early bird I linked audiences at the Parke-Bernet Galleries in New York City and at Sotheby’s in London for the first trans-Atlantic art auction, ComSatCorp reported. BBC broadcasted a portion of the auction for British TV viewers. The telecast marked the fourth successive Monday on which the satellite had carried a commercial program free of charge to show its potential. (ComSatCorp Release; Esterow, NYT, 5/25/65,1)
NASA announced it had approved a Rice Univ. proposal for a satellite to measure radiation and radiation loss in the Van Allen belts, aurorae and airglow, bombardment of the upper atmosphere by energetic particles from space, and galactic and solar cosmic rays. The 125-lb. scientific satellite, to be known as Owl, would be designed, developed, and built by a Rice group headed by Dr. Brian J. O’Brien, and would be injected into a near-circular orbit at about 400 mi. altitude by Scout launch vehicle. After achieving orbit, the satellite would be oriented by a large permanent bar magnet so that one axis would be continuously aligned with the earth’s magnetic lines of force. The Rice project would be part of the NASA University Explorers Program. Spacecraft and experiments would be tested at NASA facilities under the direction of NASA’s Wallops Station, which also was assigned project management of Owl. (nasa Release 65-29)
Four flashing light beacons on nasa explorer XXIX satellite had been turned on and were functioning normally, NASA officials announced. The beacons, each emitting a light of 1,580 candleseconds per flash, would permit the satellite to be photographed against the stellar background, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, A6)
An 11-ton, 60-ft.-dia. radio antenna was erected on a mountain near San Diego, Calif., by USN Electronics Laboratory to bounce signals off the moon and certain artificial satellites. R. U. F. Hopkins, director of the Microwave Space Relay Project, said the antenna could improve the tracking and monitoring of active satellites such as the NASA Tiros weather-forecasting series, aid in studying refraction of radio waves caused by atmosphere, and beam powerful signals into space, (ap, NYT, 11/17/65, 33)
early bird I transmitted clear pictures and sound of live television programs between Europe and North America for 14 hrs. demonstrating its usefulness in regularly scheduled television. For three weeks, television’s use of early bird i would be restricted to Mondays; daily commercial use would not begin until fall when rates had been fixed. The satellite would be used on other days for telephone purposes and transmission of recorded information. (ComSatCorp; Gould, NYT, 5/4/65, 75)
NASA launched from Wallops Island a four-stage Journeyman (Argo D8)	sounding rocket with 130-lb. Univ. of Minnesota payload. Firing was timed to correspond closely with passage of the OGO I satellite in an unsuccessful attempt to compare and correlate radiation belt electron and proton measurements. Sounding rocket reached peak altitude of 1,031 mi.; experiment package impacted in the Atlantic Ocean about 1,200 mi. downrange. Telemetry indicated proper functioning of instrumentation during the 26-min. flight, but no useful data were returned because the nose cone covering the payload failed to eject and the experiment package was not exposed to energetic particles in the radiation belt. (Wallops Release 65-21; nasa Rpt. srl)
Soviet propaganda needs in the wake of Mariner 4’s flight to Mars appear to have been influential in determining the timing of the latest Soviet space shots,” wrote Harry Schwartz in the New York Times. He continued: “Moscow’s decision to send up last Friday two rockets—one putting five small satellites into orbit and the second orbiting the heaviest man-made object yet put into space—seems to Western observers to be a transparent Soviet effort to counteract the propaganda defeat Moscow suffered as a result of Mariner 4’s historic voyage. That defeat was all the greater because of the failure of the Soviet Mars probe, Zond, sent on the same journey at roughly the same time Mariner 4 was launched.” (Schwartz, NYT, 7/18/65)
A prototype Tiros weather satellite was donated to the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, on behalf of NASA, in commemoration of the fifth anniversary of NASA’s tiros I launch. Dr. Dryden said:	. . nine experimental meteorological satellites of the Tiros series have been successfully launched and operated. “Seldom, if ever, has a complex technological effort in its early phases returned such valuable dividends as this project. In the early stage Tiros was an Army project. When the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was created in 1958 it took over the development of the spacecraft. “The United States Weather Bureau utilized the data from the very first experimental flight. The first Tiros had been in orbit only a few hours when it began transmitting to NASA ground stations cloud photographs of good quality. The Weather Bureau was quickly able to apply the pictures to its day-by-day forecasting. During the years since then, Tiros satellites have literally been working their way around the world, benefitting men everywhere by supplying previously unobtainable weather data. At this stage, it is impossible to estimate how many lives have been saved and how much property loss avoided through use of Tiros information, but the totals must already be substantial.” David Arthur Davies, Secretary-General of the World Meteorological Organization, discussed international reaction to meteorological satellite developments, listing three main points: (1) “. . . the tremendous impact which this new means of observing the atmosphere has had upon the world scientific community. . . . [For instance,] it was the realization that the meteorological satellite was ... a turning point in the long history of man’s endeavors to improve his knowledge and understanding of his environment—the atmosphere” that led to the establishment of the World Weather Watch. (2) The impact of the meteorological satellite upon the United Nations. The “. . . impact of the tiros satellites was so great as to inspire the General Assembly of the United Nations to take the very unusual step of adopting a resolution on a scientific question of this kind [Resolution 1721 on International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space] and to maintain its interest from that time.” And, (3) . . the general feeling of gratitude and admiration towards the United States which the launching of tiros I and which the decision to distribute the data to all countries throughout the whole world engendered.” Speaking at the ceremony, Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, praised the Tiros program and said that the NASA-Weather Bureau Tiros Operational Satellite System (Tos), expected to be operational early next year, would modify a Tiros satellite similar to tiros IX to permit daily observation of clouds in the earth’s atmosphere. He added: “And one day we may even be using the moon as a base for establishing a weather station to monitor and study terrestrial weather.” Dr. White predicted continued NASA-Weather Bureau cooperation: (1) to further develop “satellite visual and infrared sensing devices for the indirect probing of the atmosphere”; (2) to “broaden the meteorological satellite system as a means of data collection”; and (3) to “pursue the use of synchronous satellites for weather observations.” Dr. Morris Tepper, Director of Meteorological Programs in nasa’s Office of Space Sciences, recalled the launching of TIROS I: “It was a very exciting morning—waiting for my first countdown . . . someone fixed a leaky lox line at the launching pad by wrapping a wet rag around the leak and freezing it solid . . . The launch vehicle, the Thor-Able, performed exceptionally well. The spacecraft was placed into an exceptional orbit. The next question was—what would we see? . . . And finally we had our picture—this first picture from TIROS I. Yes, there were clouds in it . . . The first three pictures were . . . carried to Dr. Glennan, the first Administrator of NASA, and finally we all trekked over to the White House and interrupted a Cabinet Meeting to show President Eisenhower the results of this remarkable space capability.” (Texts; nasa Release 65-102)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
Frederick G. Donner, chief executive of General Motors, appeared before a Senate Commerce Committee on his renomination by President Johnson as a director of the Communications Satellite Corporation. Asked about rivalry from the Soviet Union in view of their recently-launched comsat, Donner said he regarded this about the same way he did Soviet automobiles as far as competition was concerned, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/28/65)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
ComSatCorp’s early bird i communications satellite successfully received, amplified, and returned a television signal to Andover, Me., ground station in an unscheduled communications test. ComSatCorp Vice President Siegfried H. Reiger said that “the picture quality of the test pattern was excellent.” (Clark, NYT, 4/8/65; ap, Balt. Sun. 4/8/65)	'
The launch of Oso-C was postponed from Aug. 24 to Aug. 25 because NASA’s Fort Myers tracking station might be acquiring data from EXPLORER XXVI satellite about the same time it was scheduled to conduct Oso-C’s critical first-orbit interrogation. Recent calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center indicated the conflict was expected to last for only two minutes, but project officials decided to avoid jeopardizing Oso-C’s first orbital data, (nasa Release 65-227)
NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives reached two satisfactory understandings in their New York discussions on space cooperation. The first, which reaffirmed the existing agreement for exchange of weather satellite data, provided that satellite data would be available on a continuing basis from both sides within a few months. The second, an agreement for the preparation and publication of a joint review of research in space biology and medicine, provided for a joint editorial board to receive full cooperation from both sides in the preparation of materials available in the two countries, selection of authors, and publication of their work. Barring an objection 'from either side within two months, the agreement would become effective automatically, (nasa Release 65-325)
“There are 593 objects in earth orbit today,” said Maj. Gen. Horace A. Hanes (usaf), Commander of the 9th Aerospace Defense Div., at an Armed Forces Week celebration at Selfridge AFB, Mich. He said these ranged from the six-in.-dia. Vanguard satellite through the 90-ft.-dia. Echo satellite. Hanes said the primary mission of his division was to detect and warn the U.S. of a mass ballistic missile attack: “We use radar stations in Alaska, Greenland, and England for this. But to detect satellites and other objects in earth orbit we use these radars plus a variety of other equipment including special optical cameras eleven feet high that weigh 3,000 pounds.” (Pipp, Detroit News. 5/16/65)
President Lyndon B. Johnson is briefed on the Mariner mission at nasa Headquarters. Left to right, James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, President Johnson, Vice President Hubert 1L Humphrey, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. world were “deep in your debt.'’ (NASA Announcement 65-43; Simons, Wash, Post, 2'26 65; Seldstedt. Balt. Sun. 2* 26 65: Young. Chic. Trib., 2/26/65: Mohr, NYT, 2/26/65, 10) February 25; usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite pavload. I U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 190S, 135)	'	_	_
ComSatCorp requested industry proposals for an advanced satellite for a worldwide commercial communications system. The Corporation requested a satellite for use in a phased system at altitudes between 6,000 and 12,000 mi., or in a synchronous system at an altitude of 22,300 mi.; that had 1,000 two-way voice channels; that weighed approximately 240 lbs.; that could be launched alone or in groups of up to six satellites; that measured not more than 56-in.-dia. and 40-in. high; and that had a five-year lifetime. ComSatCorp stipulated the proposal should cover construction of six to 24 satellites, the number depending on the type of system, with the first six to be delivered within 24 months after the contract award. Proposals would be opened on October 25. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA’s PEGASUS I meteoroid-detecting satellite recorded 19 wing punctures in its 3 to 4 million mi. travels. Earth-transmitted electronic signals might have been the cause of several recorded hits, but some were definitely meteoroid particles. PEGASUS I orbited the earth every 97 min.	(ap, NYT, 3/4/65, 50; ap, Wash. Post, 3/4/65)
COSMOS XCIX unmanned satellite, carrying scientific instruments “for continued space research,” was launched into orbit by the Soviet Union, Tass announced. Initial orbital data: apogee, 320 km. (198.7 mi.); perigee, 199 km. (123.6 mi.); period, 89.6 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 12/10/65)
The earth has four vast bulges roughly in the design of a pyramid and four equally large depressions, reported scientists from Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. “They are as big as the North American continent,” said Dr. Robert R. Newton, Supervisor of Space Research and Analysis at the Laboratory. Discoveries announced were credited to anna ib geodetic satellite, launched Oct. 31, 1962, and a number of USN research satellites. By studying rises and dips in their orbits, scientists were able to determine gravitational highs and lows. One high point centers over Ireland in the northern hemisphere and sprawls northward toward the pole. Another extends across the equator from New Guinea northward toward Japan. Another is south of Africa centered about half way to Antarctica, and the fourth is west of South America with its apex off Peru. (Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Lab. Release; Myler, upi, Wash. Post, 6/9/65, A3; ap, NYT, 6/10/65, 17)
Thor-Agena D launched from Vandenberg AFB orbited eight military satellites, the most in any single launch to date. Two satellites would measure solar radiation (greb vi and solrad) ; two would test stabilization methods for future spacecraft (ggse ii and ggse ill); one would be used in geodesy (secor in); two would help calibrate satellite tracking networks (surcal satellites) ; and one would transmit radio broadcasts for ham operators (oscar ill). OSCAR hi would transmit signals from 25 amateur radio channels over a 4,000-mi. radius and w^as being tracked by ham radio operators at Foothill Jr. College, Calif. Amateur tracking stations in 30 foreign countries were informally participating in the project. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 135-36; gsfc SSR, 4/15/65; Clark, NYT, 5/19/65; Wash. Post, 5/20/65, A12; ap, Omaha Eve. World-Herald, 3/10/65)
ComSatCorp invited 20 construction companies to bid on site preparation for the Brewster Flat, Wash., earth station. Expected to cost approximately $6 million, the station would be a U.S. link in a worldwide commercial communications satellite system. (ComSatCorp Release)
According to official sources, both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had exploded certain of their own satellites in orbit to prevent their falling into other hands, but neither nation was known to have attempted to knock down a spacecraft belonging to the other. (Clark, NYT, 4/4/65, 1)
Lights flashing earthward from 1,000 mi. in space were giving scientists their first operational workout with geodetic satellite explorer xxix launched by nasa Nov. 6 from Eastern Test Range. From a site about 100 mi. south of Cape Kennedy, five different types of camera systems were set to record on each clear night the one millisecond bursts of light from explorer xxix’s four lamps. In this first programed exercise, the Jupiter Calibration Experiment, the cameras were positioned side-by-side at the Jupiter, Fla., Baker-Nunn Camera Station of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Simultaneous use of the different camera systems would permit validation of data and procedures required for later phases of the NASA explorer xxix project that called for mutal visibility by ground stations equipped with optical and electronic tracking equipment. Calibration of the camera systems would be an important step in realizing maximum utilization of the NASA satellite and participating ground stations in the National Geodetic Satellite Program, (nasa Release 65-365)
zond ill’s photographs of the hidden side of the moon received editorial comment in the New York Times: “Scientists and laymen from all nations will look forward to the pictures of the dark side of the moon that Moscow reports its Zond 3 satellite took last month. UnitI then the only photographic intelligence on the area had come from the pictures an earlier Soviet satellite took in 1959, a time when the available equipment—and consequently the quality of the result— was primitive by present standards. Six years ago' the marvel was that this feat could be accomplished at all. Now, in the wake of the photographic knowledge of the moon and of Mars obtained by this country’s Ranger and Mariner vehicles, world judgment of the importance of the Soviet accomplishment will depend upon the quality and the quantity of the new knowledge it provides.” (NYT, 8/16/65, E9)
Establishment of a communications satellite system for commercial purposes is a matter entrusted to the Corporation under the Communications Satellite Act,” was the reply of ComSatCorp President Joseph Charyk to the FCC regarding the American Broadcasting Co.’s proposal to launch its own satellite. The fcc had requested the views of ComSatCorp on the proposal. (ComSatCorp Release)
osc—C was launched from Eastern Test Range, with a Delta booster, fell into the south Atlantic Ocean after failing to achieve orbit. First two stages of the launch vehicle performed perfectly: following second stage cutoff and an approximate 7-min. coast period, small rockets mounted on a table between the second and third stage ignited and spun the table up to 120 rpm; second stage separated, but the third stage ignited about 5/4 sec. prematurely, was not properly aimed, and did not attain orbital speed. oso-c was third in a series of eight orbiting solar observatories planned by NASA. First two satellites were launched from Kennedy Space Center, nasa, March 7, 1962, and February 3, 1965. oso-c I had provided more than 2,000 hrs. of scientific information during its lifetime; oso II was still operating. The Orbiting Solar Observatory program was designed to advance understanding of the sun’s structure and behavior and to determine the physical processes by which the sun influences the earth. Next Oso launch would occur in mid-1966. (NASA Release 65-261; Wash. Post, 8/26/65, A 4; N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/26/65)
Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite payload was launched by usaf from Western Test Range. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 132)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
USN announced the Transit navigational satellite system was operational and had been in use since July 1964. The three gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites, weighing between 110 and 160 lbs. each, were launched on Thor-Able-Star boosters into near-circular 600-mi. polar orbits from Pt. Mugu, Calif. Operational lifetime of the satellites was expected to be about two years. The satellites emitted radio signals which ships used to determine their positions, and could provide ships with navigational fixes—accurate to 0.1 mi.—about every 90 min. The shipboard computer operated automatically, beginning when the satellite approached, receiving the data, computing the ship’s position, and typing the results for the navigator. A number of fleet units were reported to be using the system. Capt. F. H. Price, Jr. (usn), who tested the system from the nuclear-powered cruiser U.S.S. Long Beach, called the system “the most reliable means of providing navigational information” and said it met the requirement of an “accurate, dependable, worldwide, all-weather, 24-hour-a-day capability.” This was the first continuous use of space technology in direct support of the fleet. It was predicted, but not officially confirmed, that the Polaris missile-firing submarines would adopt the navigational satellite system. NASA was studying commercial applications of a navigational satellite system and considering the possibility of developing its own system if it proved economically feasible, (dod Release 16-65; ap, Chic. Trib., 1/13/65; Watson, Balt. Sun, 1/13/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 14)
Study of approximately 300 photographs taken over the Antarctic by NASA nimbus I meteorological satellite had caused the U.S. Geological Survey to plan three major changes on its relief maps:	(1) Mount Siple, 10,000-ft.-high Antarctic mountain used by pilots as a navigational aid, would be repositioned 45 mi. further west; (2) a mountain group in the Kohler range, positioned by two expeditions in two different locations, would appear as one group rather than two; and (3) ice front information on the Filshner Ice Shelf, Weddell Sea, and Princess Martha Coast areas would be updated with photographs producing better definition of the ice shelfs shape, (csfc Release G-29-65)
According to a report in a West German publication, Luftfahrttechnik Raumfahrttechnik, Soviet communications satellite MOLNIYA i transmitted color television programs for nine hours in May 1965. Quality of the transmissions was good. (Luftfahrttechnik Raumfahrttechnik, 9/65, 237)
U.S. authorities had considered and rejected the idea of building orbiting nuclear missiles because it would be a clumsy, inaccurate method of waging atomic war, reported the Associated Press. U.S. experts had calculated that a warhead launched from orbit would not come within 50 mi. of its target on earth whereas U.S. ICBMS and submarine-launched Polaris missiles were accurate within one mile. In addition, U.S. had developed antisatellite rockets that could intercept enemy satellites in orbit. Disclosure was made because of a November 7 Tass announcment that one of the missiles paraded through Moscow for the Anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution had warheads that could “deliver their surprise blow on the first or any orbit around the earth.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, H2)
ITT World Communications, Inc., asked FCC for permission to use early bird I satellite for live television coverage of part of the Gemini v mission scheduled for Aug. 19. ITT would like to set up a portable ground station in the Atlantic aboard carrier U.S.S. Lake Champlain, expected to be the primary recovery ship, (ap, NYT, 7/20/65)	_ _
cosmos liii, an unmanned satellite containing scientific equipment for outer space research, was orbited by the Soviet Union. Preliminary orbital data: period, 98.7 min.; apogee, 741 mi. (1,192 km.) ; perigee, 141 mi. (227 km.) ; inclination, 48.8°. Equipment on board was operating normally. (Tass, Pravda, 1/31/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., with 150-lb. payload containing French-built radio propagation experiments designed for later flight on the FR-1 satellite. It reached 114-mi. (183-km.) peak altitude during an eight-minute flight. (Wallops Release 65-59)
ComSatCorp filed with FCC a notice of a proposed $300,000 contract with AT&T for research data and consultant services on ground stations for the global communications satellite network. FCC was notified that ComSatCorp had analyzed and evaluated other proposals and had held subsequent discussions with those making proposals. (ComSatCorp)
Cape Kennedy and Moscow’s Red Square were linked in a British television program, “East Meets West,” marking U.S. and Soviet space achievements. First part of the program showed the triumphant return to Moscow of Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Aleksey Leonov. Then the scene switched to Cape Kennedy to show preparadons for the gt-3 flight of Astronauts Virgil Grissom and John Young. Both parts were screened "live”—the Moscow scenes via Eurovision and the Cape Kennedy one via comm unications satellite. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3, 2-1/65! starch 24: tiAVRKK IX photograph of moon, 38.fi seconds before impact and 58 miles above lunar surface. March 24; After transmitting 5.814 close-up lunar pictures to earth, ranger ix. traveling at 5.677 mph, imparted the moon at 0:08 a.m. EST at 12.0° south latitude and 2.-10 west longitude in the crater Alphonsus. The 10-ft,, 800-lb. spacecraft, last in the Ranger series, was only four miles off Larget. NASA had made real-time TV coverage available and the three major networks broadcast “live7’ pictures during the last ten minutes of ranger tx’s flight. First pictures, taken as the photographic probe was 1.300 mi. from the moon, had about the same degree of detail as telescopic views from earth. Those taken a few seconds before impact defined objects as small as 10 in, across, including close-ups of canal-like rilles on the floor of the crater and dimple-like depressions at points along the rilles. Photographs shown on television were taken by the “B” camera, one of two wide-angle cameras used. Four narrow-angle cameras took other shots. Pictures were received on 85-ft. antennas at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station in the Mojave Desert and recorded on both 35mm film and magnetic tape for detailed analysis. Simultaneously signals were relayed by microwave to the JPL laboratory in Pasadena where an electronic scan converter “translated” electronic impulses from the 1,152-lines-per-picture of the ranger IX signal system to the standard 500 lines of commercial television. The Ranger program had begun inauspiciously in 1961 with a series of failures and near-misses. Rangers 1 and 2 had been designed to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle but were not injected into the desired orbit, ranger iii, iv, and v were to rough-land a seismometer package on the moon to record moon quakes, and to transmit closeup photos of the moon to earth by radio. None of the missions was successful, ranger VI, first of the reworked and redesigned spacecraft, impacted within 17 mi. of its point of aim—but its television system failed. On July 31, 1964, ranger vii successfully relayed to earth 4,316 high-quality close-up photos of the lunar surface, ranger viii, launched on Feb. 20, 1965, transmitted 7,137 pictures. Total number of photographs from ranger vii, viii, and ix was 17,267. (nasa Release 65-96; Sullivan, NYT, 3/22/65, 1; ap, Dighton, Wash. Post, 3/25/65, Al, A12, A16; Hill, NYT, 3/25/65, 1, 23; nasa Proj. Off.)
Four-stage Javelin (Argo d-4) sounding rocket with an Ionosphere experiment was launched by nasa from Wallops Station, Va. The 138-lb. payload reached 495-mi. (797-km.) altitude and impacted 625 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Primary objectives of the flight were to measure ion and electron densities and temperatures in the upper atmosphere. Launch was timed to coincide with a pass of the Canadian alouette satellite; measurements would be compared with those of the satellite and with ground-based ionosonde measurements. (Wallops Release 65-60)
U.S. Army disclosed it had orbited a three-satellite earth-mapping system, with two of the spacecraft circling the earth from west to east and the third traveling from pole to pole. The satellites were of the Secor type. Two were fired into orbit earlier this month; the other was launched Jan. 11, 1964. The three spacecraft, each with a radio receiver and transmitter, were helping pinpoint locations on earth that were widely separated by large bodies of water, (ap, NYT, 4/1/65, 11; M&R, 4/5/65, 12)
Yemen and Pakistan had signed agreements increasing to 46 the number of countries which had joined in the international joint venture for development of a global commercial communications satellite system, ComSatCorp announced. They would share with other nations in the financing and ownership of the space segment of the global system, consisting of the satellites themselves, tracking, control, and related functions, but not earth stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
American Newspaper Publishers Association asked the fcc to permit wide use of communications satellites by newspapers and wire services. In a brief filed with the Commission the publishers’ group said: “Specifically, we propose that a basic policy determination be made at this time, assuring access by the press to Comsat facilities for news media determination.” (NYT, 10/31/65, 22)
Describing the growing space role of Woomera, Australia’s equivalent to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, R. N. Hughes-Jones said is Missile Space Daily: “Cooperation between Australia and the United States in the field of space research began [in 1957] when installations were set up at Woomera for the International Geophysical Year. They occupied a couple of caravans. “In 1960, in a formal exchange of notes, the governments of the two countries affirmed their intention to extend the cooperative program to space flight operations. “Under it, the Australian Department of Supply establishes and operates stations on behalf of NASA, for tracking, communicating with and obtaining telemetered information from U.S. space vehicles. “Establishment of the station at Carnarvon . . . consolidated at one site nasa’s ground support facilities for the Gemini project. “Tidbinbilla was officially opened on March 19 of this year, and is the first of three NASA facilities programed for the Australian Capital Territory. “The second of the three is at Orroral Valley and is currently under construction. It will track the larger and the more complex of the U.S. scientific satellites, while the third, at Honeysuckle Creek, will support the U.S. Lunar Manned Space-flight Project.” (Hughes-Jones, M/S Daily, 7/27/65)
ComSatCorp, in a letter to the FCC, outlined its position regarding ITT World Communications, Inc.’s request to use EARLY BIRD I satellite for live television coverage of the recovery of the Gemini 5 astronauts. George P. Sampson, ComSatCorp’s Vice President of Operations, said that although itt and ComSatCorp had agreed that technical and operational aspects of the shipboard station would be subject to ComSatCorp’s control, ComSatCorp took “firm exception” to itt’s insistence that the fcc designate ITT as the responsible operating entity. Sampson noted the Fee’s May 12 decision giving ComSatCorp sole responsibility for operation of the initial terminal stations for the proposed global satellite system and said: “Despite our fundamental concern with the proposal, ComSat Corp is willing to give consideration to a joint application for the operation of the station.” (ap, Wash. Post, 7/23/65)
A tariff for the use of Early Bird satellites for transmission and reception of voice, record, data, telephoto, facsimile, television, and other signals was filed by ComSatCorp with the FCC. Beginning Sunday, June 27, voice channels would be available between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. edt on a daily basis. Minimum rental period, one month; rent, $4,200. Additional consecutive periods would be rented at $140 per day. Voice channels would be two-way. No refunds would be given for interruptions of less than 30 min. or for those caused by solar eclipse. Interruptions of 30 min. or more not the responsibility of the customer would be refunded at roughly $3 per 30-min. interruption. ComSatCorp could request temporary surrender of a voice channel for TV use and, in that event, would refund charges in amounts proportional to the surrender period if it falls between 5 a.m. and 8 a.m. or between 2 p.m. and 9 p.m., or in amounts twice proportional to the surrender period if it falls between 8 a.m. and 2 p.m. Also beginning June 27, television channels would be available as frequently as feasible. Hours would be 5 a.m. to 8 a.m. and 2 p.m. to 9 p.m. (Schedule i) and 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. (Schedule Ii). Channels would accept standard TV signals. TV channel rentals must be made for at least a 30-min. period. Rent: $2,400 for first 30min., $475 per immediately following 15 min. (Schedule I); $3,825 for first 30 min., $710 per immediately following 15 min. (Schedule n). Regular channels would be on one-way monochrome. Two-way monochrome and one-way color would rent for an additional 50%. Interruptions of more than 30 sec. and not the responsibility of the customer would be refunded in amounts proportional to the interrupted period. If a customer canceled his application for use of a TV channel, he would be billed as though he had not and would be required to pay any additional charges involved in acquiring temporary use of a voice channel if his application had made such acquisition necessary. TV channels would be rented on a first-come-first-serve basis. Rates covered only transmissions between Andover, Me., and the satellite. The arrangement whereby refunds would be made for temporary TV use of voice channels was necessary because early bird i cannot handle both kinds of transmissions simultaneously. (ComSatCorp Release)
Martin Co. had delivered the first pair of prototype nuclear generators for use in space to NASA, it was reported. The units contained no radioactive fuel and would be heated electrically for their qualification tests. Each generator was designed to deliver 30 watts of direct current to the weather satellite Nimbus B, first NASA satellite to use a nuclear power source, (ap, NYT, 2/23/65, 21)
usaf launched a 100-lb. arv (Aerospace Research Vehicle) satellite pickaback aboard an Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif. The satellite, carrying instrumentation to sample radiation and micrometeoroids, was the first to be sent toward westward orbit around the earth. Satellite Situation Report for January 31, 1965, did not indicate that the satellite had achieved orbit, (ap, Wash. Post, 1/22/65; M&R, 2/1/65, 9; SSR, 1/31/65,13)
A German amateur radio station used OSCAR iv, sent into an unplanned orbit Dec. 21 by the Titan iii-c rocket, to relay a signal to the Bochum Institute for Satellite and Space Research which had spotted the amateur radio satellite. Signal was reportedly loud and clear. USAF said 42-lb. comsat was expected to be useful to amateur radio operators around the world despite its poor orbit. (Wash. Post, 12/23/65, A6)
National Science Foundation reported that three New Mexico State Univ. engineers were studying satellites’ radio signals in an attempt to determine exact shape of the earth. Under an NSF grant, the engineers had set up and were manning a special tracking unit at U.S. McMurdo Station in Antarctica and were tuned in on three spacecraft in polar orbit that passed near McMurdo 42 times daily. Stanford Univ. scientists had established a unit at Byrd Station to receive information from NASA’s Pogo, to be launched later this year, (upi, NYT, 4/11/65, 2)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the U.S. Naval Academy: “. . . we are on the verge of another major breakthrough—the capability to forecast weather at least five days in advance with better accuracy than we can now predict 24 to 36 hours ahead. Atmospheric systems such as weather balloons and ground and seabased instruments which are already developed, together with satellite systems and high speed computers, should make it practicable in the next few years to establish a global observation system. As distinguished from the satellites whose main mission is cloud cover photographs, the more advanced future system will be able to map the structure of the earth’s atmosphere in terms of wind, temperature, and pressure at various altitudes.” He continued: “We foresee the possibility of carrying sensors in satellites that will give us the thermal patterns of the ocean’s surface which, when compared with the atmospheric conditions in any area, may give us the ability to predict the formation of fog. Similarly, ocean currents can be mapped and studied to advance the science of oceanography. We can even measure sea state—roughness of the sea —from a satellite.” (Text)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from wtr with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 159)
American Broadcasting Co. requested permission from fcc to own and operate a communications satellite system linking an estimated 200 affiliated television stations. The proposed $21.5-million system would use a synchronous orbit satellite similar to EARLY BIRD I. ABC’s request challenged the right of ComSatCorp to be sole operator of U.S.-launched commercial communications satellites, (abc Release)
Commenting that contributions to science made by the space probes and satellites had been “interesting, all of it useful, none of ii genuinely', eyepoppingly unexpected,” an editorial in the San Francisco Sunday Chronicle continued:	“Surprisingly enough, space research has produced several by-products with a practical end. “The most significant to the world as a whole are the reconnaissance satellites with which Russia and the U.S. are now mutually inspecting each other’s and everyone else’s military installations with the kind of accuracy that has given Washington excellent pictures of the tower on top of which the Chinese atom bomb was exploded. They can prevent any significant military move from going undetected; a byproduct of them are the weather satellites. “Less is heard about the progress of early warning satellites designed to pick up the flaming tails of enemy missiles; this could be either because they have run into trouble or, like the satellites the Polaris submarines steer by, they are too successful to be mentioned. The possibility of putting H-bombs into satellites is not mentioned either in these days, but this time because the Russians and the Americans seem to have decided by mutual consent to forget it: the risks of an unmanned satellite going wrong were too great, and the risk of a manned one going berserk was even greater.” (5. F. Sun. Chron., 4 /11/65)
French and Soviet scientists ended a one-week conference on possible cooperation in space programs, but did not issue a communique. Howard Simons in the Washington Post quoted “informed sources” as saying the subject of a French-Russian communications satellite had been raised by the Soviet Union and that the French were lukewarm to the idea but had not rejected it. (Wash. Daily News, 10/21/65, 22; Simons, Wash. Post, 10/29/65, A6)
tiros vn meteorological satellite completed two years in orbit without a failure, nasa had orbited tiros vii June 19, 1963, with a Thor-Delta launch vehicle launched from etr (then called amr) . (nasa Proj. Off.)
tiros lx photograph of ice-covered U.S. Great Lakes area. at 10 rpm, each camera, in turn, would roll into position and snap a picture, triggered by an infrared horizon sensor. The combination of tiros ix’s polar orbit (83.4°) and rolling wheel was expected to provide 100% photographic coverage of the earth’s cloud cover during daylight hours. Primary purpose of the tiros ix launching was to test the new cartwheel concept as a forerunner of a joint NASA-Weather Bureau Tiros Operational System (tos) of weather satellites, (nasa Release 65-7; Goddard News, 1/25/65; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/22/65; UPI, Wash. Daily News, 1/22/65; ap, Ball. Sun, 1/23/65; Appel, NYT, 1/23/65, 9; Hixson, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/23/65)
usaf Titan iii-a rocket was launched from Cape Kennedy, hurled its third stage (transtage) and two satellites into orbit in a maneuverability test involving three different orbits. Primary goal of the mission was triple ignition of the transtage’s engine. First firing, about five minutes after launch, injected the 7,000-lb. rocket-payload assembly into near-earth orbit of 128-mi. apogee and 108-mi. perigee. After traveling once around the earth, during which the rocket performed a deliberate somersault, the transtage ignited again, burned 37 sec., and shifted the rocket into an elliptical orbit of 1,766-mi. apogee and 116-mi. perigee. During one and one half orbits around the earth, the rocket performed a second deliberate somersault; a third firing put it in circular orbit with parameters of apogee, 1,737 mi.; perigee, 1,721 mi.; period, 145.6 min.; and inclination, 32.15°. Titan hi-a’s transtage then ejected a 69-lb. experimental communications satellite (les i), and ejected a 1,000-lb. metal chunk to demonstrate its ability to launch more than one payload. LES I was to have fired a solid-propellant motor to move to an elliptical orbit with an apogee of 11,500 mi. and perigee of 1,725 mi., but the motor failed to fire. LES I continued to orbit near the transtage and the metal chunk, les 1 (Lincoln Experimental Satellite) had been built by mit’s Lincoln Laboratory to test advanced components, materials, and techniques which might apply to future communications satellites. Radio signals were to be exchanged between les i and ground stations, (upi, NYT, 2/12/65; ap, Houston Post, 2/12/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 2/12/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 133)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA’s activities in the field of international cooperation: “Nineteen sixty-four was a year in which other nations emerged clearly as friendly competitors and valuable collaborators in space science and engineering and demonstrated by emulation their endorsement of our view that energetic efforts in these fields are essential contributors to the betterment of human society. I am thinking of such things as the energetic space programs of France, the demonstrated competence of Canada and Italy, the entry of the British aircraft industry into spacecraft engineering, the formal establishment of the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo), and finally of the successful first test flight of a large new booster by ELDO. . . . “A year ago I reported our plans for including foreign experiments on NASA satellites under arrangements by which foreign experiments, selected in open competition with domestic proposals, are sponsored and financed by the experimenter’s national space authority. One such experiment flew in 1964—a British ion mass spectrometer on explorer xx, the U.S. fixed-frequency topside sounder. Six additional experiments were selected for flight, bringing the total to thirteen, with ten more under active consideration. We now have opened virtually all categories of NASA spacecraft, including Gemini and Apollo, to foreign participation on this cooperative basis. Indeed, we are now inviting foreign biomedic experts to a working conference in Houston, next April, to learn directly of the opportunities and constraints which apply to this program. . . . “A noteworthy development was the fact that esro became the first foreign space agency to seek a ground station on American territory. After conducting a site survey and finding a suitable location near Fairbanks, Alaska, esro has formally requested the Department of State to begin negotiations for an agreement. The ESRO station is projected as an element in a network of tracking and data acquisition facilities. . . . France is establishing a North/South fence from France through the Canary Islands, Algeria, Upper Volta, Congo Brazzaville, and South Africa, with an injection-monitoring station in Lebanon. This chain will also serve esro, which expects to have additional stations at Spitsbergen, Brussels, and in Australia and the South Atlantic. Both the ESRO and French networks will be entirely compatible with NASA’s, to maximize possibilities for mutual assistance. This is to our advantage, and we encourage it. . . . “Let me bring you up to date on the status of our cooperation with the Soviet Union. You will recall that we have a series of agreements with the Soviet Academy of Sciences providing for three coordinated projects—in meteorology, in surveying the geomagnetic field, and use of ECHO II for communications tests. The project involving the observation and use of echo ii is completed. The Soviet side observed the critical inflation phase of the satellite optically and forwarded the data to us; although not including radar data, which would have been most desirable. Communications via echo ii between the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. were carried out in only one direction instead of two, at less interesting frequencies than we would have liked, and with some technical limitations at the ground terminals used. On the other hand, the Soviets provided very complete recordings and other data of their reception of the transmissions.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 15-37)
ComSatCorp met with representatives of aerospace companies it had invited to discuss specifications for 24 communications satellites for a proposed dod satellite system. Previously ComSatCorp had indicated it would contract with the Hughes Aircraft Co. to build the satellites. But when the Philco Corp. protested to the FCC, the FCC required ComSatCorp to give Philco and other competitors a chance to show their capabilities. (ComSatCorp; Weekley, Wash. Post, 2/17/65)
LUNA VII 3,313-lb. instrumented moon probe was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Tass said the last stage of the multistage launching rocket was put into parking orbit and then LUNA VII was fired on a trajectory toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. Launching occurred on the eighth anniversary of the orbiting by the Soviet Union of the first earth satellite, sputnik i. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/65, 1; ap, Wash. Post, 10/5/65, All; Nordlinger, Balt. Sun, 10/5/65, 5)
ComSatCorp announced selection of J. P. Finan General Contractor, Inc., for site preparation and construction of buildings and other facilities for ComSatCorp’s earth station at Paumalu, Oahu, Hawaii, under a contract totaling $948,362. The Paumalu station, when completed, would serve as part of a worldwide commercial satellite communications system. (ComSatCorp Release)
Sen. E. L. Bartlett (D-Alaska) introduced a bill to extend privileges and immunities, including tax and customs granted international organizations, to the European Space Research Organization (esro). ESRO was considering building a satellite telemetry command station near Fairbanks, Alaska, and was seeking the same special treatment afforded NASA with regard to its tracking stations abroad and personnel abroad. (CR, 6/11/65, 12836)
Harro Zimmer, chief of a West Berlin satellite (racking station, said the U.S.5.R. had secretly launched a second spacecraft with proton i July 16. The unannounced spacecraft, said Zimmer, had been brought back to earth, landing near Magnitogorsk. 300 mi. north of (he Aral Sea, between 3 a.m. and 3:25 a.m. iEOT) July 31. (UPl, fWash. Post, 8/6/65.1	'
President Johnson sent to Congress his annual reports on the National Science Foundation, the ComSatCorp, and U.S. participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency. In message accompanying the NSF report. President Johnson said: “Close and understanding accord between science and public affairs is an imperative for free societies today.” Science would be looked to for use in technology and industry, health programs, exploration, and, “most especially for the guidance that will permit us to proceed with greater security and greater confidence toward our goals of peace and justice in a free world.” In a message accompanying the report on the ComSatCorp, the President said the goal of the U.S. was “to provide orbital messengers, not only of word, speech and pictures, but of thought and hope” for the world. “The past year has seen important advances in the program to develop a global communications satellite system. The first launch of a commercial satellite is to take place in the early months of this year. “Through the initiative of the United States an international joint venture has been established. Under the law I have designated the Communications Satellite Corp. as the U.S, participant. The corporation is to be the manager on behalf of all participants. “The corporation has now been financed, has constituted its first board of directors to replace the original incorporators and has moved forward with its program. All agencies of the Government with responsibilities under the act have made important and faithful contributions with the sympathetic assistance of the congressional committees concerned. “The newr and extraordinary satellite telecommunications medium bringing peoples around the globe into closer relationship is nearer to fulfillment, heralding a new day in world communications.” In its second annual report ComSatCorp noted that it had ended 1964 with about $190 million in short-term holdings and more than 137,000 shareholders. It reported it had agreements with 18 countries to join in a single global system with ComSatCorp as manager and said that a satellite was being readied for launching in March. The report on the Nation’s participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency was accompanied by a covering letter which said 1963 “will possibly be marked in I.A.E.A. history as the year in which a firm foundation was laid for its system of safeguards against the diversion of materials to military use.” (Text, CR, 2/15/65, 2605; NYT, 2/16/65, 1; ap, NYT, 2/17/65, 64)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. for mission modifications on seven Agena-D second stages for future missions. Total cost of the modification would be more than $13 million. Five of the Agenas would be used with Atlas boosters to launch the Applications Technology Satellites (Ats); the other two, also to be boosted by Atlas launch vehicles, would be used for the third and fourth Orbiting Astronomical Observatories (Oao). Lockheed would design, develop, and fabricate equipment and match the Agenas with the Atlas boosters and the spacecraft, (nasa Release 65-199)
After almost 7 years, vanguard i appeared to be silenced. Its radio signals had weakened to a point where NASA tracking engineers thought the satellite might never be heard from again, according to NASA announcement. The six-inch, 3.25-lb. sphere was the second U.S. satellite, launched by USN as part of the International Geophysical Year program. For more than six years, it had transmitted radio signals from space with power from only six solar cells. Officially known internationally as 1958 Beta II, vanguard i was circling the globe every 134 min. and had an apogee of 2,442 mi. and a perigee of 402 mi. (nasa Release 65—45)
ComSatCorp was seeking establishment of a world-wide satellite communications network to be leased jointly by NASA and commercial telecommunications carriers, reported Katherine Johnsen in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Miss Johnsen reported that last week the National Communications System (the U.S. Government’s centralized communications agency) and ComSatCorp appeared to be approaching “agreement on an arrangement under which it would pay about $80 million over a 10-year period for use by NASA of the global network, primarily for the Apollo manned lunar landing program.” Several variations of the proposal were also presented and ComSatCorp executives were optimistic that one would be approved. (Johnsen, Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 35)
Launch of Geos A Geodetic Explorer satellite, originally scheduled for Nov. 2 and later postponed to Nov. 5 because of an electric circuit break, had been rescheduled for Nov. 6. Geos A would contain five geodetic instrumentation systems to more accurately map the earth and to serve as a precise space reference point for ground surveyors. (ap, NYT, 11/4/65, 24; Wash. Post, 11/5/65, A16)
U.S. would withdraw in six months from the Warsaw Convention limiting the liability of international airlines to $8,300 for each passenger killed or injured in air accidents, unless a new agreement was reached substantially increasing carrier liability, the State Department reported. U.S. had refused to ratify a 1955 amendment to the Convention raising the limit to $16,000, was arguing for a $100,000-limit liability. (U.S. State Dept. Release 268) “. . . advancing our competence in nuclear technology is of critical importance to the future of the national space program. Nuclear power and nuclear propulsion are musts for the more complex and long duration missions of the future. . . . “We all know that the nuclear going in space won’t be easy. . . . Yet I am confident that the technical problems are resolvable and the investments warranted. . . .” Dr. Welsh delivered a warning to “space planners” to stop sitting on nuclear propulsion concepts and to expedite development programs. “We must not wait for clear-cut space requirements for these nuclear systems before moving forthrightly with their development. If we wait for precise mission definitions the technology will not be available when it’s needed. Moreover, we can be sure that our Soviet competitors will take positive actions, whether we do or not. For this country to sit back on its technological haunches and let someone else, bolder and more imaginative, show us the way is unthinkable to me.” (Text) and procedures. We hope that by 1971 ... we will have made three significant improvements in the international system. First, we hope to improve the ability of the system to observe the global atmosphere and to provide fuller data for weather forecasting. In part this improvement will rest on the Tiros Operational Satellite System . . . which the United States will launch into orbit next year. Second, we hope to extend the benefits of modern computer technology throughout the world—by utilizing the computer to prepare weather analyses and forecasts routinely for the entire globe. And third, we hope to develop an international communications network for the timely exchange of raw data and for the rapid dissemination of analyses and forecasts.” (Text) Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa LaRC, delivered a keynote address on “Advances in Aircraft Technology.” He discussed the importance of scientific research to the continued leadership of the U.S. in the field of air transportation with particular reference to the next decade. Representing NASA Flight Research Center at the technical sessions was Joseph Walker, Chief of Research Pilots, who spoke on the X-15 research airplane as a tool for progress in hypersonic flight. (LaRC Release)
Six of eight oso II experiments had been turned on and gave “excellent” data, NASA reported. The two experiments not yet operating were the ultraviolet scanning spectrometer provided by Harvard Univ. and the ultraviolet spectrophotometer provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Both had been turned on but were turned off to prevent damage to themselves or to the satellite when irregularities in the data received were noted. All other functions of the satellite— such as solar power supply, telemetry system, tape recorder, temperature control, and command system—were normal. (NASA Release 65-37)
In an original report on communications satellites, Soviet Prof. M. Kaplanov said: “The transmitter on the Molniya 1 Comsat had a power of 40 watts, i.e. 10 times that of the Early Bird. In this regard, the Soviet scientists and engineers have solved the most complex technical problems in the development of a sputnik equipped with onboard antennas oriented on the Earth with a strong power system assuring a supply to the transmitter throughout the entire communication session. “The development of a wideband space transmitter of 40 watts power operating continuously is an innovation in world technology. This distinguishing feature of the Molniya-1 Comsat permits a considerable simplification of the onground equipment and a great reduction in the cost of its construction and operation. Evidently the great complexity of servicing and the inadequate reliability of the [ComSatCorp] equipment compelled France, England and West Germany to organize the alternate operating of their ground receiving points of space communication. Each of these points operates only one week out of three, the second week it is in reserve, and the third is spent in repair work. We note that the Soviet onground facilities for space communication in Moscow and Vladivostok have been operating daily since the launching of the Molniya-1. This is quite important for a satellite communication system, since upon the operating cost there depends greatly its ability to compete with other means of communication.” (Izvestia, 10/17/16, 5, atss-t Trans.)
An unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena D booster was launched by usaf from Vandenberg afb. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/65)
Pegasus B, second of the “winged” micro meteoroid detection satellites, arrived at Cape Kennedy to he readied for launch during the next two months. Similar to pegasus i, Pegasus B would occupy a simulated Apollo service module aboard the sa-8 vehicle. A boilerplate model of the Apollo command module would be placed above the Pegasus; in orbit, the Apollo modules would be jettisoned and the satellite exposed. Preliminary data from PEGASUS I indicated it was confirming current theory on micrometeoroid density, (msfc Release 65-85; Marshall Star, 4/21/65, 1, 2)
Soviet’s first communications satellite MOLNIYA i maintained direct radiotelephone communications between Vladivostok and Sofia, Warsaw, and Prague for almost three hours. (Tass, 5/12/65)
USAF launched Thor-Agena D from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 141)
President Johnson told a group of young foreign journalists at the White House that he envisioned a day when communications satellites would be able to relay telecasts of United Nations’ sessions to the homes of “men everywhere.” He added that “from better communications must surely come better understanding.” (UPI, Houston Chron., 7/23/65)
Approval by President Johnson of USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory received editorial comment in the New York Times: “The United States Air Force has been demanding orbiting laboratories for years. The reason is essentially defensive. Such space laboratories could have the capacity to intercept and destroy enemy satellites. Their value for surveillance is obvious. As President Johnson said, they will provide ‘new knowledge about what man is able to do in space’ and ‘will enable us to relate that ability to the defense of the nation.’ “The mol’s however, will naturally he capable of offense as well as defense. It was therefore significant that President Johnson should have taken the opportunity to couple his announcement with a new peaceful gesture toward Moscow for cooperation in the space program. . . .”	(NYT, 8/26/65, 30M)
U.S. launched eight military satellites into orbit from Vandenberg afb March 9 with a Thor-Agena D booster, nasa disclosed. This was the greatest number of payloads the U.S. had ever orbited with a single launch vehicle and was believed to exceed any multiple launching made by the Soviet Union. Orbital parameters: apogee, 585 mi. (942 km.) ; perigee, 561 mi. (903 km.) ; inclination to the equator, 70°. Two payloads would measure solar radiation; two would test stabilization methods for future spacecraft; one would map the earth’s surface; another, Surcal (Space Surveillance Calibration), would help improve precision of satellite tracking networks; another, Oscar (Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio), would broadcast on frequencies that amateur radio operators could track. The satellites had been unidentified until NASA listed them in its periodic satellite summary. The summary also showed that unmanned cosmos LXI, cosmos lxii, and cosmos lxiii, launched by U.S.S.R. March 15 with a single launch vehicle, had become 26 satellites or pieces of satellites. COSMOS LXVI, and two companions, launched May 7, had fallen out of orbit, (gsfc SSR, 4/15/65; Clark, NYT, 5/19/65; Wash. Post, 5/20/65, A12)
Saturn I (sa—S> launch vehicle, launched from Eastern Test Range, orbited a 23.0004b. payload of which 3,200 lbs. was the PEGASUS U meteoroid detection satellite and 9.700 lbs. was Apollo boilerplate command and service modules (bp-26(. This was the ninth successful test in nine flights for Saturn I, At launch. Apollo command and service module boilerplate spacecraft and launch escape system I Les) tower were atop Saturn I, with PEGASUS II folded inside the service module. After second-stage ignition, Les was jettisoned. After injection into orbit, the Apollo boilerplate was jettisoned into a separate orbit and a motor-driven device extended 96 X 14-ft. winglike panels on fecasus n, exposing 2,300 sq. ft. of instrumented surface. The satellite was attached to the Saturn’s s-iv second stage and would remain so during its lifetime. Each wing consisted of seven frames hinged together and providing mountings for a total of 208 detector panels. As particles collided with this surface, the penetrations would be registered and reported to earth. Orbital data: apogee. 460 mi. (741 km.); perigee, 316 mi. (509 km.); period, 97 min.; inclination, 31.8°. Primary purpose of the flight was to gather information on frequency of meteoroids encountered in the near-earth environment for use in design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft, pecasus n, an improved version of pegasus r launched Feb. 16, 1965, would be visible to the naked eye under favorable conditions near dawn and dusk. (NASA Release 65-151; msec Release 65-121; Marshall Star, 5/26/65, 1: ap, NYT, 5/26/65. 10; V.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 143)
Successful simultaneous two-way transmission of television tests via EARLY bird communications satellite between the U.S. ground station at Andover, Me., and European ground stations at Pleumeur-Bodou, France; Goonhilly Downs, England; and Raisting, W. Germany, was announced by ComSatCorp. The pictures were of good quality. (ComSatCorp Release)
The growing debate about what the next step in manned spaceflight should be was roughly divided into three schools, according to Howard Simons in the Washington Post: (1) a negative “Let’s do nothing at all after landing men on the moon” school; (2) a “wild-space-yonder” school wanting to try everything; and (3) a “school of thought that would make do with what we are now developing through modification and imagination before taking expensive new steps into the heavens.” He said the latter view would mean using Saturn IBs and Vs to launch modified Apollo spacecraft on largely scientific space ventures, possibly as early as 1968. (Simons, Wash. Post, 11/28/65) November 28-December 1: The Committee on Space of the National Citizens’ Commission on International Cooperation recommended nine possible areas of international space cooperation at the White House Conference on International Cooperation: (1) new launching sites for satellites; (2) multipurpose navigation satellite systems; (3) experimental data-gathering satellite system; (4) synoptic sounding rocket investigations; (5) applications of communications satellites; (6) mutual assistance between national and international tracking and data acquisition networks; (7) exploration of the distant planets; (8) remote sensing; and (9) international convention to govern human activity on the moon. (Text) Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, in opening remarks at the session on international space cooperation, said: “I want to support what I understand to be the central argument of the report. “We have done well so far in pursuing our objective of international cooperation. “Our cooperative projects have borne witness to our peaceful aims in space . . . involved foreign intellectual and material resources in our programs . . . and established patterns of cooperation that further our goal of a stable world. “But the future demands a new level of effort.” (Text) The Honorable Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, speaking at the White House Conference, said: “We live at a time when the whole world is being made over socially, economically, scientifically and even intellectually. Our era has witnessed such dramatic achievements as flight faster than sound, the splitting of the atom, miracle drugs, and manned satellites hurling through space. Rapid and turbulent changes in the scientific, economic, and social fields, almost too numerous to name, daily defy evaluation on the basis of prior standards and experience. Vistas of endless space have opened as man’s horizons have widened to encompass the universe. At a pace beyond dreaming the whole pattern of our existence is being reshaped. To ensure that these changes work for the benefit of mankind, law must be developed rapidly enough in the world community to cope with the problems they raise and to harness their potential for peaceful and productive ends.” (Text) The Committee on Science and Technology of the National Citizens’ Commission on International Cooperation said at the Conference that cooperation in science already “is an extensive and integral part of life” but that the same thing was not true in the development qnd application of technology. The Committee urged an international earthquake prediction program, a world oceanography organization, and a “greatly accelerated” program to disseminate technology “for improving the basic needs of man—such as nutrition, sanitation, health, shelter, and communications.” (Text) An Inter-American Skyway, linking cities in Latin America with each other and to North American centers, was suggested by the Committee on Aviation. The Skyway was needed, the Committee said, because airports, controlled airways, navigation aids, safety rules, and other services “lag behind the speed, number and variety” of aircraft on Latin American routes, as they do throughout the world. (Text) November 29: Second Orbiting Solar Observatory (oso ii), after exceeding its operational life expectancy by 50 per cent, had been placed in coasting mode by NASA. Gas supply for the pitch-control in the stabilization system had been depleted, allowing the spacecraft to exceed acceptable tolerances in pointing at the sun. Data would be collected from time to time when the spacecraft did properly observe the sun. oso II, launched Feb. 3, 1965, had completed more than 4,100 orbits and returned some 2,200,000 bits of scientific data each orbit. The nine advanced oso ii experiments were designed to further the work of oso I as well as to extend measurements of the study of solar x-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet radiation, (nasa Release 65-367; GSFC Historian)
USAF launched unidentified satellite payload from WTR using a Thor fw4s booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 151)
usaf launched two unnamed satellites from the Western Test Range with an Atlas-Agena D booster, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/4/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 149)
A projection of the U.S. space program was outlined by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, at the Building Products Executives Conference in Washington, D.C.: “1. After we have made initial landings on the moon, we will, if conditions warrant, make many other trips to explore the various parts of the lunar surface and possibly to establish one or more bases there. “2. Not only will unmanned probes be sent throughout the solar system, but manned expeditions will visit the planets whenever that becomes scientifically promising and practicable. “3. We will develop a family of useful manned earth-orbiting stations, growing from relatively small orbiting laboratories to large multi-manned permanent stations. Regular ferry service will transfer personnel and supplies to and from such spacecraft. “4. Global communications via satellites will become a fact in the very near future and will be followed by direct broadcast of both voice and TV by satellite to home receivers throughout large sections of the world. “5. Orbiting spacecraft will increase annually in numbers, in size, and in sophistication. Through such activity we will greatly increase our knowledge about the earth as well as about the heavens. “6. We can expect a marriage of the major features of both aeronautics and astronautics . . . lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry ability will be launched into near and distant space by means of recoverable and re-usable launch vehicles. Drastic reduction in the mileage cost of space travel will result. “7. Spaceports for the coming and going of spacecraft will be built in a number of parts of this country as well as elsewhere. “8. Improved propulsion—faster, more powerful rockets using nuclear as well as chemical energy—will characterize space transportation. Planetary trips which today would take many months will be done in perhaps a week’s time or less, while carrying substantial payloads of passengers, equipment, and supplies. And, “9. As competence in space increases ... we can expect to see greater economic progress and international cooperation. Then we can truly say that our space efforts have made major contributions to world peace. . . .” (Text)
Japan expected to orbit a satellite within the next three years, New York Times reported. Although Japan’s progress in the missile field had been slowed by the limited annual budget allocations of the Defense Forces, scientific advances, particularly in the field of electronics, plus stimulus to Japanese industry provided by the Korean War, had brought marked advances in rocketry and missiles. {NYT, 1/18/65)
General Bernard A. Schriever, AFSC Commander, said in an address to the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association Conference in Albuquerque: “The Air Force responsibility for our nation’s military developments in space is clearly established. This morning I would like to review our current progress in the areas of unmanned space programs, boosters and propulsion, and finally, manned space programs. . . . “In the late 1950s, a small group of Air Force officers began a program to develop a space-based missile detection and warning system. To obtain information on the background as observed from space and on the signature of ballistic missile rocket motors, the Air Force initiated a series of measurement programs. Instrumented aircraft were used to obtain data on our missile target, from many aspects and in various weather conditions. Concurrently, a spacecraft ‘piggyback’ program for background measurements was instituted. This program has resulted in information of great value and is still collecting valuable data. . . . “The second area of interest is anti-satellite defense. Last September, President Johnson announced the existence of operational U.S. anti-satellite defense systems. . . . “The third area of interest is the detection of nuclear detonations in space. The original effort was formerly known as ‘Vela Hotel,’ and has now emerged as the present Vela Satellite Program. . . . “In 1963 the first pair of Vela Satellites was launched from Cape Kennedy; the second launch occurred in 1964. Both launches were completely successful, and the four satellites are still functioning. . . . “The last area that I would like to consider in unmanned military space systems is communication satellites—commonly called comsat. Our current philosophy of controlled response has placed an additional emphasis upon communications between field commanders and the highest level of our nation. . . . “In summary, space is a new environment of activity. We need to exploit it effectively for our own purposes to prevent it from being used against us. We are aware of the many problems confronting us and do not pretend to have all the solutions. But much has been done, and we are building a broad technological base to meet the even greater challenges of the future.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched cosmos cii and cosmos ciii unmanned satellites to continue space investigations, Tass announced. Orbital parameters for cosmos cii: apogee, 172 mi. (278 km.); perigee, 135 mi. (218 km.) ; period, 89.24 min.; inclination, 65°. COSMOS CHI had been placed in near-circular orbit at 372-mi. (600-km.) altitude, with a period of 97 min. It was not specified whether the two spacecraft were launched simultaneously or whether there was an interval between launchings. All onboard systems were functioning normally. (Pravda, 12/29/65, 1)
In advance excerpts of his book, Waging Peace, 1956-1961, President Dwight D. Eisenhower related his “reactions to Sputnik and the Gaither Report” in October and November 1957. President Eisenhower reviewed a meeting on October 8, 1957, with his principal military and scientific advisers. The late Deputy Secretary of Defense Donald A. Quarles reported: “There is no doubt that the Army Redstone could have orbited a satellite a year or more earlier. . . .” Quarles reviewed the reasons for the separation of the IGY Vanguard satellite from the ballistic missile programs, saying: “The Russians have done us a good turn, unintentionally, in establishing the concept of international space,” a principle confirmed by the orbiting of Sputnik over the air space of country after country. “Late that same morning,” President Eisenhower wrote, “I directed Secretary of Defense Charles Wilson to have the Army prepare its Redstone at once as a backup for the Navy Vanguard.” Of sputnik II, which orbited “Laika” on November 3, 1957, President Eisenhower said it did not arouse American public opinion because people “seemed to resent the sending a dog to certain death—a resentment that the Soviet propagandists tried to assuage a few days later by announcing that they had put poison in the last of Laika’s rations. . . . “The public, however, became bewildered and upset when word got out that a far from optimistic secret report had been made to me in the National Security Council . . . called the Gaither Report. “This was a period of anxiety. Sputnik had revealed the psychological vulnerability of our people. The Communists were steadily fomenting trouble and rattling sabers; our economy was sputtering somewhat, and the ceaseless and usually healthy self-criticism in which we of the United States indulge had brought a measure of self-doubt. Added to this was the failure of our first satellite launching attempt [Vanguard] in the full glare of publicity and the alleged missile ‘gaps’ which political observers claimed they had detected .. . “The Soviet satellites,” President Eisenhower said, “were a genuine technological triumph, and this was exceeded by their propaganda value. To uninformed persons in the world, Soviet success in one area led to the belief that Soviet communism was surging ahead in all types of activity.” {Wash. Post, 9/21/65, Al, A19)
A second molniya i communications satellite was launched by U.S.S.R. into a high elliptical orbit with the following parameters: apogee, 40,000	km. (24,800 mi.) ; perigee, 500 km. (310 mi.) ; period, 11 hrs., 59 min.; inclination, 65°. Tass said: “With the launching of the second molniya I satellite, verification will begin of the possibility of organizing a communications system with the simultaneous use of several Sputniks. . . . “The main purpose of the launching ... is to further develop the system of two-way long-distance television and telephone-telegraph radio communication, and its experimental operation. The entire equipment ... is functioning normally. “The second molniya-I . . . has already been used for telephone calls and an exchange of television programs between Moscow and Vladivostok.” (Tass, 10/14/65; Wash. Post, 10/15/65, A4)
echo I, launched by NASA five years ago, had traveled more than 659 million miles and circled the earth more than 22,600 times. Orbital data: apogee, 1,165 mi. (1,875.7 km.); perigee, 560 mi. (901.6 km.) ; period, 113 min. The satellite had demonstrated that large inflatable spheres could be used as passive communications reflectors in space, (gsfc Release G—19-65)
Planning Research Corp. of Los Angeles received a one-year, $48,229 contract from NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to conduct an independent reliability assessment of the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/26/65, D6)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced it would negotiate with Radiation, Inc., of Melbourne, Florida, for a contract to develop a new weather measuring system to be tested aboard the Nimbus B meteorological satellite. The new equipment, Interrogation Recording and Location System (IRLS), would tie together weather observations made on the ground and in space as well as oceanographic measurements. (gsfc Release G-l-65)
The Interim Communications Satellite Committee (icsc), on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat), approved a communications satellite system to provide services for nasa’s Project Apollo and for other commercial users. The system, which would provide the first commercial comsat service to the Pacific area and supplement services across the Atlantic as part of the Intelsat system, would include four satellites: two in synchronous orbit at about 22,300-mi. altitudes, one over the Pacific, the other over the Atlantic; and two in reserve. Larger and more versatile than early bird I comsat providing commercial service over the Atlantic, these satellites would weigh 150 lbs. compared to early bird i’s 85 lbs. icsc also approved ComSatCorp’s contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. to buy four satellites for the system. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb. (ap, Balt. Sun, 6/10/65)
France’s newest satellite tracking station, located outside Pretoria, South Africa, was nearing completion and would probably be operational by July 1965. The $840,000 station would be used to track France’s first satellite, scheduled to be orbited around the earth in 1965. (ap, Balt. Sun,1/13/65)
USAF Titan III—A rocket was fired from Eastern Test Range in a maneuverability test in which the third stage (transtage), carrying two satellites, executed a series of consecutive and intricate maneuvers. Primary goal of the mission was four separate ignitions of the transtage’s engines—a feat never before attempted. First firing, after burnout of the first two stages, lasted 296 sec. and injected the 7,000-lb. rocket-payload assembly into near-earth orbit of 125-mi. (201.3 km.) apogee, 108-mi. (173.9-km.) perigee, and 88.1min. period. After one earth orbit, about 90 min. after launch, the third stage ignited a second time, for 37 sec., driving the stage upward into an elliptical orbit of apogee, 1,757 mi. (2,828.8 km.) and perigee, 115 mi. (185.2 km.). Two and one-half hours later, transtage’s two 8,000-lb.-thrust engines burned a third time, for 27 sec., to circularize the orbit at 1,743-mi. (2,806.2-km.) apogee and 1,729-mi. (2,783.7km.) perigee. Thirty seconds after shutdown of the transtage, an 82-lb. Lincoln Laboratory experimental communications satellite (les Ii), equipped with its own rocket motor to shoot itself into a higher elliptical orbit, was spring-ejected from the stage. LES II attained orbit of 9,364-mi. (15,076-km.) apogee; 1,753-mi. (2,822-km.) perigee; 315-min. period; and 31.35° inclination. Then, 42 sec. after les II was released, a 44.5-in.-dia., 75-lb. hollow aluminum radar calibration sphere (lcs i) was ejected from the transtage. lcs I was to remain in near-circular orbit with 1,743-mi. (2,806.2-km.) apogee, 1,729-mi. (2,783.7-km.) perigee. Seven hours after launch, the transtage was fired a fourth time, driving it into a final elliptical orbit of 2,317-mi. (3,730.4-km.) apogee; 1,725-mi. (2,777.3-km.) perigee; 157min. period; and 32.07° inclination, (upi, NYT, 5/7/65, 12; Av. Wk., 5/10/65, 33; usaf Proj. Off.; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 141)
A—i, France’s 88-lb. first satellite, continued orbiting, but its radio signals had become weaker. Telemetry analysis indicated part of the difficulty was damage to the antennas at launch Nov. 26 from Hammaguir Range, Algeria, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/27/65, A2; Reuters, Balt. Sun, 12/28/65, 6)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB with a Thor-Able-Star booster, (upi, NYT, 6/26/65, 6)
U.S. News and World Report commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory: “President Johnson has now committed this country to a vital and far-reaching race against Russia for military supremacy in space. “It is a strategic decision regarded as important as any since World War II. “The race actually has started. At this point it is largely silent and secret. But both powers are known to be conducting military missions with unmanned satellites, and results are described as striking and enormous. “Next, both countries will make major strategic moves by putting up space stations with military crews. Beyond that, plans are being readied for armadas of orbiting platforms and fleets of space planes— and, in case of hostilities, possible confrontation in space. “The U.S. goal: to make certain Russia is denied control of space that might enable it to tip the balance of power here on earth. . . .”	(U.S. News, 9/13/65, 10)
Russian communications satellite MOLNIYA i, because of its higher and sharply elongated orbit, could transmit continuously several hours longer than American Telstars, reported Tass. Tass claimed that Tel-stars could transmit uninterruptedly for only 30 min. (Reuters, NYT, 5/7/65, 3)
NASA ceased operation of RELAY II communications satellite after a final demonstration broadcast during which Sen. B. Everett Jordon (D-N.C.) spoke via the satellite from Exposition Hall in Atlantic City in opening the week-long International Exposition of the American Textile Machinery Assn, there. After the demonstration, the Mojave Desert Ground Station, the only one in the world equipped to communicate with relay Ii, was closed to begin modifications for use in the Ats (Applications Technology Satellite) program. Since its launch Jan. 21, 1964, relay ii had performed experiments demonstrating the feasibility of a worldwide system of communications by spacecraft and the technology for such a system, (nasa Release 65-306)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos liv, cosmos lv, and cosmos lvi on one rocket booster. All three satellites were moving in close initial orbits: apogee, 1,856 km. (1,141 mi. I ; perigee, 279.7 km. (170 mi.) ; period, 106.2 min.; inclination, 56°4'. Equipment aboard “for the further investigation of outer space” was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/22/65, atss-t Trans.; NYT, 2/22/65, 12)
North American Air Defense Command (norad) tracked a new Russian satellite (cosmos lii) for several hours before Moscow announced the launching. As of this date, norad’s space detection and tracking system was observing 488 man-made objects in space, of which 29 were actual payload satellites and the rest debris from previous launchings, (ap, Balt. Sun, 1/12/65)
Status report on molniya i comsat, launched by the Soviet Union April 23, was given to Tass by I. P. Petrushkin of the U.S.S.R. Ministry of Communication: “Tests have demonstrated that the combinations of the terrestrial and onboard communication equipment of the ‘Mol-niya-1’ satellite assure the possibility of the reliable transmission of black and white TV. Color tv sessions yielded encouraging results. “On Sundays, via the ‘Molniya-1,’ a regular exchange of TV programs is being conducted between Moscow and the Pacific coast. During May and June, tests were also run on the quality of the multichannel telephone system. The systems were simultaneously loaded with phone conversations, tonal telegraphy, phototelegraphy, and radio broadcasting programs. Even under such an ‘optimal’ regime, the communication channels function fairly reliably. “In June, there was put into operation the commercial long-distance phone link between Moscow and Vladivostok, functioning via the ‘Molniya-1.’ ” (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/4/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced it had selected four companies for feasibility studies for experiments in applications satellite technology. Contracts awarded were: Control Data Corp., $45,000 to examine a technique for determining a satellite’s orbit by using only spacecraft observation; Philco Corp., $50,000 to study a device capable of determining attitude of a spin-stabilized spacecraft from star measurements; Bell Aerospace Corp., $47,000 to study an electrostatic accelerometer which could provide information about the relative motion of a gravity gradient stabilized spacecraft; and Electro Optical Systems, Inc., $37,000 to study measuring of degradation of optical characteristics of materials in space. Studies should be completed in eight weeks, (csfc Release G-20-65)
Orbit of molniya I Soviet communications satellite was slightly corrected to increase its usefulness for relaying telecasts between Moscow and Vladivostok. Soviet Communications Minister Nikolai D. Psurtsev told Izvestia that the firing of a special rocket motor aboard the satellite had raised the apogee to 40,(M5.2 km. (24,872.8 mi.) ; perigee to 548.4 km. (340.6 mi.) ; and the period to 12 hrs. Previous orbital parameters: apogee, 39,467.7 km. (24,514.1 mi.) ; perigee, 498.4 km. (309.5 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 48 min. The corrected high elliptical orbit put molniya i within the visibility of Russia’s ground stations for the greater part of its period. (NYT, 5/5/65, 6) Discussing investigation of space by the U.S.S.R., Skuridin said that from 1962, the problem of going to the moon had been studied with the Cosmos series of spacecraft. He said cosmos iii and COSMOS IV had studied solor plasma, its energy and location in earth areas, and during the period April 24 to May 2, 1962, had transmitted to earth more than 50 million measurements; 20 million more had been stored in a data-storage system, cosmos xli had investigated charged particles at 40,000 mi. altitude. The Elektron series, he continued, had made important measurements of the atmosphere up to an altitude of 3,000 km. The ions of hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen had also been measured. Discussing future flights, Skuridin said the Soviet Union would like to study Saturn, Pluto, and the sun, but added that a satellite was needed that could be launched to far-off planets and the sun and return to earth, (upi, NYT, 5/6/65, 2; Kotulak. Chic. Trib., 5/7/65; M&R, 5/10/65, 12, 13) May 4^-6: Preliminary plans for Apollo Extension System (Aes) development required selection of three major spacecraft contractors, NASA official told Missiles and Rockets during Symposium on Post-Apollo Space Exploration in Chicago1: one to devise single payload plan, one to cover physical installation of experimental payloads and checkout systems, and one to translate Apollo spacecraft into Apollo extension vehicle with a six-week manned orbiting capability. NASA official attributed this decision to a reluctance to depend on a single contractor and a desire for broad-based readily available industrial capability. (M&R, 5/10/65, 13)
A newspaper article summarizing a report of the International Civil Aviation Organization on the safety record of the non-Communist world’s airlines in 1964 said: “. . . its more than 100 member airlines, which include U.S. carriers, ended the year with the lowest fatality rate on record, 0.61 deaths to 100 million passenger-miles flown, 22.5 percent below 1963, the best previous year.” (CR, 5/19/65, 10592) Week of May 16: A $300,000 telescope produced through gifts of parts and money was put on display at the Stamford (Conn.) Museum and Nature Center. The 22-in. photo-visual telescope, designed to track even man-made satellites, was the result of a project compared to a “barn raising.” A spokesman said that at dedication on June 13, plaques would be distributed to 51 major contributors of equipment and labor, and certificates to 81 other cooperators. (Devlin, NYT, 5/23/65)
ComSatCorp announced the selection of Vern W. Johnson & Sons, Inc., Spokane, Wash., for site preparation and construction of buildings and other facilities for ComSatCorp’s fixed earth station at Brewster Flat, Wash. The construction contract, totaling $909,382, was filed with fcc. The Brewster Flat station, when completed, would serve as a U.S. link in a worldwide commercial satellite communications system. (ComSatCorp Release)
Establishment of a Joint Meteorological Satellite Program Office (JMSPo), to identify, compile, and coordinate requirements from the military services and the Joint Chiefs of Staff for use of meteorological satellites, was announced by dod. JMSPO would continually review the NASA meteorological satellite program and would define military applications of the national system and the dod technical efforts to support the national program, (dod Release 229-65)
DOD refused request by television networks to present live coverage of the recovery portion of the Gemini v flight scheduled for Aug. 19. Equipment necessary to set up a portable ground station on the aircraft earner U.S.S. Lake Champlain “might interfere with operational requirements and shipboard communications,” DOD said. The networks had intended to send pictures to early bird i satellite for relay to the Andover, Me., ground station.	(NYT, 7/31/65, 35)
NASA postponed indefinitely the launching of a beacon Explorer satellite from Wallops Island. The launching had been scheduled for March 30. (NYT, 3/27/65)
Missions currently performed at Vandenberg afb, reportedly now busier than Cape Kennedy, were listed by U.S. News and World Report: launching “spy” satellites into polar orbits to take detailed photos of military bases in Communist lands; testing Titan and Minute-man XCBMS over the Pacific; launching weather, mapping, navigation, and other scientific satellites; tracking space vehicles—U.S. and Soviet. Programs projected included: launching of the first Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) in 1969 or 1970, following unmanned test shots in 1968; rapid buildup of manned military flights that could reach the level of 50 military man-in-space launches a year by the early 1970s; establishment of regular shuttle service in small rockets to and from large orbiting military spacecraft. Vandenberg was described as “a nest of pads and silos, some underground and some above, from which every U.S. missile and satellite can be fired.” In the past year, there were 117 launchings at Vandenberg, compared with 93 at Cape Kennedy. {U.S. News, 12/13/65, 5)
A Scout Evaluation Vehicle (Sev) was successfully launched by NASA from Wallops Station. Primary purpose of the mission was to demonstrate in flight the operation of improved vehicle features: (1) use of new second- and fourth-stage rocket motors with improved thrust characteristics; (2) test of Scout’s capability to fly a “dog-leg” course from Wallops Station by yaw torquing, performed during the third-stage coasting period; (3) test of in-flight performance of improved spin motors to stabilize the fourth stage of the vehicle; (4) demonstration of the Scout air transportability concept by launching a vehicle which, after complete assembly at Wallops, had been airlifted from and returned to the launch site in simulation of a transcontinental trip. All flight objectives were met, including injection of Army Corps of Engineers secor v (Sequential Collation of Range) geodetic satellite into an orbit with apogee, 1,504 mi. (2,421 km.); perigee, 702 mi. (1,130 km.); period, 122 min.; inclination, 69.23°. Elliptical orbit should enable SECOR v to transmit measurements of distances up to 2,000	mi.—twice the distance possible with earlier Secor versions which had been launched into 600-mi. circular orbits. The satellite would map the surface of the earth, pinpointing the location of land bodies separated by large expanses of ocean. (Wallops Release 65-49)
NASA had requested industry to submit proposals for a study of the feasibility of a satellite capable of broadcasting directly to conventional home fm radios and/or shortwave radios. Potential contractors were expected to have their proposals back to NASA in 45 days. Following a NASA evaluation, one or more contracts would be awarded for a detailed six-month mission study, (nasa Release 65-363)
Sir Francis Vallat, acting director of McGill Univ.’s Institute of Air and Space Law, told a news conference that if a piece of a satellite were to hit an individual on the head, he could sue the government that launched it and probably win the case, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/65, A8)
explorer xxx (iqsy Solar Explorer) was successfully launched by NASA from Wallops Station, Va., by a four-stage Scout booster. Orbital data: apogee, 548 mi. (883 km.) ; perigee, 440 mi. (709 km.); period, 100.8 min.; inclination, 59.7°. Ninth Solrad Satellite developed by Naval Research Laboratory, explorer xxx would monitor and measure x-ray emissions from the sun as part of the U.S. contribution to the International Quiet Sun Year project. (NASA Release 65—352; gsfc)
Tracking and telemetry station to support Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) would he established by NASA at Toowoomba in eastern Australia near Brisbane at an approximate cost of $6 million. Plans for the new station were jointly announced by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Australian Minister for Supply Allen Fairhall. (nasa Release 65—357)
Environmental Science Services Administration (essa) asked that NASA temporarily assign Dr. Joachim P. Kuettner, deputy director of the Technical Staff (Saturn/Apollo Systems Office) of the Research and Development Operations, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, as Chief Space Scientist of the National Weather Satellite Center. Dr. Kuettner, expected to leave for Washington, D.C., about Sept. 1, would administer ESSA’s space program, specifically, manned and unmanned advanced systems, (mfsc Release 65-207)
Canadian alouette ii and American explorer xxxi (Direct Measurement Explorer) were launched in a pick-a-back configuration by nasa from the Western Test Range with a single Thor-Agena B booster. Their orbital parameters were nearly identical: apogee, 1,837 mi. (2,958 km.); perigee, 329 mi. (516.8 km.); period, 121 min.; inclinations, 80°. The two satellites would make related studies of the earth’s ionosphere as they orbited in close proximity. Both the 323-lb. alouette II and the 218-lb. explorer xxxi were performing well. Called Isis-X, the double-launch project was first in a new NASA-DRB (Canadian Defense Research Board) program for International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies (Isis). (NASA Release 65—355; gsfc)
Some highlights of the year in physics: Planet Mars has no substantial magnetic field, according to scientific experiments by mariner IV Mars probe. Because of this, Martian life-forms would have to be able to withstand intense radiation, but possibility of Martian life was not ruled out. mariner iv also reported Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to readily support parachute or glider-type descents for soft landings on the planet. Comet Ikeya-Seki, the brightest comet to enter the solar system this century, was discovered Sept. 18 and subsequently studied from the ground, airplanes, and rockets. The comet passed within 300,000 mi. of the sun and made a hairpin turn Oct. 21, when it broke into three pieces. Results of NASA’s testing of public reaction to sonic booms, begun in 1961, showed that no serious psychological or physiological effects result from sonic booms. Commercial use of the supersonic transport, to begin in early 1970’s, was expected to create sonic booms that, when Sst’s come into full use in the U.S., would be heard by everyone about once a day. On the subject of antimatter, two items: Swedish physicist Hannes Alfven theorized such cosmic phenomena as quasi-stellar radio sources (“quasars”), radio stars, and supernovae may be powered by matter-antimatter annihilations; and, antideutrons were produced in the laboratory by scientists of Columbia Univ. Unwanted noise from a BTL horn-reflector antenna being used in comsat research may have been radiation from the birth of the universe. This interpretation was based on the “big bang” theory of the universe’s formation and was propounded by a group of Princeton Univ. scientists. Decision was believed near on which of the three principal models of the universe was correct—the steady-state, expanding, or oscillating universe theory. Results in astronomy based on red-shifts of “blue-galaxies” (discovered in 1965) and quasars hinted at an oscillating universe, (aip News, 12/22/65) During 1965: Among highlights in the U.S. communications satellite program were: initiation of commercial comsat operations, with EARLY BIRD I in synchronous orbit over the Atlantic; initiation of a synchronous-orbit comsat program to furnish communications for Project Apollo and for expanded commercial service; and growth of the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium to 48 member nations, representing every continent. Communications Satellite Corp. represented the U.S. and served as manager for the consortium. (Com-SatCorp Release)
West German satellite tracking station at Bochum monitored radio signals from a new Soviet space probe. The observatory said it had received the signals since 11:26 a.m. edt. (Reuters, 6/21/65)
Fee vetoed a proposed Communications Satellite Corp. contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for the design of satellites to be used by DOD. In a letter to ComSatCorp, the FCC took note of a protest by Philco Corp. (see Feb. 2), that it was as qualified as Hughes to bid on the proposed contract and said ComSatCorp must award the contract only after competitive bidding. ComSatCorp had asked the FCC to approve the proposed contract, waiving requirements for competitive bidding, (fcc Public Notice-C)
U.S.S.R. launched its first communications satellite molniya i into orbit: apogee, 39,380 km. (24,459 mi.); perigee, 497 km. (309 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 48 min.; inclination, 65°. Krasnaya Zvezda reported that the “basic purpose of launching the Molniya-1 communications satellite is to accomplish the transmission of TV programs and to perform two-way multichannel telephone, phototelegraphic and telegraphic communication. All the onboard equipment on the satellite and the ground radio network are operating normally, and the first transmission of TV programs between Vladivostok and Moscow were successfully completed.” (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/ 24/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
USAF launched Atlas-Agena D from WTR with unidentified satellite payload.	(U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 143)
German Space Research Commission (dkfw) recommended $460million West German space program between. 1966 and 1970: $250-$280 million would be spent on broad-based “vital-point” program; the balance would be used for West German participation in the European Space Research Organization (esro) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo). The Commission’s report emphasized three programs from its list of “vital points”: development of satellites, development of a recoverable sounding rocket, and construction of research installations. The report deplored the previous neglect of space research in Germany, emphasized that the funds recommended were minimal and that Germany’s late start in the space field would entail a high rate of annual increases in cost. At the end of the building stage, costs could “be adjusted to fairly fixed share of the gross national product.” (Wetmore, Av. Wk., 9/6/65, 51)
usn would build new stations at Raymondville and Roma, Tex., as part of its SPADATS (Space Detection and Tracking System) surveillance network for detecting satellites passing over the U.S., reported Warren Burkett in the Houston Chronicle. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 5/12/65)
PEGASUS ill meteoroid detection satellite was launched into orbit from Eastern Test Range, with a Saturn I booster—last(sA-lO) in a series of ten launch vehicle test flights. Initial orbital data: apogee, 336 mi. (541.9 km.); perigee, 324 mi. (522.6 km.); period, 95.5 min.; inclination, 28.9°. Main assignment of the 3,200-lb. spacecraft with wing-like panels was to add information on the frequency of meteoroids in near-earth environment, for use in the design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft. Eight of its detachable panels carried 352 thermal surface samples collected from the aerospace industry. If NASA should program an astronaut-PEGASUS III rendezvous, the astronaut would detach as many panels as possible and return them to earth for study. Also orbited was Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-9), which served as shroud for PEGASUS III. Apollo launch escape system was jettisoned during launch vehicle’s ascent. PEGASUS ill—expected to return meteoroid data to ground stations for at least one year—was identical to PEGASUS II, in orbit since May 25, 1965. pegasus I was sent into orbit Feb. 16, 1965. (nasa Release 65-232; msfc Release 65-185; msfc Release 65-190)
Bell Telephone Laboratories astronomers detected radio waves that seemed to be “flying in all directions through the universe.” Dr. Arno A. Penzias and Dr. Robert W. Wilson made the observations with the horn antenna developed for communications satellite research at Holmdel, NJ. Princeton Univ. scientists led by Dr. Robert H. Dicke, Prof, of Physics, unaware of the btl observation, reached a prediction of the existence of such waves, which they theorized were remnants of light waves from the primordial explosion giving birth to the universe. In this theory of the universe’s origin—the “big bang” theory—the galaxies all originated at a single point, shooting outward ever since the cataclysmic event. According to the theory, the light waves were stretched into radio waves by the expansion of the universe. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/65)
Dr. Burton I. Edelson, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke on communications satellites at the aiaa meeting in Las Cruces, N.Mex. He said: “There is a general growing interdependence of politics, economics, and technology, and in no area do these forces interact more noticeably, than in international communications. When we try to predict the course that communications satellites systems will follow in the years to come we must consider not only decibels and megacycles, rocket thrusts and orbital elements, but the competitive economic pressure of transoceanic cables and the political aspirations of developing nations. . . . “Finally, I believe the words of Arthur Clarke, the visionary who first conceived of the communications satellite, will be fulfilled: ‘Com-sats will end ages of isolation making us all members of a single family, teaching us to read and speak, however imperfectly, a single language. Thanks to some electronic gear twenty thousand miles above the equator, ours will be the last century of the savage.’ ” (Text)
ComSatCorp invited 29 manufacturers to submit by September 30 proposals for communications and control equipment to be installed at two ground stations in Hawaii and Washington state—-U.S. links in the proposed worldwide communications satellite system. Two sets of ground communications equipment with one control unit would be integrated with two antenna systems in both earth stations. Each station was expected to cost about $6 million. Work was to begin in the fall and to be completed in about a year. (ComSatCorp Release)
cosmos xciii unmanned satellite was launched by U.S.S.R. Onboard was scientific apparatus for continuing studies of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962. Orbital data: apogee, 522 km. (324.2 mi.); perigee, 220 km. (136.6 mi.); inclination, 48°24'. All instrumentation was functioning normally. (Tass, 10/19/65)
France postponed her first attempt to orbit a satellite. No reason was given, (upi, NYT, 11/23/65, 52)
A successful 60-sec. ground test of the solid-fuel rocket programed to launch Japan’s first artificial satellite in 1968 was announced by Tokyo Univ. scientists. The rocket had a maximum thrust of 200,000 lbs. (Wash. Post, 5/30/65)
usaf launched Thor-Able-Star booster from Western Test Range, placing in orbit an unidentified satellite and U.S. Army’s secor II geodetic satellite, secor II “failed to deploy properly from its piggyback container.” (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 136; M&R, 4/5/65, 12)
NASA Langley Research Center scientists Arthur L. Newcomb, Jr., Nelson J.	Groom, and Norman M. Hatcher reported their work on an infrared sensing instrument to help a spacecraft determine which way was up, at the IEEE national convention. The device described was sensitive to the difference between infrared radiation in space and that emitted by a planetary or lunar body; it employed a mechanically-driven system of mirrors to scan the region of space in which it was operating. Radiation gathered by the mirrors was focused into four germanium lenses, each containing a thermistor sensitive to infrared. When the scanning mirror crossed the horizon of a planet, the increase or decrease registered on the thermistor and generated an electronic signal that could be processed through a series of special circuits to provide a stabilizing or control command to the spacecraft. The new sensor concept was expected to be useful for weather and communications satellites, as well as for space probes and other types of spacecraft. (LaRC Release)
Western Union International, Inc., asked fcc for authority to conduct a series of satellite communications tests should NASA and DOD permit live coverage of the Gemini 6 recovery in October. The proposal included testing a portable ground station at Taylor’s Island, Md., and then on a ship at sea. Trials would include live television transmission from the portable ground station to early bird i communications satellite, which would relay the transmission to U.S. and Europe. ComSatCorp approval would also be necessary before tests could begin. {Wash. Post, 9/15/65)
NASA announced explorer xxxi and Canadian alouette ii, launched together on the same booster Nov. 28, were functioning as planned. EXPLORER xxxi’s apogee was less than a mile higher than alouette n’s and its perigee less than a mile lower. Orbits were some 1,850 mi. (2,978.5 km.) at apogee and 310 (499 km.) at perigee. The 13 experiments on the ISIS satellites were working well with excellent data on the ionosphere being obtained, (nasa Release 65-377)
usaf Titan m-c, launched from Eastern Test Range, encountered trouble with its transtage—third stage—and failed to reach near-synchronous equatorial orbit with four pick-a-back satellites. At lift-off, the booster’s two 1.2-million-lb.-thrust strap-on engines and the Titan m-C core vehicle functioned as scheduled, propelling the booster to 400,000-ft. altitude at 10,300 mph. Second stage ignited and the stages separated simultaneously with first stage burnout. Ten-second coast period followed second stage shutdown before stage was separated; three seconds after separation, the transtage, powered by twin engines rated at 8,000-lb. thrust each, ran for 17 sec. to drive vehicle into temporary parking orbit with apogee, 194 mi. (311 km.); perigee, 103.6 mi. (167 km.); inclination, 28.6°; orbital insertion velocity, 25,609 fps. About three-quarters through its first orbit (75 min. after lift-off) guidance system commanded transtage engines to restart and burn for 297 sec. to drive transtage and payload upward toward synchronous altitudes; transtage entered transfer orbit with apogee, 20,948 mi. (33,725 km.); perigee, 113.4 mi. (182.6 km.). Vehicle coasted in this deep elliptical orbit almost five hours before transtage was scheduled to restart its engines for third and final time to circularize its orbit. For unknown reasons, the engines did not restart and the vehicle entered a highly elliptical earth orbit with apogee, 20,900 mi. (33,649 km.); perigee, 120.8 mi. (194.4 km.). Telemetry indicated the LES in and IV satellites were released, as was the oscar iv satellite, but all three much later than planned and into the wrong orbits. Fourth payload, OV2-3, remained attached to transtage. Titan ill, most powerful rocket currently in use by the U.S., was being developed by USAF for use with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). This was the second time in three Titan III tests that the transtage had failed, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/22/65, Al; ap, NYT, 12/22/65, 14; ap, Houston Post, 12/22/65; Av. Wk., 12/27/65, 27; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965,157-158)
Radio Prague disclosed that at a November meeting in Moscow of Soviet-bloc countries the U.S.S.R. had agreed to launch Communist nations’ artificial satellites, sounding rockets, and probes for scientific research. Countries involved were preparing research programs which would be announced in 1966. (NYT, 12/12/65, 141)
The 1965 International Space Electronics Symposium was held in Miami Beach. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council, told the Symposium that electronics would continue to play a prime role in the U.S. space program. Emphasizing the difficulty and complexity of the electronic problems which would be encountered in manned planetary exploration, Dr. Welsh noted that for manned Mars travel “we’ll need reliability for at least 400 days contrasted with more immediate goals of 14 to 30 days; we’ll need electrical ‘on board’ power measured in kilowatts instead of today’s tens of watts; we’ll need the data rates of 5 million bits per second instead of the current capability of 8 bits per second; and there is a still debatable possibility that we will need laser beam pointing accuracy several magnitudes better than what we now have. In components, we shall require new or improved concepts such as self-healing, self-checking, and accurate failure prediction to give the greatly increased reliability required. . . .” (Text) Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the Future Space Programs panel that the use of satellites for scientific research and the development of practical applications in meteorology, communications, navigation, and geodesy were important components of the total progress of the space program. He said science had been the prime beneficiary of skills developed for using satellites and space probes as scientific tools: “The vitality of space science has been its close association with various disciplines of science, and its ability to offer those disciplines new ways of solving old problems, while at the same time opening up new horizons.” (Text) The military space program had established the feasibility of using space as a medium for military support missions and now had the initial techniques to exploit the military usefulness of space, M/G Jerry D. Page, AFSC, told the panel on Future Space Programs. Application of these capabilities involved: (1) programs to provide near-term applications such as the Nuclear Detection Satellite program, a research-oriented effort which, at the same time, provided a global nuclear detection capability; and (2) consideration of multi-mission satellites for the future, (afsc Release)
In a brief filed with the Fee, ComSatCorp commented on the problem of direct purchase of communications services:	“. . . Comsat believes that as a general rule it should afford the other carriers the first opportunity to provide satellite services desired by users other than the U.S. Government and foreign communications entities. However, in the event that the other carriers, owning and operating non-satellite facilities in which they have substantial investments, do not provide a satellite service to any customer who desires such service, Comsat should be able to provide such service directly to that customer. . . .” (Text)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., had demonstrated during their August 21-29 GEMINI v flight that a manned weather satellite could become a valuable part of Weather Bureau forecasting, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. U.S. weather forecasters needed information on tropical storm Doreen moving through the Pacific. Cooper and Conrad observed the storm and fixed its position, acquiring the information earlier than tiros x meteorological satellite and more precisely than a ship 150 mi. from the storm. The San Francisco Weather Bureau Office had been able to combine GEMINI v data with that from tiros X to prepare an advisory on Doreen. (Simons, Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A3)
Operation of syncom n and syncom hi communications satellites was transferred to DOD by NASA, which had completed its R&D experiments. Telemetry and command stations and range and range-rate equipment operated by NASA for the Syncom program would be transferred to DOD along with the satellites. DOD had furnished the communications ground stations used to relay transmissions via the two Syncoms for the past two years and would provide NASA with certain telemetry and ranging data of continuing scientific and engineering interest, syncom ill was to prove useful in DOD’s Vietnam communications. (nasa Release 65-5)
NASA was seeking buyers for rocket launches, and the improved Delta, incorporated into the launch package, might prove most economical, William S. Beller reported in Missiles and Rockets. Cost of launching the Delta, either to low-earth orbit or into interplanetary space, would be the same. Cost to send a package to the moon would be $16,000/ lb.; on a Mars flyby, $21,000/lb. Beller’s article continued: “It is ironic that the fabulously successful series of Delta rockets is based on much of the hardware and concepts used in the presumed failure called Vanguard. In 1959, the Air Force took the upper two Vanguard stages, mounted them on Thor, and called the combination Thor-Able. NASA then made minor modifications in the vehicle’s coast attitude-control system and put in a new auto-pilot control system; but the basic Thor-Able shell was used. This was the Delta that failed in its first firing in 1960 with an Echo satellite payload. The subsequent Deltas orbited their payloads in 22 successive launchings. “The Vanguard program, too, besides giving birth to Delta was probably one of the most economical buys of the U.S. space program. Originally budgeted for a total cost of $20 million, Vanguard ended up costing $105 million, which was paid not only for development of the Vanguard hardware and several launchings but also for setting up the worldwide Minitrack network used in Project Mercury. “Improvements in Delta from 1960 to the present involved using more energetic propellants, lengthening the second-stage tanks, replacing the third-stage motor for a more active one, adding solid strap-ons to the first stage, and again enlarging the second stage. “The result is an inexpensive and reliable bus whose launch can be bought for less than $3.5 million.” (Beller, M&R, 8/16/65, 24)
Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc., received the first patent for a satellite communication system with its own orbit pattern. The satellite would linger for a considerable period over each of two widely separated areas; while hovering virtually stationary, it could relay television and radio programs within its range, and also store programs from one area to play later on the other side of the globe. (Jones, NYT, 1/2/65; Chic. Trib., 1/3/65)
In an article discussing major American testing sites, Howard Simons and Chalmers M. Roberts of the Washington Post said: “Indeed it is from Vandenberg and not Cape Kennedy, Fla., that the majority of American satellites are launched. Between Jan. 1, 1964, and Oct. 31, 1964, for example, 33 or three times as many satellites were successfully put into space from Vandenberg as from Cape Kennedy. “The great majority of the satellites launched from Vandenberg, the hub of what is officially called the Air Force Western Test Range, are military satellites with secret payloads or reconnaissance cameras capable of peering down on Russia and China.” (Simons and Roberts, Wash. Post, 4/17/65)
High-speed transmission of weather data between the U.S. and France was provided by early bird i communications satellite. Information gathered by tiros ix weather satellite during a 24-hr. period and assembled on a chart at the World Weather Center in Maryland, was relayed to the Andover, Me., ground station; then, via early bird I, it was transmitted to the French ground station at Pleumeur-Bodou and on to the French National Weather Center in Paris. Conducted jointly by the Weather Bureau and ComSatCorp, in conjunction with Press Wireless, Inc., and Alden Electronics Corp., the demonstration illustrated a new and advanced forecast method which would include transmissions of facsimile charts and data at eight times the speed of present networks. (ComSatCorp Release; ap, Balt. Sun, 6/16/65)
During a luncheon speech at the Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System, presented in Denver, Colo., by the American Astronautical Society, Mai. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, formerly NASA Director of Launch Vehicle Programs, said it was now generally agreed that the near-earth space area “looks more promising from the standpoint of potential military applications” than lunar bases, Mars flights, and other projects suggested earlier. USAF was seeking refinement of its knowledge in astronomy, geophysics, geodesy, and other areas. More pressing, he said, was to study the space environment as related to weapon systems and orbiting satellites. (Partner, Denver Post, 2/29/65)
NASA had awarded a contract to the Univ. of Iowa for preparation of an Injun spacecraft to be used in a dual satellite launch in 1967. The Injun Explorer would be teamed with a 12-foot inflatable Air Density Explorer and flown on a single Scout launch vehicle in the same way explorers xxiv and xxv were orbited Nov. 21, 1964. The contract, valued at $1,070,488, covered construction of the Injun spacecraft, preparation and integration of the onboard experiments, and integration with the Air Density Explorer spacecraft as a single Scout payload. Dr. James A. Van Allen of the Univ. of Iowa would be the principal scientific investigator, (nasa Release 65-338; LaRC Release)
explorer xxix Geodetic Explorer satellite (Geos A) was successfully launched by nasa from etr by a Improved Thrust-Augmented Delta with a new enlarged second-stage fuel tank to provide longer engine burn. Because the guidance system did not shut down the second stage at the desired time, the achieved orbit had the following parameters: apogee, 1,412.4 mi. (2,274 km.); perigee, 695.6 mi.
Aerospace Research Satellite was placed in orbit as a pick-a-back satellite on usaf Atlas D missile test from Western Test Range, the satellite entering the first highly retrograde orbit. Orbital data: apogee, 2,141 mi. (3,447 km.); perigee, 255 mi. (410.6 km.); period, 125.7	min.; inclination, 144.3°. Carrying onboard instruments to map and monitor energetic particles, mass spectrometers, detectors imbedded in radiation shield, and instruments measuring dose rates in tissue-equivalent medium, the satellite successfully returned data. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/65)
NASA successfully conducted an Apollo boilerplate pad abort test at White Sands Missile Range to check the launch escape system. The test simulated an abort from ground level, using the Apollo launch escape system for propulsion. This type of abort would be necessary in an actual mission if serious trouble developed with the Saturn launch vehicle just before or during ignition of the Saturn engines. Boilerplate 23A, the command module used for this test, powered by the launch escape rocket’s 155,000 lbs. of th rust, traveled 5,000 ft. above the range. Eleven sec. after ignition was signaled from the blockhouse, canards deployed near the top of the escape motor, causing the spacecraft to pitch aerodynamically to a blunt-end-forward position. Three seconds later, the tower jettison motor ignited, removing the tower and boost protective cover from the spacecraft. The forward (apex) heat shield was jettisoned .4 sec. later to uncover the parachute containers. Dual drogue parachutes were deployed by mortars from the upper deck two seconds after the LES was jettisoned. They slowed the spacecraft’s descent, then disreefed to stabilize the module in a blunt-end-forward position. When the drogue parachutes were jettisoned, three pilot chutes were deployed to extract the three main chutes from their containers. The main parachutes were deployed in reefed condition, then disreefed to lower the spacecraft to a gentle landing about one mile from the launch site. The flight sequence took about one minute. This was the first Apollo boilerplate to be reused, (nasa Release 65-202; upi, Chic. Trib., 6/30/65; msc Roundup, 6/25/65, 1) President Johnson signed the bill authorizing $5,190,396,200 for NASA during fy 1966. (ap, Wash. Post, 6/30/65) At Kennedy Space Center, NASA problems with radio frequencies forced at two-day postponement of an attempt to launch Tiros 10 weather satellite, designed to study hurricanes and typhoons. (Wash. Post, 6/29/65)	_
U.S. would install new equipment costing an estimated $5 million at one of its three satellite tracking stations in the Pretoria area of South Africa. Arrival of the expensive new equipment was taken by observers as a sign that NASA officials were determined to hold on to the stations. Possibility that they might be closed had been raised last summer when Prime Minister Hendrik F. Verwoerd had said American Negroes could not be assigned to the stations. American officials insisted they had accepted no racial restriction on their personnel in South Africa. (NYT, 10/31/65, 12)
In an article in the Orlando Evening Star, Barry Goldwater said: “Defense Secretary Robert McNamara has indicated that space weapons are too costly, as though any dollar cost is too high for the security of 190 million Americans and a billion allies and friends. The only major space-military program McNamara has permitted to stay alive is the Manned Orbital Laboratory, and he has so slowed and limited this that its orbit is apparently toward nothing but bureaucratic extinction. “We have deployed one or. two so-called ‘satellite killers,’ but they are a pitiful particle of what really is needed. “Pictures of Mars are fine. So is a trip to the moon. But the first job of any administration is to secure the nation against its enemies. “We will not remain the most powerful nation on earth for long if we do not reverse the suicidal Johnson-McNamara refusal to let us arm ourselves in space.” (Orl. Eve. Star, 8/4/65)
A special educational television satellite station to carry color or blackand-white TV direct to home receivers was proposed to NASA by Hughes Aircraft engineer Dr. Harold Rosen. (Time, 5/14/65; CR, 5/20/65, A2549)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxxvi, lxxxvii, lxxxviii, lxxxix, and XC artificial earth satellites with a single booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,609 km. (999.3 mi.); perigee, 1,380 km. (857 mi.); period, 116.7 min.; inclination, 57°. An electrical pack operating on energy released by a radioactive isotope was onboard power system on one of the satellites. Instruments were functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 9/21/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Japan’s Ministry of Telecommunications said signals from what they had thought a new Soviet satellite turned out to be Italian-U.S. SAN marco i, launched Dec. 15, 1964. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/2/65; ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 1/3/65)
Pravda announced the birth of Russia’s third “space baby”: a son to Cosmonaut Valery F. Bykovsky and his wife Valentina, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 4/13/65) Week of April 12: European Space Research Organization (esro) selected Laboratoire Central de Telecommunications (lct), a wholly-owned French subsidiary of International Telephone and Telegraph Corp., as prime contractor for development of Esro 1 polar ionosphere satellite. The $3-million contract awarded called for development and production of one prototype and two flying satellites—one a backup—to gather information on ionospheric and particle conditions in the northern polar region. (Av. Wk., 4/12/65, 37; Av. Wk., 4/19/65, 30)
Opening the annual meeting of the National Research Council, Harvey Brooks, professor of applied physics at Harvard Univ., discussed recent trends in Federal support of research and development. Of the $14.5 billion r&d budget for fy 1966. he observed, nearly half was for space activities—expended principally through dod and NASA. Scientific satellite programs accounted for 36r/r of all basic research expenditures. He noted the steady trend toward greater diversity in sources of Federal support for academic research. One indication is the fact that in 1954 dod accounted for 70r/< of academic research but in fy 1966 for only 27r/c. (nas-nrc News Report, 3/65, 1)
USAF launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from WTR with an unidentified satellite. (17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965,153)
ComSatCorp’s early bird i communications satellite reached its permanent station over the Atlantic Ocean:	apogee, 22,243 mi. (35,811 km.); perigee, 22,224 mi. (35,780 km.); period, 23 hrs. 56 min. 57 sec.; inclination, .085°; location, 28.0° west longitude. (ComSatCorp)
The Bochum Observatory in West Germany reported it had received signals from Soviet satellite proton i which indicated it would “not remain for a long period in a stable orbit.” (ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/18/65, A2)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D booster with unidentified satellite payloads from Western Test Range. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 136)
NASA launched a two-part 104-lb. sounding rocket payload from NASA Wallops Station, Va., to measure electron densities and ion composition of the upper atmosphere. Designed as a mother-daughter experiment—with radio signals to be sent from daughter to mother—the payload separated as planned at about 170-mi. altitude and the two-sections reached peak altitude at 605 mi. The sections were programed to rise separately for about 8 min. and reach a distance apart of about 3 mi. Experimental information was radioed to ground stations and no recovery of the sections was required; they impacted in the Atlantic Ocean. Measurement of the differences between the signals of the two devices, monitored by ground stations, was expected to provide more accurate profiles of upper atmosphere electron density. The launching was timed to occur while Canadian satellite alouette was passing nearby, alouette’s instruments would provide a horizontal profile of ionospheric and ion densities and temperatures to be correlated with findings of the mother-daughter experiment. (Wallops Release 65-30)
USAF presented a Lockheed Agena-B to the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., for permanent display in the National Air Museum. The Agena had performed as an orbital injection vehicle, space satellite (first to achieve circular and polar orbits), and as an intermediate stage booster for deep space probes. (Smithsonian Release)
Dr. C. 0. Bostrom and Dr. D. J. Williams of the Space Research Div. of Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory said danger of radiation damage to satellites from the artificial radiation belt created in July 1962, following the nuclear detonation over Johnston Island, was “now significantly less severe.” Results of measurements by instruments aboard Navy research satellite 1963 38C showed that the number of high-energy electrons in the artificial radiation belt decreased by 50% in from three months to one year in different parts of the belt. The decrease in intensity as time passed would continue until natural levels of intensity were reached. Dr. Bostrom said, “. . . the observed time decay does show that the satellite radiation damage problems have been reduced by a factor of ten from what they were two years ago.” (Balt. Sun, 3/11/65)
tiros x meteorological satellite was launched from Eastern Test range by a Thrust-Augmented Delta booster into a near-perfect sun-synchronous orbit from which it would photograph tropical storm breeding areas. Orbital parameters: apogee, 517 mi. (832 km.) ; perigee, 458 mi. (737 km.); period, 100.6 min.; inclination to the equator, 81.4°. The spacecraft at first was spinning too fast for picture-taking because of inability to command activation of an automatic slowdown device. A more intense ground signal sent during the second orbit activated the device, slowing the satellite’s spin rate from 138 rpm to about 13 rpm. tiros x would photograph the hurricane-breeding area between 70° north and 30° south latitude, about 60 to 80 percent of the earth. Its two vidicon cameras would take more than 400 pictures daily, tiros ix in its “cartwheel” movement in orbit had been able to provide about 100 percent coverage of the earth daily. The weather observation spacecraft was the 10th successful Tiros (Television Infrared Observation Satellite) to be launched by NASA in as many attempts, tiros x was funded by the Weather Bureau, while the previous nine were NASA research and development spacecraft. It was one of three satellites purchased by Weather Bureau in 1963 “to be used to assure continuity of satellite observations for operational purposes.” (nasa Release 65-229; NASA Release 65-197; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/65, A3; ksc Spaceport News, 7/8/65, 4)
tiros X meteorological satellite photographed an area of unusual cloudiness in the Atlantic about 2,400 mi. east-southeast of Miami, the Miami Weather Bureau said. A hurricane-hunter aircraft would be sent to check. (Miami Her., 8/5/65)
At the Spring Meeting of the American Physical Society, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, attempted to answer the question “What can the space program do for experimental sciences like physics”:	. . the impact that space techniques are having and have already had on geophysics ... is three-fold in character. First, the geophysicist finds in the space program powerful tools to use in a new approach to solving old problems. Secondly, the application of space techniques to geophysics has already turned up a number of exciting new problems, greatly broadening the scope of the discipline. Thirdly, as space probes, and eventually men. reach other bodies of the solar system such as the moon and planets, the domain of geophysics grows beyond the confines of a single body of the solar system. Let us consider each of these extensions to geophysics a little further. “. . . space techniques have provided new tools for studying old problems of geophysics. Geodesy, meteorology, upper atmospheric physics, ionospheric research, and sun-earth relationships have all benefited from the application of space techniques. In the case of geodesy, the influence of the earth upon the orbits of various artificial satellites has been measured by careful radio, radar, and optical tracking and used to obtain quantitative measures of the various harmonics in the expansion of the earth’s gravitational potential. As a consequence of such measurements it has been found that the earth’s equatorial bulge is some 70 meters greater than one would expect. . . . Other departures of the geoid from the figure of hydrostatic equilibrium have also been determined from these satellite measurements. . . . These measurements in turn have important implications for the distribution of matter within the earth, and for the internal strength of the earth’s mantle.” (Text)
French scientists bounced laser beams off NASA satellite EXPLORER XXII three times, according to French Ministry of Scientific Research on Feb. 3. Laser beams were reflected from glass prisms on the satellite, (ap, NYT, 2/4/65, 3)
Danish satellite tracking station official reported what he believed to have been the explosion of a U.S. satellite launched by usaf Mar. 25. About ten brilliantly lighted objects crossing the sky were at first assumed to have been meteors. (M&R, 4/26/65, 11)
ComSatCorp announced that clear test signals transmitted via EARLY BIRD between Andover, Me., and stations in Goonhilly Downs, England; Pleumeur Bodou, France; and Raisting, W. Germany, had demonstrated that communications satellite’s equipment to receive messages from the European stations was functioning properly, as was its receiver tuned to the Andover station, (ap, Chic. Trib., 4/13/65)
NASA had awarded a contract to Rice Univ. for a new type of Explorer satellite designed to extend studies of near-earth atmosphere phenomena, especially auroral phenomena. Under a cost-reimhursement contract, the university would provide two Owl Explorer spacecraft and a flyable prototype at a total estimated cost of $3,676,100. Earliest launch would be in 1967 from the Western Test Range. Launch vehicle would be a four-stage Scout, (nasa Release 65-266; Wallops Release 65-46)
France announced it had successfully completed tests of its three-stage Diamant rocket scheduled to orbit a French satellite in 1966. (Reuters, Detroit News, 6/10/65; Reuters, NYT, 6/10/65)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb using a single Atlas-Agena D booster, (upi, Chic. Trib., 6/26/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 146)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg aFB on a ThorAgena D booster. It also fired its 85th Minuteman icbm. (upi, Phil. Inq., 3/26/65)
One of TIROS ix’s two cameras had stopped returning useful photographs, NASA announced, possibly because of malfunction of a diode. Second camera was taking about 250 pictures daily of the earth’s cover. Project engineers at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center had begun a “turnabout” maneuver to prevent the meteorological satellite from overheating and to ensure continued solar power. Maneuver would not affect satellite’s picture-taking ability. Launched into polar orbit Jan. 22, 1965, tiros ix had apogee of 1,605 mi. and perigee of 435 mi. The “cartwheel satellite,” so called because it was moving through space like a rolling wheel with the cameras mounted opposite each other on the perimeter, had taken more than 32,000 pictures, 92% of them useful to weather forecasters. (nasa Release 65-120)
U.S. Army Engineer Geodesy, Intelligence and Mapping Research and Development Agency (gimrada) awarded $557,000 contract to Cubic Corp. for four additional Secor (Sequential Collation of Range) satellites for use in gathering information on the exact location of land bodies. Although similar to the Secor satellites presently in orbit, the four new satellites would have a transponder capable of operating at higher altitudes. Delivery of the first of the four was scheduled for next February, (gimrada Release)
U.S.S.R.’s cosmos Lxx artificial earth satellite was successfully launched containing scientific equipment “for continuing the outer space research in conformity with the program announced by Tass on March 16th, 1962,” a radio system for precise measurement of the orbital elements, and a radio telemetry system for sending data to earth. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,154 km. (716.7 mi.); perigee, 229 km. (142 mi.); period, 98.3 min.; inclination to the equator, 48.8°. Equipment was functioning normally. Bochum Observatory (W. Germany) had reported picking up signals different from those of the Cosmos series. Heinz Kaminski, head of the Institute for Satellite and Space Research at Bochum, West Germany, said he tracked two Soviet space satellites in orbit although the U.S.S.R. announced the launching of only one: “Apparently'the Russians are preparing for a space rendezvous—perhaps between these two satellites or between a manned space ship and a satellite in parking orbit.” No confirmation of the Bochum report was available from other sources. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/3/65, 1, atss-t Trans.; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/65, 1; upi, Cocoa Trib., 7/2/65)
Soviet Union launched cosmos xciv artificial earth satellite carrying scientific instrumentation to continue the space exploration program. Orbital parameters: apogee, 293 km. (181.9 mi.); perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.); period, 89.3 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was operating normally. (Tass, 10/28/65)
Use of ComSatCorp’s Early Bird communications satellite was subject of a London meeting between U.S. and European participants in the program. A general understanding was reached that once commercial service started, television networks could use the satellite system outside peak transatlantic telephone hours. The peak traffic hours were generally considered from about 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. EST. Exceptions could be made if major news stories broke in Europe during this period. (Farnsworth, NYT, 2/27/65, 51)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxx, lxxxi, lxxxii, lxxxiii, and lxxxiv into orbit with a single booster. Initial orbital data: cosmos lxxx, apogee, 1,552 km. (963.3 mi.); perigee, 1,356 km. (842 mi.); period, 115 min.; cosmos lxxxi, apogee, 1,556 km. (967 mi.); perigee, 1,385 km. (860.2 mi.); period, 115 min.; cosmos lxxxii, apogee, 1,563 km. (971 mi.); perigee, 1,410 km. (876 mi.); period, 115 min.; cosmos lxxxiii, apogee, 1,569 km. (975 mi.); perigee, 1,438 km. (893.1 mi.); period, 116 min.; cosmos lxxxiv, apogee, 1,574 km. (978 mi.); perigee, 1,467 km. (911.1 mi.) ; period, 116 min. Inclination for all five satellites was 56°. One of the satellites was powered by a radioactive isotope, but Tass announced that full measures had been taken “to preclude the possibility of the radioactive isotope contaminating the atmosphere or the surface of the earth.” All onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 9/3/65)
United Press International had announced it would seek to establish a worldwide satellite communications system, either on its own or in partnership with others, if the governments concerned granted the necessary permission. {NYT, 5/23/65)
Data from SOLRAD, the Naval Research Laboratory’s satellite monitoring the sun’s x-ray behavior during the 1964--65 International Years of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), indicated that the sun was at its quietest during May, June, and July, 1964. Information from SOLRAD also suggested that the x-ray region of the corona, instead of being a homogeneous region of a million miles or so, was a series of small cells that flared up to emit hard x-rays and then decayed rapidly. What was seen on earth was the net effect of many knots of very hot, flashing gas giving the appearance of a homogeneous region. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/11/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/65; M&R, 1/18/65)
Soviet communications expert Dr. N. I. Chistiakov, speaking at the UNESCO-sponsored space communications conference in Paris, called for an international convention to govern the use of satellites for broadcasting. He said a draft agreement should be drawn up by the International Telecommunications Union and should make satellite communications available to all countries on a non-discriminatory basis. (Wash. Post, 12/8/65)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center awarded a $500,000 contract to itt to develop a lower-altitude space weather camera for NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite (Ats). (ap, NYT, 12/15/65, 2)
ComSatCorp asked 24 firms to propose earth station construction plans for antenna systems in Brewster, Wash., and Paumalu, Hawaii, by Sept. 17. The rfp specified four 85-ft. parabolic antennas capable of working with satellites at altitudes from 6,000 mi. to 22,300 mi. Requirements were for one operational antenna system at each of the earth stations within a year after the contract award, and the second antenna system at each station two months later. The stations would provide high quality two-way commercial communications, track spacecraft, and send commands and receive data from satellite both during launch and while satellites were in orbit. (ComSatCorp Release; UPI, NYT, 8/20/65, 41)
ComSatCorp’s 85-lb. early bird i, the first commercial communications satellite, was successfully launched from Cape Kennedy with a three-stage Thrust-Augmented Delta (Tad) booster. An hour after launching, flight control center confirmed that the satellite had entered an elliptical transfer orbit with apogee, 22,677 mi. (36,510 km.) ; perigee, 908 mi. (1,463 km.) ; period, 11 hrs. 10 min., and was sending clear radio signals. NASA handled the launching under a contract with ComSatCorp. About 40 hrs. after launching, a kick motor aboard early bird i would be fired to adjust the path of the satellite to a synchronous circular orbit at 22,300 mi. altitude above the Atlantic, early bird i would become the first link in ComSatCorp’s proposed worldwide satellite communications system and would relay radio, television, teletype, and telephone messages between North America and Europe. (Clark, NYT, 4/7/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 4/7/65; ComSatCorp)
Saturn I (sa-9) two-stage launch vehicle, launched by NASA from Cape Kennedy, orbited a 33,000-lb. multiple payload, of which 3,200 lbs. was the pegasus i meteoroid detection satellite. Orbital data:	apogee, 745 km. (462 mi.); perigee, 496 km. (308 mi.) ; period, 97 min.; and inclination, 31.7°. This was the eighth successful test in eight flights for Saturn I; pegasus i was the first active payload launched in the Saturn tests. At launch, an Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-16) and launch escape system (Les) tower were atop Saturn I, with pegasus I folded inside the service module. After first-stage separation and second-stage ignition, Les was jettisoned. When second stage (s-iv) attained orbit, the 10,000-lb. Apollo boilerplate command and service modules were jettisoned into a separate orbit. Then a motor-driven device extended winglike panels on the Pegasus satellite to a span of 96 ft. Each wing consisted of seven frames hinged together and made up of 208 panels, pegasus i remained attached to Saturn I’s second stage as planned. A television camera, mounted on the interior of the service module adapter, provided pictures of the satellite deploying in space. PEGASUS I exposed more than 2.300 sq. ft. of instrumented surface, with thicknesses varying up to 16/1000 in. As meteoroid particles collided with the surface of the panels, they would be registered electronically and reported to earth. Exposure of the large panel area over a long period would give designers of manned and unmanned spacecraft a good sample of meteoroid data. pegasus I would be visible from the earth without the aid of telescope on clear nights. (NASA Release 65-38; Marshall Star, 2/24/65, 1, 5; ap, Houston Chron., 2/16/65; Clark, NYT, 2/17/65; ap, Benedict. Wash. Post, 2/17/65; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/17/65; Sehlstedt. Balt. Sun, 2/17/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 133-134) February 16: On the floor of the House of Representatives, Congressman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) commented upon the successful Saturn I launch: “ . . . this morning the United States took another giant stride in the exploration of space. At 9:37 a.m. a Saturn rocket . . . with its 1,500,000 pounds of thrust, lifted off the launch pad at Cape Kennedy, Fla., on a mission to place in orbit around the earth the Pegasus satellite. “This was the eighth launch of the Saturn rocket out of eight attempts, a truly outstanding scientific and engineering accomplishment of the men of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and of the many contractors who worked so long and hard to make this event a success. “I may say that the gratifying success of the Saturn booster has been matched in other programs as well. “I need only point to the Tiros weather satellite. “Nine have been launched out of nine attempts. “I think we have every right to be proud of our space team on this day of outstanding achievement.” (NASA LAR iv/30-32; CR, 2/16/65, 2630)
usaf awarded General Electric Co. a $1,494,000 increment to a $33,552,224 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for flight testing of the Maneuvering Ballistic Re-entry Vehicle, (dod Release 536-65) “Before the end of this decade, man will have set foot on the Moon’s surface. This will be an event of historical magnitude. “By 1970, manned satellite stations will be circling the Earth for a month or more. A crew of three or four will be on board, performing many kinds of scientific experiments, ranging from astronomy to zoology. Much larger manned space stations could become a reality in future years.	_ “Before the end of the next 5 years, world-wide communication by means of satellites will be a routine accomplished fact, as will detailed observation of weather patterns and collection of meteorological data around the globe. “Radio and TV broadcasting to large areas of the Earth from satellites could become a reality in the next 10 years. “Before 1975 unmanned vehicles from Earth will be circling Mars and Venus and sending exploratory probes to the planets’ surfaces. “To look into the future beyond 1975 is much more uncertain, but experts judge that if Man has the desire and will, he can have gone, by 1985, a long way toward the goal of sending a manned expedition to Mars, perhaps with the aid of some kind of nuclear propulsion. . . .” (Text) Leonard Jaffe, Director of NASA Communication and Navigation Programs, told the Conference that recent announcement that DOD’s navigation satellite system was operational demonstrated the great potential of artificial earth satellites for providing position determinations to the maritime industry. He said NASA had under study a number of techniques, different from those employed in the DOD system, by which satellites located in medium or synchronous orbits could provide position fixes to ships and aircraft. Techniques whereby the craft’s position would be determined at ground computer stations might make the satellite system attractive to U.S. industry, he said. For the future Jaffe foresaw the combination of a position determination method and a communications system integrated into a single satellite to provide capability of aiding in air traffic control. He said: “Accurate position data and reliable communications readily available to air traffic controllers by use of satellites may provide the answer to the acute problem of safely reducing the present separation standard of aircraft flying across the crowded Atlantic Ocean region. Similar data supplied to a maritime regulatory agency may provide a means for preventing marine collisions.” (Text) “Space has at least four unique characteristics which offer advantages for military operations. These are: first, extremely high altitudes which offer line of sight to large areas of the earth’s surface; second, very high speeds; third, almost infinite flight duration; and fourth, highly predictable flight paths. “These recognized advantages have led to the development of a number of space systems which provide support to military land, sea, and air operations. These include satellite systems for communications, weather, and navigation. The capabilities they provide are either unique or represent a distinct improvement over other means of accomplishing the same task . . . “On the other hand, the advantages of space are frequently offset by several disadvantages. The first of these is the cost of launching payloads into space. Presently this amounts to about $1000 a pound in low earth orbit, although it is estimated that the Titan ill will reduce this figure to about $500 a pound, and we foresee methods of reducing the cost to the neighborhood of $100 a pound. The second is the requirement for extremely high reliability—the need to build satellites that will operate for long periods without maintenance and repair. Third is the absence of a demonstrated method of returning from space to a controlled landing at a specified point. And fourth is the environment of space itself—the problems associated with hard vacuum, temperature extremes, and intense radiation. “The need to overcome these disadvantages leads to consideration of the second way in which space may be regarded—not merely as a place, but as a primary focus for man’s scientific and technological efforts in the years ahead. The success of these efforts will determine the practical use that can be made of space for a variety of purposes, including military purposes.” (Text)
fcc received 27 statements on the question of direct purchase of communications services from ComSatCorp. A brief submitted by the American Newspaper Publishers Assn, argued that “a basic policy determination [should] be made at this time, assuring access by the press to ComSat facilities for news media dissemination. ...” A brief by AT&T argued that “authorized users” of ComSat services should be common carrier companies only not any communications organization wishing to rent satellite channels. The “only interpretation . . . consistent with the specific language of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962,” argued at&t, is “the view that ComSat is to function as a ‘carriers’ carrier,’ except possibly in the case of the U.S. Government. . . .” Weekley, Wash. Post, 11/4/65, C9)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
early bird i began commercial operations when President Johnson formally inaugurated telephone service via communications satellite in a 25-min., 6-nation conference call with European officials, including British Prime Minister Harold Wilson, West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard, and Swiss President Tschudi. Participants reported satisfaction with results. (ComSatCorp Release; Robertson, NYT, 6/29/65, 12)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with a Thor-Agena D booster. (Wash. Post, 12/10/65, A29)
It was announced that the special magnetic actuator which worked shutters on rangers vii, vni, and IX, that photographed the moon, and on all nine Tiros weather satellites would be granted a patent. The device moved the shutter at a constant velocity so that the exposure was uniform. It was invented by rca engineers Langdon H. Fulton and Thomas D. Tilton. (Jones, NYT, 3/7/65. 35)
Alfred Gessow, Chief of Fluid Physics Research, nasa, discussed before the Compressed Gas Association in New York City the problems of spacecraft deceleration and heating involved in return through the earth’s atmosphere. He explained why the blunt shape solved deceleration and much of the heat problem in returning Mercury spacecraft from orbit through the atmosphere to earth. Looking beyond the satellite return speed (Mercury and Gemini) and lunar return speed (Apollo), return from interplanetary flight poses the problem of much higher spacecraft speed (and thus heating). Research indicates “that the more pointed shape, although it doesn’t show up too well at the lower re-entry speeds, is better than the blunt nose at the higher speeds because the bow shock is weaker, thus producing lower radiant heating losses. Thus, in a very short time scale, but taking a big leap forward in the velocity-temperature scale, we find ourselves going into another phase of the blunt vs. pointed nose cycle. “. . . The switching between slender and blunt shapes is not new in the race for higher speeds at all times of history. Going through history, compact rocks were replaced by slender arrows; the concept of powder guns created round cannonballs; the rocket age produced slender forms again, which ironically, finally got blunt noses. It is interesting to see how long it took to make such changes empirically and how rapidly these variations have been made by following scientific principles. . . .” (Text)
ComSatCorp announced a $4,650,000 contract with Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., for two large antenna systems to be installed at earth stations in Paumalu, Hawaii, and Brewster Flat, Wash. Movable portions of the 85-ft. dish antennas would weigh more than 135 tons and, when in place atop concrete foundations, be up to 110 ft. high. When completed, the stations would serve as links in a worldwide commercial satellite, communications system. I.ComSatCorp Release)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever predicted at a Retired Officers’ Luncheon in Washington, D.C., that “the next major breakthrough in international commerce will be low cost, long haul air transportation, which could be derived in large part from prior military experience.” Gen. Schriever said he recognized “that there are problems involved in translating military systems into commercial systems . . . but these problems can be successfully attacked and solved if there is adequate long range planning now.” (Text) White’s extravehicular activity, planned for the second orbit, but delayed until the third to allow astronauts more preparation time, began at 3:45 p.m. edt. The cabin was depressurized; White, equipped with tether carrying oxygen and communication and with chest pack for emergency oxygen supply, emerged from the spacecraft just past Hawaii. Carrying a modified 35 mm. single-lens reflex camera loaded with color film and propelled by a hand-held, oxygen-jet gun, he went three times to the full length of his 25-ft. tether and then returned, using the gun to halt his motion and prevent his hitting the spaceship. When the gas supply in the gun was depleted, he returned to the spacecraft by gently tugging on the tether line. At one point, McDivitt exclaimed:	“You smeared my windshield, you dirty dog.” Flight plans had called for a ten-minute walk in space but White remained outside the spacecraft for 22 min. He experienced no disorientation during his “walk.” When he finally heeded commands to return to the capsule, he had difficulty closing the hatch and decided not to reopen it to jettison excess equipment. “It’s the saddest moment of my life,” White said as he reentered the spacecraft. On June 5 during the 17th orbit, the astronauts spoke to their wives at msc. During the 20th orbit, McDivitt spotted a satellite with “big arms sticking out.” He was unable to identify it positively. On June 6 during the 48th orbit, trouble developed with the spacecraft’s computer and attempts to repair it with the aid of ground instructions failed. The malfunctioning computer made it necessary for GEMINI IV to reenter on a ballistic trajectory. Throughout the flight the daily routine of the astronauts included eating, exercise, and performance of medical and scientific experiments. They alternated rest periods. During 12 of the 62 orbits, when gemini iv passed through a heavy radiation area called the South Atlantic anomaly, Astronauts McDivitt and White switched on radiation and magnetic field measuring devices to take readings inside and outside the spacecraft and near their bodies. They also attempted to improve the knowledge of the earth’s terrain through high-quality color photographs; to measure with instruments the electrostatic June 3; Space walk o{ gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White. charge that accumulates in space and on objects in space; to better define the magnitude and direction of the earth’s geomagnetic field; to test the accuracy of part of a prototype navigational system for future space capsules; to measure heartbeats to try to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on functioning of the heart; to determine the effects of limited exercise in space through use of a tension cord; to take high-resolution photographs of cloud formations over the earth to aid weathermen in improved forecasting from weather satellites; to determine more exactly the elevation of the earth’s atmosphere and its layers through use of filtered film; and to determine if long periods of weightlessness might make the bones brittle. On June 7, to begin reentry, McDivitt fired a 100-lb. thrusting rocket for two minutes, 41 sec.—one second too long—to guide the capsule into an orbit with 156.2-mi (252-km.J apogee and 100-mi. (161-km. perigee. Twelve minutes later, McDivitt fired the retro-rockets; 2% min. later he placed the spacecraft into slow rotation to reduce reentry dispersion. Communications with the spacecraft then ceased for about 4 min. as ion-sheath blackout phase of reentry began. GEMINI iv entered the final stage of reentry at 1:07 p.m. edt when the stabilizing chute emerged and damped the oscillations of the descending craft. The main parachute opened shortly afterward and slowed the spacecraft for its final landing at 1:13 p.m. EDT, about 450 mi. east of Cape Kennedy. The landing was 40 mi. off target because of the one-second error in the firing of the thrusting rockets and one-second delay in the firing of the retrorockets. Fifteen minutes after splashdown, Navy frogmen, lowered into the water by helicopter, placed a flotation collar around the capsule. Before egressing from the spacecraft to be hoisted to helicopter, astronauts took biomedical data on themselves. About 40 min. later, Majors McDivitt and White were landed by helicopter on the flight deck of the'carrier Wasp. They were taken immediately to the ship’s sick bay for postflight examinations. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief Flight Surgeon for the astronauts, said after the examinations:	“We have knocked down an awful lot of straw men. We had been told that we would have an unconscious astronaut after four days of weightlessness. Well, they’re not. We were told that the astronaut would experience vertigo, disorientation when he stepped out of that spaceship. We hit that one over the head.” The most serious problem was fatigue. “Both men were bushed,” said Dr. Berry. Maj. McDivitt had a few flecks of caked blood in his nostrils, caused by the dryness of the mucous membranes from inhaling pure oxygen for so long. X-rays taken of the astronauts’ little fingers and heel bones both before and after the flight to determine if long exposure to weightlessness would cause a substantial loss of calcium were being studied. Commenting on the historical significance of the Gemini flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said the flight had included “at least two world firsts”: a record length for two-man flights and the first time a pilot had maneuvered outside a ship with a propulsion gun, which gave him control over his movements. American astronauts had flown a total of 259 hrs. 34 min. in space; Soviet astronauts had accumulated 507 hrs. and 16 min. (NASA Release 65-158; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 6/4/65, 1,15; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65, A1,A6,A10; Wash. Post, 6/4/65, A1,A7,A8; WSJ, 6/4/65, 4; Clark, NYT, 6/5/65, 1,12; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/65, A3; Wash. Post, 6/5/65, A1.A7; NYT, 6/6/65, 1,70; NYT, 6/7/65, 22C; Wash. Post, 6/7/65, A1,A4,A6; Balt. Sun, 6/7/65; Justice, Wash. Post, 6/ 8/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/8/65; Time, 6/8/65, 20,25,25A; NYT, 6/8/65, 22C; NYT, 6/9/65, 1,22; Lee, Houston Post, 6/9/65; Wash. Post, 6/11/65, Al; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, Al; Wash. Post, 6/15/ 65, Al.)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite on a Thor-Altair booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Altair was normally the solid-fuel fourth stage of the Scout booster, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/19/65)
First static test firing of European Launcher Development Organization’s (eldo) Europa I booster was conducted at Spadeadam Rocket Establishment in Cumberland, England. The launch vehicle was composed of Blue Streak first stage, French Coralie second stage, West German third stage, and Italian satellite and nose casing. For this test, all but Blue Streak were dummy stages. (Av. Wk., 8/2/65, 35)
AH five geodesy experiment systems on the new NASA EXPLORER XXIX satellite had been tested successfully and operational programing of the spacecraft was expected within a few days, NASA announced. explorer xxix, popularly referred to as geos i, was launched from Eastern Test Range Nov. 6. (nasa Release 65-359)
early bird I communications satellite experimentally transmitted to a Paris physician an electrocardiogram of a passenger on the S.S. France, 2,000	mi. at sea, the French Line reported. {NYT, 6/15/65, 70; ap, Wash. Post, 6/15/65, A14)
Philco Corp. had been awarded a $3 million increment to a contract with usaf for work on a satellite tracking network, (dod Release 651-65)
At a news conference at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini GT—4 spaceflight, Astronaut McDivitt said: “I saw three things that looked to me like they were satellites on the earth. I saw two over the Pacific, I guess. One . . . near Hawaii. ... I saw a white object and it looked like it was cylindrical and it looked to me like there was a white arm sticking out of it. . . . We saw another one at night. It looked like just a pin point of light in the sky. . . . And I saw another one over the western Pacific again just shortly before I got into the sunlight on the windshield. . . . The only one I could even define the shape of at all was the first one and it looked a lot like an upper stage of a booster.” Astronaut White commented: “. . . we were looking to find out: Could man control himself in space? And the answer is yes, man can control himself in space.” McDivitt continued: “The first thing we learned was that the Gemini 4 is a liveable spacecraft for at least four days.” (Transcript; NYT, 6/12/65, 3)
NASA canceled for budgetary reasons further development of the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso). From its 1963 start through the fiscal year ending June 30, 1966, a total of $39 million had been budgeted for Aoso development; NASA said some of the $24.9 million appropriated for fy 1966 would be recoverable. Aoso was to have been a 1,250-lb. satellite that would accurately point 250 lbs. of scientific instruments at the sun to measure solar radiation. A prototype spacecraft was being developed and the first Aoso flight had been scheduled for sometime in 1969. (nasa Release 65-380)
COSMOS LViu satellite, containing “scientific equipment,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 659 km. (409 mi.); perigee, 581 km. (360 mi.); period, 96.8 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/27/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
18 additional countries were applying for ownership in the $200-million international consortium to operate a global communications satellite system, it was reported. Eighteen nations and Vatican City had originally participated in forming the consortium in July 1964. U.S.’s ComSatCorp acquired 61% ownership and would serve as manager for the consortium. The new nations applying for ownership participation were Monaco, South Africa, New Zealand, Syria, Kuwait, Libya, Yemen, Brazil, Morocco, United Arab Republic, Sudan, Iraq, Lebanon, Tunisia, Argentina, Jordan, Indonesia, and Ceylon. (Av. Wk., 2/8/65, 25) February 8: The world’s first nuclear-powered weather station, designated Navy Oceanographic and Meteorological Automatic Device (Nomad), began its second year of successful operation 300 mi. out of New Orleans in the Gulf of Mexico. Developed by the Navy, the unattended station was powered by the aec generator, Snap-7D. (NYT, 2/14/65, 90)
Dr. Homi J. Bhabha, chairman of India’s Atomic Energy Commission, denied reports that India was secretly preparing to explode a nuclear device. In an interview, he said: “We are still eighteen months away from exploding either a bomb or a device for peaceful purposes and we are doing nothing to reduce that period.” (NYT, 11/29/65, 8) November 27: Soviet Union launched COSMOS xcvm unmanned satellite with “scientific apparatus to continue space investigations,” Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 570 km. (354 mi.) ; perigee, 216 km. (134 mi.); period, 92 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 11/28/65, 4)
Dr. Hideo Itokawa, professor at Tokyo Univ. and deputy director of Japan’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science, was quoted on Japan’s role in space activity by Peter Temm in an article in the Washington Sunday Star: “Space research is not a competition. It should be a cooperative undertaking among all countries, to explore and study the universe. “Both America and Russia appear to be chiefly interested in artificial satellites and manned space vehicles. I see Japan’s role as filling some of the gaps skipped over by these two nations. “I believe it is possible that Russia may be preparing to abandon its project of putting a man on the moon in favor of assembling a satellite space station; at least, this how I interpret the recent Voskhod flight and its emphasis on carrying out tasks outside of the capsule. “I sincerely hope if this is so, that American space scientists will not swerve from their intentions of getting to the moon. There are many sides to space research, and the ideal approach is for all nations engaged in the new science to tackle different areas. “That way, we will all progress at a faster rate.” (Temm, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/25/65)
Project Stormy Spring,” a meteorological study by the Air Force Cambridge Research,Laboratories to develop more precise forecasting techniques for specific local areas, began. AFCRL scientists would investigate mesoscale structures and weather system dynamics in New England, particularly within a mesoscale. A varying distance measure, a mesoscale in New England in March was an area about 100 mi. sq. Major storm systems would be observed and analyzed for continuous periods of 24 to 36 hrs. each. A weather satellite, U-2, and c—130 aircraft w ould provide cloud photographs. The u-2 w ould also measure ozone distributions, temperature, wind, and radiometric data; the C-130 would contribute cloud physics, temperature, and wind data. Permanent and mobile radiosonde sites 60 mi. apart would comprise one aspect of the data-gathering network; special surface linkage of 25 sites spaced 20 mi. apart would gather wind, temperature, pressure, humidity, and precipitation data. The study would continue through April 30. (usaf oar Release 3—65—51
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden reported on the status of NASA cooperation with the Soviet Union in testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Let me review where we stand. Of three projects agreed to in 1962, the only one completed is that which involved communications tests with Echo II. . . . “The second project—joint mapping of the geomagnetic field—is at the stage of exchanging ground-based magnetic observations ... we are now acquiring data that was not previously available in the United States. . . . “In the third project—for the coordination of meteorological satellite launchings and the establishment of a link for exchange of data— our prime purpose was and remains a sharing of the cost of providing weather satellite service and the exchange of satellite data. ... we are . . . exchanging conventional data over the link, which ... is financed on a 50-50 basis. I look forward for a meeting soon with Academician Blagonravov which will afford opportunity to review this exchange and the prospects of satellite data exchange. ... a recent check shows the U.S. sending surface data for more stations than it receives but receiving upper air data for more stations than it sends. In sum, the present exchange is considered by the Weather Bureau to improve the quality of forecasts by our national weather services since it makes more data available in time for such forecasts than was the case prior to establishment of the link.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 50-76)
In a triple launch, USAF launched two 524-lb. Vela Hotel (Sentry) satellites and ORS ill—1 (Octahedron research satellite) with an Atlas-Agena D booster from Eastern Test Range. Orbital data: vela 6577-11: apogee, 72,014 mi. (115,942.5 km.); perigee, 66,583 mi. (107,198.6 km.); period, 6,713 min.; inclination, 34.6°; vela 6564-10: apogee, 75,761 mi. (121,975.2 km.); perigee, 63,224 mi. (101,790.6 km.); period, 6,716 min.; inclination, 34.8°; ors m-1: apogee, 69,640 mi. (112,120.4 km.); perigee, 123 mi. (198 km.); period, 6,715 min.; inclination, 34.3°. Expected to operate six months, the Vela Hotel satellites were part of DOD’s Vela program to monitor space for violations of the nuclear test-ban treaty, ors hi—1 was monitoring natural radiation above the earth and relaying information to ground stations. (USAF Proj. Off.; upi, NYT, 7/21/65, 43)
In a report of shareholders for fall 1965, ComSatCorp said it had realized revenues of $966,000 from the operation of EARLY BIRD I covering a period from June 28, when the satellite began commercial service between North America and Europe, through Sept. 30. As of Sept. 30, the Corporation’s total cash and temporary cash investments amounted to $187,767,000. (ComSatCorp Release) During December: NASA Flight Research Center had completed analysis of flight handling characteristics of six representative light private aircraft currently manufactured in the U.S. Aircraft flown in the study were considered a good cross-section of this type of aircraft and included high- and low-wing and single- and twin-engine configurations. Report would be published as a technical note in spring 1966. (Av. Wk„ 12/27/65, 13)
usaf announced that data from aec’s Snap-10A satellite indicated “an extremely high noise factor” when the ion engine was turned on, making it impossible to determine whether it was operating properly. Scientists said the engine, which on Apr. 2 had operated normally for an hour, would not be tested further until additional analyses were made. The difficulty had not interfered with the major experiment— operation of the Snap-10A nuclear reactor, (upi, NYT, 4/8/65)
The Soviet Union was considering sending weather observers into outer space in manned meteorological satellites, Prof. K. I. Kondratief, Univ. of Leningrad, said at a meeting in Geneva of the World Meteorological Organization’s Scientific Advisory Committee. (NYT, 2/21/65, 24) February 21: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks taped for the nbc-tv program, “The Sunday Show,” that the U.S. would extend its national strength into the space dimension. “We expect to explore the moon, not just to photograph it or visit it,” he said. “We plan to explore and chart the planets as well. We shall expand our earth laboratories into space laboratories.” Mr. Humphrey praised the Nation’s space effort, saying that such activities had encouraged economic development, stimulated new products and processes, and furthered the cause of peace. This was Mr. Humphrey’s first public statement on the space program as Vice President, (nbc-tv)
explorer xxiii and pegasus i meteoroid technology satellites continued to transmit useful information after months of operation in the space environment, reported Milton B. Ames, Jr., NASA Director of Space Vehicles Research and Technology. explorer xxiii, launched by Scout rocket from Wallops Station, Va., Nov. 16, 1964, was last of three S—55 series satellites which were the first spacecraft orbited specifically to measure meteoroid penetrations through spacecraft structures. Performance of explorer xxiii had been entirely satisfactory, and indications were that it would have a useful life of more than a year, Ames said. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 615 mi. (990 km.); perigee, 290 mi. (467 km.); inclination to the equator, 51.95°. pegasus i, launched Feb. 16, 1965, was first of a series of three satellites intended to measure meteoroid penetrations of greater structural thicknesses and contained a meteoroid penetration area of almost 2,300	sq. ft. Ames said that although useful results had been obtained with ,0015-in.-thick panels, the data obtained with .008-in.-thick and .016-in.-thick panels had not been fully satisfactory because of difficulties in the operation of the detection system. Still, PEGASUS I had provided significant information leading to improvement of detection systems on the remaining two Pegasus spacecraft. Orbital parameters for PEGASUS I were: apogee, 451 mi. (726 km.); perigee, 311 mi. (500.7 km.) ; inclination, 31.75°. (NASA Release 65-157)
NASA had already received 170 suggested experiments for Voyager—the largest response to any scientific satellite program NASA had conducted, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology. NASA would refine the experiments in consultation with the originators by November 19; preliminary selection would be made by March, and final one by July. (Av. Wk., 8/30/65, 21)
An article in The Economist questioned the political wisdom of the State Dept.’s ban on exchange of communications satellite information between Hughes Aircraft Co. and the British Aircraft Co.; it suggested that unfavorable repercussions to Anglo-American relations could resuit: “The reason had little to do with military security. The State Dept, appeared to think that American industry has a valuable monopoly in commercial satellites which should be exploited for maximum profit, which means keeping the know-how in America. . . . The first commercial satellite of Comsat happens to be the Hughes-built Early Bird due to be launched in the first half of April. Comsat is obliged ... to distribute its orders among member countries on a basis proportional to the shares they hold. . . . Britain is the largest shareholder after the United States. So the less satellite know-how there is, particularly in Britain, the more work goes to the United States . . . this ... is precisely what some people have been declaring the Americans would do whenever they found themselves in a position of technical superiority. . . .” {Economist, 3/13/65)
U.S.S.R. orbited cosmos lii earth satellite. Orbital data: apogee, 304 km. (188.9 mi.) ; perigee, 205 km. (127.4 mi.) ; period 89.5	min.; inclination to the equator, 65°. The satellite carried scientific equipment “for the further investigation of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass on the 16th of March, 1962.” (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/12/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
COSMOS LVii earth satellite was launched by the U.S.S.R. Orbital data: apogee, 512 km. (318 mi. I ; perigee, 175 km. (109 mi.) ; period, 91.1 min.; inclination, 64°46'. Tass said the satellite carried scientific apparatus “intended for the further investigation of outer space.” Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/23/65, atss-t Trans.)
NASA’s seven-year Saturn I program was concluded with the successful launch of pegasus iii. It marked the tenth success in as many attempts for the Saturn I booster. A significant development of the program was the clustering of several large rocket engines: the power plant in the first stage of the Saturn I was a cluster of eight H-l engines each with 188,000 lbs. of thrust to give this stage 1,504,000 lbs. of thrust. The first four flight tests (sa-1 through SA-4) were with dummy upper stages; beginning with SA-5, both stages (s-l and S—IV) were “live”; and the last three Saturn I’s each orbited a Pegasus. Other significant developments growing out of the Saturn I program included: “1. First extensive use of multi-engines (six RL-10-a3’s) and liquid hydrogen in the upper stages. “2. Advancement of guidance and instrumentation technology. “3. Facility expansion, and development of new transportation modes for large rockets. “4. Orbiting meteoroid technology satellites, the largest instrumented satellites launched to date. “5. Developing the capability of placing into earth orbit payloads of more than 37,000 pounds. “6. Developing guidance and instrumentation technology which could be used in other programs.” (nasa Release 65-253)
U.S.S.R. had offered to launch a French satellite with a Soviet rocket during space cooperation talks in October, a Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (ones) official told Space Business Daily, cnes had proposed launching an Imp-type payload into a 125,000-mi.-apogee orbit, but the Soviets preferred a 25,000-mi.-apogee orbit. (SBD, 11/16/65, 1)
A $3,200,000 contract had been let to the E. A. Hathaway Co. for construction of the new 93,000-sq.-ft. Advanced Flight Simulation Laboratory at NASA Ames Research Center, ARC announced. It would contain the most advanced aircraft simulator known (for supersonic transport studies) ; the most powerful centrifuge yet built (up to 50 times the force of gravity); a mid-course navigation facility where stars and planets could be projected just as they would be seen by astronauts in spaceflight; and a “virtually frictionless” satellite attitude control facility. Total values of these facilities would be $10,068,000. (ARC Release 65-16)
Five surcal satellites and one unidentified satellite were orbited by single USAF Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from Western Test Range. The satellites all were in similar orbits of about 735-mi. (1,183-km.) apogee, 677-mi. (1,090-km.) perigee, 108-min. period, 90° inclination. (U.S. Aeron & Space Act., 1965, 150)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
EARLY BIRD communications satellite would relay a sampling of scientific, cultural, and entertainment events televised live at 35 sites in North America and Europe during an hour-long inaugural program, “This is Early Bird,” scheduled for 1 p.m. est, May 2, ComSatCorp announced. (ComSatCorp Release; Adams, NYT, 4/21/65, 91)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite from Western Test Range. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
nasa had asked ComSatCorp to provide communications satellite services in support of tracking and data acquisition needs for Project Apollo, The facilities—six highly-reliable telecommunications channels to be made available to three Apollo tracking ships and three remote land stations—were to be in operation by the fall of 1966. Negotiation of a definitive contract would begin shortly. (nasa Release 65-320)
explorer xxix launch with first NASA Improved Thrust-Augmented Delta from Cape Kennedy. 1.1,118.1 km.); period, 120 min.; inclination, 59°. Planned orbit had called for apogee of 920 mi. The 385-lb, satellite, designed ar.d built by Johns Hopkins Univ, Applied Physics Laboratory, contained five geodetic instrumentation systems to provide simultaneous measurements necessary for a more precise model of the earth’s gravitational field and to map a world coordinate system relating points on or near the surface to the common center of the mass: 111 four Hashing light beacons to be photographed against the background of stars to define the arc of orbit and angular data; (2) corner cube quartz reflectors to pinpoint the satellite's position by reflecting laser beams; (3) three radio transmitters for Doppler-shift determination of the precise orbit; (4) radio range transponder to hx the positions of the satellite and interrogating ground stations; and (5) range and range-rate transponder to determine the changing range and radial velocity of the satellite. Simultaneous operation of the five independent and diverse geodetic-tracking systems would permit cross-checking and evaluation of the different techniques and was expected to enhance the accuracy of each system. Other objectives of the Geos program were: (1) to map with a high degree of mathematical exactness the structure of the earth’s irregular gravitational field; and (2) to compare and 'correlate results from different instrumented techniques employed simultaneously so as to assure greater accuracy and reliability. Critical to optimum use of the radio and optical beacons on EXPLORER XXIX was the gravity-gradient attitude stabilization system to keep the satellite antennas, laser reflectors, and optical beacons pointing earthward at all times. In two to three days the attitude control would be initiated, (nasa Release 65-333; nasa Proj. Off.; ap, NYT, 11/7/65, 10; upi, Wash. Post, 11/7/65, A16)
The Soviet Union’s apparent effort to penetrate the world commercial aircraft market was reported by Evert Clark in the New York Times. He said the U.S.S.R. had formed a new organization called Aviaexport to direct commercial sales. It was expected to pick satellite countries as its first target, then so-called “dependent” nations, and eventually the Western countries. Showing of the Antonov 22 700-passenger aircraft and a model of a supersonic airliner scheduled to begin test flights in 1968 had enabled the Soviet Union to dominate the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) until the arrival of Vice President Humphrey and Astronauts White and McDivitt. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/65, 30)' During week of July 4: Ambassador Tran Thien Khiem, South Viet Nam, visited NASA Langley Research Center. (Langley Researcher, 7/16/65, 8)
Wall Street Journal space reporter wrote a “Memo on Space Semantics” to his editor: “I think you should be aware of some problems in semantics and etymology that are becoming acute as a result of the activities at Cape Kennedy. Unless we resolve some of these problems in the near future, I fear that a new space age neurosis may appear among our reporters and copy editors. “If you recall, since late 1957 there have been a number of hints that the advent of space exploration would create some new difficulties with our editorial style. First, there was the problem of deciding whether to italicize the Russian word ‘sputnik.’ Then we had to decide on the spelling and capitalization of ‘a-okay’ (or is it ‘A-OK’?). “Unfortunately, we are now encountering some difficulties which would tax the abilities of Clifton Fadiman, himself. . . . “Perhaps the most serious problem . . . stems apparently from an oversight on the part of our ancestors. In writing out the names of the nine planets of our solar system it became evident that we have neglected to formally name our own planet. At least this is the only conclusion one can come to when it’s noted that we capitalize the names of all the planets except our own. Webster, himself, insists on using a lower case ‘e’ for earth while dignifying tiny Mercury with a capital. Even the minor planets such as Eros carry formal names. “The neglect is even more conspicuous in the instance of our own natural satellite. While the moons of other planets have exotic names such as Phobos we refer to ours in the generic and, consequently, with a lower case ‘m\ “I suggest we either start capitalizing Earth and Moon or else ask the American Society of Newspaper Editors to convene an international conference to pick a name for our planet. While they’re at it, they might decide whether ‘marsography’ is a word and straighten out the planetary adjectives.” (Bishop, WSJ, 9/9/65, 12) September IQ: NASA began recruiting to select additional pilot/astronauts for manned space flight missions. There were presently 28 pilot/astronauts and five scientist/astronauts participating in the NASA manned space flight program. To be eligible for selection, applicants had to: (1) be a U.S. citizen, no taller than six feet, bom on or after Dec. 1, 1929; (2) have a bachelor’s degree in engineering, physical or biological science; and (3) have acquired 1,000 hrs. jet pilot time or have been graduated from an armed forces test pilot school. (NASA Release 65-288)
In a speech before the National Association of Broadcasters in Washington, D.C., Gen. Bernard A. Schriever ( usaf) remarked that the Soviet’s space science timetable “always seems to put them one step ahead of us.” He said: “It is still true that we lead in some aspects of space exploration, such as the total number of space shots, number of scientific probes, and practical applications of space satellites for such purposes as communications and weather observation. On the other hand, the Soviets lead in a number of areas with both propaganda and practical implications. “. . . Thus, they have put into space the first satellite, the first living creature, the first man, the first woman, the first multi-man space ship and now the first man to step out of the capsule and into space itself. They also hold the world record for time in orbit, orbital distance, orbital weight lifted, and highest orbital altitude. . . . “How will the Soviets use their space capabilities? ... we are interested. . . .” Gen. Schriever said ground tests would begin shortly for a collapsible and expandable space laboratory for possible use as a space station: “The structure can be compressed into a small package and expanded to a cylinder 10 ft. in dia. and 25 ft. long.” (Text)
usaf launched Titan m-c from etr with triple-satellite payload: LCS II radar calibration sphere, Ov2-l radiation sensor satellite, and a metal-ballasted dummy. About the time of the second burn of the transtage engines, the total assemblage exploded into hundreds of fragments and therefore the satellites were not useful beyond the earlier steps of launch vehicle testing. The Titan iii-c transtage was to have ignited its engines 10 times, changed course 4 times, and ejected the satellites. Primary mission of the flight was launch vehicle testing, and USAF officials noted most major objectives were met. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 153; ap, Newport News Daily Press, 10/17/65)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xcv artificial earth satellite carrying scientific instrumentation to continue the space exploration program. Orbital parameters: apogee, 521 km. (323 mi.) ; perigee, 207 km. (128.3 mi.); period, 91.7 min.; inclination, 48°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 11/5/65, 2)
ComSatCorp announced delay of Early Bird synchronous satellite launch, previously targeted for end of March, because of decision to replace defective transistors and retest replacements. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite payload from Western Test Range. (Z7.S. Aeron & Space Act., 1965, 146)
A 22-nation European Post and Telecommunications Congress ended its 12-day meeting in Lisbon after appointing a coordinating committee to deal rapidly with problems of international radio and television communications by satellite. Discussions in the congress, which was closed to the press and public, centered on improving postal services and satellite-relayed radio and television transmissions, (ap, WSJ, 6/14/65, 24; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, A-ll)
Defense Communications Agency and the U.S. Army had announced that site preparation had begun at Helemano, 20 mi. north of Honolulu on Oahu Island, for installation of the first earth terminal of a planned worldwide military experimental satellite communication system. Southwest Constructors had been awarded the contract for construction expected to begin in mid-October. (J/Armed Forces, 9/18/65, 16)
ComSatCorp requested 26 design-engineering companies to submit proposals by July 20 for architectural and engineering services for construction of a ground station site at Brewster Flat, Wash. The proposed station would provide communications services to Hawaii and nations of the Pacific as part of a global commercial satellite system. The RFP’s asked for plans sufficiently detailed to enable interested contractors to bid on construction and to enable the station to be operational by September 1, 1966. (ComSatCorp Release)
Soviet Union launched cosmos xci unmanned earth satellite, carrying instrumentation designed to continue the space exploration program begun March 16, 1962. Orbital parameters: apogee, 341 km. (212 mi.) ; perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.) ; period, 89.8 min.; inclination, 65°. Apparatus was functioning normally. (Komsomolskaya Prav-da, 9/24/65, 1)
ComSatCorp announced decision of DOD that continuation of its present program to secure satellite services, presumably' with Ford Motor Co.’s Philco Corp. Div., was superior to that proposed by ComSatCorp. Hie satellites involved would make up “initial” DOD system; ComSatCorp might bid to supply advanced satellites. ComSatCorp hoped its separate commercial system would he afforded some dod nonsecret traffic. Some military men had argued that, since the Government would build its own system for secret communications, it should also use these facilities for nonsecret transmissions. This had caused ComSatCorp to raise the question of the degree to which the Government should enter the communications business in competition with private enterprise. President Johnson had established policy in a report to Congress, “. . . a system tailored for the military’s exclusive use, does not alter the policy under which . . . the Government will use the commercial satellite system for the transmission of the bulk of its traffic between the United States and various overseas areas.” I WSI, 2/25/65)	_	_ *	NASA had granted an exclusive patent license, the second it ever issued, to Exactel Instrument Co. for a “line-following servo-system.” The device, which “remembers” a given graph curve, could measure one characteristic of a physical situation and read out resulting characteristics in specific quantities. President of Exactel, Eugene A. Glassey had invented the servo-system while an employee at NASA Ames Research Center. Issuance of the exclusive license on a Government-owned patent to a private individual was part of NASA’s continuing effort to make aeronautical and space inventions available for commercial development as rapidly as possible. The only previous exclusive licensing was to Union Carbide in 1963 for a nickel-based alloy invented by a NASA scientist, (arc Release 65-6)
AEC report said that nuclear fuel aboard a spacecraft which failed to go into orbit last April 21 had burned up harmlessly at high altitude. This was a reply to Russian and other critics who had accused the U.S. of causing radiation hazards by putting atomic generators aboard spacecraft. The generator involved was a Snap-9A aboard a Navy navigation satellite launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/8/65)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Chic. Trib., 11/9/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act, 1965, 154)
“Within a decade . . . space could be as vital to defense as nuclear weapons are today,” postulated an article in U.S. News and World Report. It continued:	“The deep conviction of top U.S. Air Force leaders is that Russia is directing its main energies and resources not to the moon, but to mastery of space nearer earth. Some are convinced that Russia, far behind in the missile race, is now striving to leapfrog the U.S. and move ahead with manned satellite weapons.” (U.S. News, 4/5/65) In answer to the question of what man could do in space to contribute to the military mission, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, said at the Space Congress:	“I believe that the MOL will enable us to come up with some of the answers.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Space Congress, said:	“. . . extravehicular activity, as accomplished by the Soviets, and orbital changes, as accomplished by Gus Grissom and John Young . . . are essential to future progress in space exploration. Both are objectives of our Gemini Program and both are techniques that we must learn in order to carry out the Apollo Program. We have long assumed that both were objectives of the Soviet Program. “Given these assumptions, the difference between the scheduling of these experiments in the Soviet program and ours is a detail of relatively minor importance. It has been our judgment that maneuvering and changing orbits are more important than extravehicular activity for the progress of our program. For this reason, we scheduled the conduct of such maneuvers for the first manned flight in the Gemini Program. We must assume that the Soviets had their good reason for scheduling extravehicular activity on an earlier flight in their program.” (Text) E. Z. Gray, also of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed future programs. He stressed that one of the cardinal rules guiding the planning was that maximum use must be made of hardware either already developed or currently in development. (M&R, 4/12/65, 16)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb appeared before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices, in support of the $5.26 billion NASA appropriation requested by President Johnson for fy 1966. He said:	“The budget submitted to the Congress by the President provides for activities that are essential to continuing the progress that we have made towards our goal of preeminence in space sciences, application satellites, manned space flight, and advanced research and technological development necessary for aircraft improvements and for future space activities. It does not provide for everything that we could do or would like to do. In fact, it has been necessary within the strict budget requirements imposed by the President that certain desirable project activities started in previous years be omitted from the 1966 budget. . . . “Within the confines of this limited budget, the President has provided the funds necessary to preserve the opportunity that we still believe we have to accomplish a manned lunar landing and exploration within this decade. The margin for insurance that had been built into our original program plan has largely disappeared. However, we now estimate this may be possible if we can maintain our current successful development efforts and make the all-up systems testing procedure work on the very large Saturn V-Apollo combination to launch men toward the Moon on earlier flights than we had originally planned. There is, therefore, still an opportunity to accomplish this national space objective within the time specified. Our work to date gives us somewhat more confidence than we had a year ago that we can still achieve the objectives that were planned in 1961 in spite of a limit on resources that will not fund all the flights planned at that time. It is important, however, to keep in mind that in Gemini we are just now in a position to find out by flight experiments how men can live, work, remain efficient, and make important contributions in space for extended periods. . . .” (Testimony; Incl. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 846-96)
New York World’s Fair opened for its second season. It featured NASADOD U.S. Space Park, containing two and one half acres of full-scale rockets and spacecraft. Among the exhibits were a full-scale Gemini model, an X-15 model, full-scale reproductions of Tiros, Nimbus, Relay, Telstar, and Syncom satellites, and aurora 7 Mercury spacecraft. An honorary astronaut card signed by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn), the first American in space, and Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf), the first astronaut to make two trips into space, was available at the U.S. Space Park to young visitors taking a ride in the full-scale animated Mercury spacecraft on display there. (Press Release)
France hoped to orbit its first earth satellite in November—nearly two months ahead of schedule, reported the Houston Post. An Armed Forces Ministry satellite would be fitted to the first Diamant booster and test-fired from Hammaguir, Algerian Sahara. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/15/65)
ComSatCorp may well face competition from foreign satellite communications systems in the next few years, David Sarnoff, chairman of the Board of Radio Corporation of America predicted at the convention banquet of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “We can expect that ultimately Russia will set up a satellite communications system competitive to our own and offer it to other nations on favorable terms determined more by political than economic considerations.” Mr. Sarnoff advocated creation of “a single, privately owned American company” to handle all international communications currently handled by six private carriers. He argued that, among other benefits, a single “unified carrier” was the only way the U.S. could “deal on equal terms with foreign government [communications] monopolies. The RCA chairman warned that in only five years the interim agreement between ComSatCorp and the 45 participating nations would be up for re-evaluation. The U.S., he said, “will have to negotiate a new contract under different circumstances and possibly vastly altered bargaining conditions.” It was technically feasible, Mr. Sarnoff said, that direct radio/TV broadcasting by satellite could be undertaken by 1975. Three equatorial, synchronous orbit satellites powered by nuclear energy, each equipped with a three-TV-channel capability, would be able, he said, to broadcast programs to the entire United States and parts of Canada. He estimated that the three satellites, exclusive of ground stations, would cost $30 million and compared this with the $50 million annual cost to the three major networks for leasing circuits to transmit programs to their affiliated stations or to the $30 million cost of a single large city television station. {WSJ, 5/27/65, 6; Wash. Eve. Star, 5/27/65)
fr-I (fr-1a), second French satellite to be launched within two weeks, was successfully injected into near-polar orbit from the Western Test Range by a NASA Scout booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 480 mi. (773 km.); perigee, 462 mi. (743.8 km.) ; period, 100 min.; inclination, 75.9°. NASA provided the four-stage launch vehicle and launch service as part of its cooperative agreement with the French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes), which designed, built, and tested the 135-lb. satellite, fr-i would study propagation of very low frequency (Vlf) radio waves and measure electron densities. Telemetry reports indicated all systems were operating nominally and were returning useful data. (NASA Release 65-366; Wash. Post, 12/7/65, A6; upi, NYT, 12/8/65, 13)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in Subcommittee of the Senate ate Committee on Appropriations’ hearings on the requested $5.26 billion appropriation request for NASA in fy 1966, said: “Recent events have clearly demonstrated two important facts about space activities. First, the United States has shown that it can successfully build and launch complex spacecraft to measure the space environment over large regions of our solar system and to extend our knowledge of our neighboring space bodies. We have developed a capability to produce large launch vehicles, to test them, and to launch them successfully. We are producing the space hardware for environmental testing that will prove out our concepts and engineering for the large launch vehicles and spacecraft that will be required to operate out to and on the moon and meet all the demands of our other difficult undertakings. We have successfully developed space technology for improved communications and weather reporting and forecasting systems. The Ranger program, completed with Ranger IX, provided 17,000	closeup pictures of the moon that have not only given us a better understanding of its topography but may reveal totally unexpected processes taking place below the surface.- The first two manned flights of the Gemini program verified the system for using man in space, the capability of the Gemini spacecraft, the capability of an astronaut to operate outside of his spacecraft, and the utility of the ground net and mission control, and provided the first tests of some of the equipment designed to accomplish rendezvous and docking. They also served as an orbiting space laboratory with several experiments included on both flights. “The second major fact demonstrated by recent space events is that the Soviet Union continues to make a major commitment to its aeronautical and space activity. In late 1964, they launched the first multi-manned mission with the three-man Voskhod I satellite. So far in this calendar year, they have launched 17 Cosmos satellites; in the Voskhod II flight they achieved the first extravehicular activities of man in space; in April they placed in orbit Molniya I, their first active communications satellite; in May they launched a Lunik spacecraft to the moon with a successful midcourse correction but apparent terminal failure; and only a few days ago they launched another Lunik spacecraft to the moon with an apparent unsuccessful midcourse correction. They, too, are expanding upon a sound basis for both manned and unmanned activities in space. The growth of their space activity is quite apparent. The exhibition in Paris yesterday afternoon of a new very large air transport indicates the same kind of emphasis on equipment to use the earth’s envelope of air. “In aeronautics, it is important to note the increasing tempo of our research in not only the aerodynamics, loads and structures, propulsion, and operating problems of supersonic flight, but hypersonic flight as well. There is a resurgence of interest in airbreathing propulsion in the form of advanced turbojet and ramjet engines to meet the requirements of supersonic and hypersonic transports and to make them competitive with transports operating in the subsonic range. And of course, we are also engaged at the other end of the speed spectrum in our work with vertical takeoff and landing aircraft. . . .” In response to questioning, Mr. Webb said: “A substantial amount of time is now being put into aeronautics by our top people. Remember, we have to go through the air to get to space. The use of thin wall structures and the use of power delivered by engines all come out of the same research competence which we have. “. . . I have been asked once or twice to consider whether NASA should take on the management and development of prototypes and all other factors relating to the building of a supersonic transport. “Each time I have pointed out that we spend a large number of our dollars through the military services because they have the procurement capability. They are the only people in the U.S. Government today who know how to let a contract, monitor a contract, and take delivery on large airplanes and large numbers of airplanes. We use them for that purpose in boosters where they have already developed the competence; and in new boosters like SATURN V, we also use their contract administration and their Project 60 for engines. . . .” (Ind. Off. Approp. Hearings, 1095-1195)
David Sarnoff, Chairman of RCA, accepting National Commander’s Award for Distinguished Service, said at the American Legion’s fifth annual Washington conference: “The same sense of mission that ignited our young nation’s Westward expansion a century ago should now be brought to bear in support of the President’s space objectives. . . . “Leadership in space and in the communications art which is the key to mastery in space, translates itself today into political, military, economic and social leadership among the nations of the world. Technological leadership resembles a magnet which attracts other forces. When it is weakened, these forces are drawn into other orbits.” President Johnson sent a message endorsing the award and praising Mr. Sarnoff’s achievements “on behalf of a grateful nation.” (NYT, 3/2/65) Editorializing in Missiles and Rockets, William Coughlin suggested a “useful mission” for which ranger ix might be adapted: “Our unsolicited proposal to NASA is that Ranger be employed to return to Earth photographs of Earth from space. Satellites have told us the Earth is ‘pear-shaped’ rather than round and that it draws a perhaps invisible but comet-like tail after it through space. Photographs of the entire Earth globe as seen from space would have high scientific value. As a propaganda triumph, it would be unequalled. . . .” H/fjp.j? q /l /fit; Lfi U.II, tJ/ J./ Vi), I V; President Johnson, addressing 40 winners of annual science talent search, said science and politics should strive to "serve humanity.” He added that this country was “very anxious to produce all the scientists that we can,” and expressed hope that scientists would learn about government and politics. Larry Dean Howard of Canoga Park, Calif., won first prize for having developed a method of accurately defining the orbits of earth satellites through the use of differential calculus. Prize was a $7,500 Westinghouse scholarship. (ap, NYT, 3/1/65; Loftus, NYT, 3/2/65,14)
U.S.S.R. launched into orbit three earth satellites—cosmos LXI, cosmos lxII, and cosmos lxiii—with a single booster rocket. Tass said three satellites were orbiting in close initial orbits: apogee, 1,837 km. (1,141 mi.); perigee, 273 km. (170 mi.); period, 106 min.; inclination, 56°. It was reported that the scientific apparatus onboard was functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/17/65, 1, Atss-T Trans.)
LES IV communications satellite, released into an unplanned orbit Dec. 21 by Titan m-c, had been activated and was operating well, Lincoln Laboratory reported. Tumbling had prevented restart of Titan III-C for intended orbit, (ap, NYT, 12/30/65, 11)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xcvii artificial earth satellite “containing scientific equipment for continuing outer space research,” Tass reported. Orbital parameters were close to the calculated ones: apogee, 2,100 km. (1,304 mi.); perigee, 220 km. (136.6 mi.); period, 108.3 min.; inclination to equator, 49°. Onboard equipment was operating normally. (Pravda, 11/27/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxi, lxxii, lxxiii, lxxiv, and lxxv into orbit with a single booster. Initial orbital data: cosmos lxxi, apogee, 542 km. (337 mi.), perigee, 521 km. (324 mi.); cosmos lxxii, apogee, 588 km. (365 mi.), perigee, 538 km. (334 mi.); cosmos lxxiii, apogee, 564 km. (350 mi.), perigee, 531 km. (330 mi.); cosmos lxxiv, apogee, 619 km. (384 mi.), perigee, 537 km. (334 mi.); cosmos lxxv, apogee. 644 km. (400 mi.), perigee, 539 km. (335 mi.). Period for all five satellites was 95 min.; inclination, 56°. Satellites contained scientific equipment for outer space research as well as “Mayak” radio transmitters. All instruments were said to be functioning normally. (Izvestia, 7/17/65, atss-t Trans.)
Rep. John R. Schmidhauser (D-Iowa) commented upon and inserted in the Congressional Record an article which appeared in the Davenport Times-Democrat about the Davenport Alcoa plant and the construction of Pegasus satellites. It said:	“A unique arrangement of special equipment that senses infrared energy—thus indicating which part of the satellite is facing earth—enables scientists to determine the direction each meteoroid is traveling when it strikes Pegasus. Such information will tell spacecraft designers the extent of possible damage from hits, enabling them to build manned craft which will be relatively unaffected by meteoroids.” (CR, 2/23/65, A77374)
U.S.S.R. transmitted a color television program by satellite to France for the first time. Tass said the transmission, using the French Secam color system, followed a series of technical tryouts through MOLNIYA I, first of the Soviet Union’s two communications satellites now in orbit. (Reuters, NYT, 11/30/65, 49)
Operational control of U.S. weapons to intercept and destroy armed satellites had been assigned to the Space Defense Center at Colorado Springs, Denver Post reported. The Space Defense Center included the Space Detection and Tracking Systems (Spadats), which recorded the launches of all space vehicles, foreign and domestic, and logged precise orbital data until they decayed in the earth’s atmosphere. (Partner, Denver Post, 4/30/65) During April: More than 100 delegates from Eurospace toured U.S. aerospace installations, including NASA Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, and facilities of U.S. firms corresponding to Eurospace member companies. Purpose of the U.S. European Space Conference was to bring together top industrial leaders from European and American aerospace companies to review problems posed for the industry by evolution of space technology. (M&R, 4/26/65, 9)
Pegasus C, third meteoroid detection satellite, arrived at NASA Kennedy Space Center aboard the aircraft “Pregnant Guppy.” Pegasus C was scheduled for launch during summer of 1965 by SA-10, the last Saturn I vehicle, (msfc Release 65-159; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 2)
An article in Human Events expressed fear that Russian military space capability surpassed that of the U.S.: “. . . Four times in the past 2 months, Red Star (a newspaper published by the Defense Ministry) has trumpeted the claim that Russia now has orbital space rockets with the capacity of wiping any aggressor off the face of the earth. “There is no doubt at all about the intended identity of the aggressor and among American scientists back home there is little doubt about the weapon. “There is little doubt because the United States spent 7 years and $10 million between 1958-65 to plan the nuclear-powered space orbiting system called Project Orion. We have high-ranking scientists who believe the Russians have copied or adapted Orion, which has been declassified since October, 1964. The Russians might easily have cracked the secrecy before that. “It is a first generation vehicular system that is capable of carrying 8 men and 100 tons of payload to Mars and back. It is a jet-propelled engine or engines powered by a nuclear reactor which, in effect, bombs a shield at the rear of the vehicle and drives it forward. The usual limitations of temperature do not affect this vehicle because the hot debris of the explosions makes only a momentary contact with the shield. The limitations of using full nuclear power are also absent because the reactor is outside the vehicle. “Guidance, mobility, range, the exchange of crew-members, and the restocking of the payload are all within this space cruiser’s capability. Its potentials as a raider of earth targets, and as an interceptor of our space satellites, are almost limitless. It may not be the never-never ultimate weapon, but it will do until another comes along.” {CR, 8/25/65, A4807-08)
Commenting on anxiety about the Soviet Union’s capability of delivering strategic weapons from near space, Dr. S. Fred Singer said in an article in Reporter: “If a bomb is released from a satellite without giving it any propulsion, it will stay with the satellite and simply blow it up. For a bomb from a satellite to be directed to a point on earth, it must be propelled not only with a lot of rocket power but also with exceedingly fine guidance. In principle, this can be done from a satellite or from the moon or even from the planet Pluto; but the cost and complexity is enormously greater than that of an equally effective ICBM buried deep in the earth itself.” (Reporter, 6/17/65, 14)
usaf launched Thor-Altair booster from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 136)
Seventh anniversary of the first U.S. satellite, explorer I.	In defiance of the original predicted lifespan that should have ended some two years ago, the satellite continued to pass overhead every 104 min., with perigee of 214 mi. and apogee of 983 mi. Trajectory plotters at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center believed explorer I would plunge into the atmosphere and burn in 1968. It had slowed down since launch but had logged 904 million mi. around the earth. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1, 6)
Jane's All the World’s Aircraft carried a description of how Soviet cosmonauts were ejected from their space capsules at 23,000 ft. after reentry into earth’s atmosphere. The yearbook also published detailed descriptions of the Soviet spaceship VOSTOK I, the world’s first manned earth satellite. It showed a picture of the 120-ft. ballistic missile that was displayed last May in a Moscow parade and reported that the missile was a sister vehicle to the “mighty booster” that launched the Vostok in 1961. Jane’s also obtained information on a large Soviet hovercraft still under construction and published a photograph taken at the shipyard, (ap, NYT, 11/29/65)
COSMOS LIX satellite, containing “scientific apparatus,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 339 km. (210.9 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (129.6 mi.); period, 89.7 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/9/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
ComSatCorp asked Fee for authority to build four new satellites to provide communication services for the Apollo project as well as for other commercial uses. (ComSatCorp Release)
Reaction to the cancellation of the NASA Gemini VI mission October 25 indicated that the space program and its public acceptance had matured during the first eight years of the space age, wrote Robert Hotz in Aviation Week and Space Technology. He recalled the “abuse heaped on the Vanguard program, the demands for Ranger’s cancellation, and the timorous whimpering that tried to suppress the Mercury program and bury the Apollo plans,” and suggested that “the lesson we should learn as a nation from our space program is that no task is too difficult to achieve and no challenge too great ... to surmount if its top-level leadership points out the goals and sounds the charge.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 11/1/65, 11) During week of November 1: Two 16-in. guns welded-together end to end would serve as first stage of a three-stage launch device believed capable by its developers—USA Ballistic Research Laboratories and McGill Univ. Space Research Institute, Montreal—of orbiting a 50-lb. satellite. The gun had launched 185-lb. payloads to approximate 84-mi. altitudes last year. Components of the rocket assembly had been successfully tested separately, but not as a unit; test firing of the first stage would take place in Barbados within four months. Dr. Charles H. Murphy, Ballistic Research Laboratories, and Dr. Gerald V. Bull, McGill Univ., reported on the project at a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/9/65, 3)
Data were summarized from nimbus i meteorological satellite, which had provided first high-resolution, nighttime, cloud-cover pictures and cloud-top temperatures taken from a satellite. Circular 575-mi.-altitude orbit had been planned for the 830-lb. spacecraft; but short burn of the Agena stage—resulting when about 100 lbs. of fuel which should have been loaded on board the Agena had escaped through a faulty valve prior to launch—had injected nimbus i into an elliptical orbit. Launch was made Aug. 28, 1964. Results from Hrir (High Resolution Infrared Radiometer) data had demonstrated: (1) feasibility of complete nighttime surveillance of surface and land features on a global scale; (2) detailed vertical structure of intertropical convergence zone and formation of tropical storms and of frontal zones; (3) capability to detect temperature gradients over earth’s surface under clear skies; (4) applicability of high-resolution radiometry for glaciology, geology, and oceanography. Apt (Automatic Picture Transmission) system experiments provided almost instantaneous data on clouds for thousands of square miles around Apt ground stations, demonstrating that the system could provide cloud-cover data for almost all local forecast requirements; thus, it would be a basic element in the Tiros Operational Satellite program. Avcs (Advanced Vidicon Camera System) experiment provided first near-global, relatively high-resolution cloud pictures ever assembled. Proved capabilities of camera assembly and confirmed decision to use it as basis for first operational meteorological satellite system. On Sept. 3, 1964, during 381st orbit, nimbus i stopped operating. Deterioration of the bearing grease at high temperatures had caused the paddles in the solar array drive system to lock. Final contact with nimbus i occurred Nov. 20, 1964. Data revealed that (1) all batteries were in trickle charge; (2) voltage regulation had failed; (3) both Pcm and command clock subsystems were operable; (4) spacecraft tape recorders were not operating; and (5) controls power supply had failed. (NASA Proj. Off.)
Statement of Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, was presented by Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Deputy Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Since 1958, NASA has provided tracking and data acquisition support by means of the NASA Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network for approximately 50 dod earth satellites. During 1965 we expect to provide continuing telemetry support for as many as 10 DOD earth satellites, and limited tracking support for several more. Also, our station at Carnarvon, Australia, being in an excellent geographical relation to the launch facilities at Cape Kennedy, will be used to support a number of dod spacecraft, as well as NASA spacecraft, where data and flight control after one-half orbit is required. For example, the dod titan in launch vehicle development program is vitally dependent on support by this station. We anticipate support of approximately 15 titan ill operations per year for the next two years. “In a similar fashion, the tracking and data acquisition support which the dod provides for NASA is extensive. At Cape Kennedy, for example, DOD has supported the launch phase of each NASA space flight mission. The extensive support provided by DOD for the Mercury program is well known. The Gemini program requires continuation of this dod support.” Referring in his testimony to current trends affecting planning for support networks, Mr. Buckley said: “. . . equally significant requirement, is the increase in the number of spacecraft which will have highly elliptical or synchronous orbits. Spacecraft in highly elliptical orbits must be supported by a particular ground station, much in the same way as done for deep space missions, i.e., a particular station is required to provide as much as 8—10 hours per day of its available time for support of one satellite. Spacecraft in synchronous orbits require support of a particular station for 24 hours per day. As a result, tracking and data acquisition links are being committed to longer support periods which means not only that more equipment is required, but additional personnel, ground communications, and other operations expenditures are needed to meet this upcoming satellite support workload.” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 187212)
nasa Langley Research Center requested G. T. Schjeldahl Co. to submit a bid for construction of six inflatable 100-ft., 130-lb. spherical satellites to be used in the national geodetic satellite program. They would be nearly identical to echo i and would be named Pageos (Passive Geodetic Satellite). Pageos would be launched in 1966 into a near-polar orbit at an altitude of about 2,300 mi. Ground camera stations would simultaneously photograph it against a star background to gather precise data for locating any point on Earth. The other two types of spacecraft to be used in the geodetic satellite program would be the 350-lb. Geos and the 120-lb. Beacon Explorer-B. (nasa Release 65-22; Beacon Explorer-B Press Kit)
U.S.S.R. formally protested to Norway plans of the European Space Research Organization to establish a satellite tracking station in Spitsbergen. The U.S.S.R. said such a ground station for tracking space satellites could be used for “military purposes” in violation of the 1920 Spitsbergen treaty. Norway later rejected the Soviet charge. (.NYT, 2/20/65, 2)
Two-stage Saphir rocket successfully fired by France from Hammaguir Range, Algeria, reached 720-mi. altitude, French Armed Forces Minister announced. Saphir, combined with a third stage already tested successfully, would he used to orbit the first French satellite toward the end of November 1965. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 10/12/65, A3)
AT&T and ITT asked the FCC to reverse its May 12 decision awarding ComSatCorp temporary control over the initial three U.S. ground stations which would comprise important segments of a global satellite communications system. ITT, in its petition, contended that the ruling supported an “unwarranted monopoly in international communications.” AT&T argued that the licensing policy was not in the public interest. {WSJ, 6/14/65, 24)
Philco Corp., opposing the bid by the Communications Satellite Corporation to supply dod with communications satellite service, asked the FCC to prevent ComSatCorp from signing a “sole source” contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. Philco, which was already preparing a satellite system for DOD under a contract awarded in July 1963, said ComSatCorp’s proposed contract “is in violation of the letter and spirit of the FCC rules and regulations which require competition in ComSatCorp procurement.” Since ComSatCorp apparently had been negotiating the matter for some time, “its present statement that stringent time requirements impel waiver of the Fee’s rules and regulations is insupportable,” Philco said. Under ComSatCorp’s plan, dod would be supplied 24 satellites built by Hughes Aircraft Co. and would pay for service only if the satellites worked. ComSatCorp would absorb the costs if they did not. DOD had made no decision for or against the offer. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/2/65; upi, NYT, 2/3/65, 54)
Principal source of advanced technology in the U.S. had been and would remain the aerospace industry, postulated an article in Aerospace. Only in its programs were technical goals high enough and national requirements urgent enough to move forward in major steps. As these steps were completed and technical goals achieved, the entire economy fell heir to the new technology. Key goals in defense and space programs were listed as: (1) lowering costs; (2) improving the efficiency of motors, generators, and all other energy conversion devices and processes; (3) improving design, that is, reducing the weight and increasing the strength of all machines, by either improved knowledge of the machine or by using lighter, stronger materials; (4) improving the accuracies to which machines could be controlled; (5) improving reliability; (6) improving communications between men, between men and machines, and between machines. (Aerospace, Winter 1965) During 1965: In 1965, NASA attempted 28 missions with 23 successes, a score of 82% mission success. Two spacecraft were launched on a single booster. NASA attempted 30 launches of space boosters and had 26 successes, a score of 87% launch vehicle success. Of the 92 payloads orbited by the U.S., NASA orbited 25—five of which were two-manned spacecraft and four were escape-mission probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 64 payloads, of which one was a manned spacecraft and seven were escape-mission probes. France entered the space age with two satellites, one orbited by France herself (a—i) and one by the U.S. (fr-i ) . Most spectacular of NASA’s space missions were the real-time reception of close-up lunar photographs by ranger ix, first U.S. extravehicular activity by gemini iv Astronaut White, man’s first close look at Mars (including 21 photographs) by mariner iv, and manned rendezvous to within one foot by gemini vi and vn. The Gemini program began 1965 with GT-2 unmanned suborbital flight; this was followed by four two-man orbital flights which logged more than 1,300 manhours in space, gemini v and vn, long-duration missions (8 and 14 days respectively) proved man can withstand extended conditions of spaceflight and validated plans for manned Apollo lunar flights. At the year’s end Gemini spaceflights had set for the U.S. more than 10 records, among them the record for total manhours in space: 1,354 hrs., 38 min., vs. U.S.S.R.’s 507 hrs., 16 min. 1965 was a year of extensive ground tests of the Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn launch vehicles. There were static firings of engines for the various Saturn IB and Saturn V stages, highlighted by full-duration firing of all three Saturn V stages. Saturn I program ended with a record of 10 successes out of 10 attempts, its three 1965 launches orbiting Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites. Fire II provided valuable data for Apollo on reentry from simulated lunar trajectory. In lunar and planetary achievement, rangers viii and IX provided more than 13,000 lunar surface photographs and brought that project to a close. Atlas-Centaur ac-6 launched a dummy Surveyor on a simulated lunar transfer orbit and proved itself capable of operational Surveyor missions. NASA stepped up its interplanetary research with pioneer vi, first of four projected interplanetary satellites. tiros ix became the first weather satellite to provide close to 100% coverage of the earth daily, and tiros x was the first in a series of interim operational satellites for the. U.S. Weather Bureau. Five Explorer scientific satellites, oso n, Canada’s alouette ii, and France’s FR-I were orbited. NASA orbited secor v for the U.S. Army, SOLRAD ix (explorer xxx) for the U.S. Navy, and early bird i communications satellite for the Communications Satellite Corporation. NASA turned over syncoms II and III to dod for operational use at the completion of their r&d function. The five NASA mission failures: vehicle test of Atlas-Centaur ac-5; test of Apollo launch escape system on a Little Joe II booster; failure of OGO ii, which did return good (but incomplete) experiment data; failure to orbit a third Orbiting Solar Observatory; and failure of Gemini 6 because Agena Target Vehicle did not achieve orbit. In 39 successful launches, dod orbited 67 satellites. In addition, there were four unsuccessful DOD space launches, losing five payloads. Decision was made that DOD proceed with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, and launches were begun of the powerful Titan iii-C which would eventually orbit the Mol. Highlighting the U.S.S.R.’s busy space year was man’s first extra-vehicular space activity, by voskhod ii’s Cosmonaut Leonov. Soviet lunar exploration intensified, with apparent soft-landing attempts by lunas v through viii, as well as photographs of the moon’s hidden side by interplanetary probe zond III. U.S.S.R. launched VENUS II and III on the long flight toward the planet Venus. (Western experts speculated that cosmos lx was an unsuccessful lunar soft-landing attempt and cosmos xcvi an unsuccessful Venus probe.) U.S.S.R. orbited 52 Cosmos satellites, two heavyweight Proton spacecraft, and her first communications satellites—two Molniyas I. (nasa Release 65-368; msfc Release 65-312; nasa hhr-8; nasc Staff; nasa A&A 1965; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/12/65) During 1965: Some nasa research highlights of 1965: NASA launched 191 scientific sounding rockets to obtain a variety of scientific data and about 10 for advanced research an d techno!-ogy. By the end of the year, the three x-15 research aircraft had made 156 flights, 32 of them in 1965. Tests proceeded of the modified x—15 (No. 2), expected to exceed 5,000-mph flight speed, nasa supported the National supersonic transport program and evaluated wind tunnel models of the two proposed Sst designs. NASA continued using usaf XB-70 aircraft for research in flight problems of Sst and large supersonic aircraft in general. Feasibility studies of adapting V/Stol concepts to commercial transportation and wind-tunnel studies of several V/Stol designs continued. As part of research toward efficient design of hypersonic aircraft, comparative performance and heat transfer measurements were obtained on a variety of aircraft wings, bodies, and wing-body combinations. Ramjet engine research was in the engine design concept phase. NASA developed and tested a new near-field theory useful in predicting sonic boom characteristics of Sst configurations during transonic climb-out. Flight research of M-l lifting body was advanced, and construction of HL-10 lifting body was being completed. Solid propulsion technology was advanced with static-firing of the 260-in. solid-fuel rocket motor. In nuclear rocket technology, three Nerva reactor experiments were completed and the new Phoebus advanced graphite reactor test program was begun. The success of a 2,600-hr. ion engine test provided evidence that life-times of 10,000 hrs. for electric rocket thrusters may be within reach. Among highlights in electronics and control was reentry communications experiment on GEMINI hi demonstrating feasibility of water injection to overcome communications blackout during reentry. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 25-38; ossa & oart S.Rkt. Proj. Off.; NASA Release 65-368) During 1965: About 90% of NASA’s budget was going to contractors to pay for work being done by nearly 400,000 people of about 20,000 prime and subcontractors. In the university program, NASA was doing business with about 200 universities in every state on space-related projects at the year’s end. NASA’s requirement to transfer its technology to other sectors of the economy had developed into an information system with more than 200,000 technical documents abstracted, indexed, and filed in a computer-based nationwide system. (NASA Release 65-368)
ComSatCorp had filed a contract with fcc for purchase of four satellites from Hughes Aircraft Co. to supply communication services for nasa’s Project Apollo and for other commercial services. Two spacecraft would be placed in synchronous orbits at about 22,300 mi.: one would be located over the Pacific between Hawaii and Midway Island; the other over the Atlantic near the west coast of Africa. Of the other two, one would be used as a reserve for replacement and one as a backup in case of a launch failure. Contract also provided an option for purchase of up to 15 of the satellites. Delivery date of the first satellite would be eight months after ComSatCorp would give Hughes notice to proceed, with one additional spacecraft of the four to be delivered every 21 days thereafter. (ComSatCorp Release) Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa for Manned Space Flight, introducing the symposium, noted three important general conclusions to be drawn from the results. First, data on man himself indicates that astronauts can adapt to the space environment, giving great confidence that manned space flight effort can move according to pian without the necessity of introducing special requirements such as artificial gravity. Second, further substantiation of the Mercury program evidences that man can see things from space which are not programmed on instruments to see. Third, the outstanding quality of photographs of earth from space demonstrates the feasibility of a number of significant applications of manned space flight for improvement of life here on earth, (nasa Release 65-321; nasa Rpt. of Symposium)
USAF awarded $6.5-million contract to Boeing Co. to build one groundtest and three flight-test models of a highly-reliable, low-cost upper stage for orbiting small and medium unmanned satellites. Called “Burner II,” the stage would be used with Thor standard launch vehicles and be adaptable for use with Atlas and Titan boosters. Burner II, which include a spherical solid-propellant rocket motor, inertial guidance system, and attitude-stabilization system, would bridge the payload gap between the dod/nasa Scout launch vehicle and the more expensive USAF Agena and Able-Star upper stages, (afsc Release 95.65)
cosmos lx satellite, containing “scientific apparatus,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 287 km. (177.9 mi.); perigee, 201 km. (124.6 mi.); period, 89.1 min.; inclination 64° 42'. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 3/13/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans)
Launch Dec. 15 of Pioneer 6 sun-orbiting satellite was postponed to avoid conflict with launch of Gemini vi. (ap, NYT, 12/15/65, 22)
ComSatCorp asked nine foreign companies to propose studies of launch vehicles for medium altitude communications satellites in addition to the 16 American companies approached a month ago. The deadline for submitting proposals was extended from Jan. 11 to Feb. 1. (ComSatCorp)
ComSatCorp had awarded three six-month study contracts totaling $240,000 to the U.K. General Post Office (gpo) for research into certain aspects of satellite communications. Studies would be carried out in cooperation with U.K. industry—Marconi, Plessey, General Electric Co., Mullard, and Standard Telephone Labs.—and would involve research into three major areas of technology involved in commercial communications of all types via satellite. (ComSatCorp Release)
AFCRL experiment proved- that a radio signal transmitted by an orbiting satellite could be trapped between two layers of the ionosphere and, upon emergence, channeled to ground stations half way around the world. Scientists had been aware of the ionospheric ducting capability for a number of years, but it had not been fully explored before the orbiting satellite experiment, (oar Release 4-65-1)
North American and European television broadcasters met at ComSatCorp headquarters in Washington, D.C., and announced outline of inaugural broadcast between the two continents to demonstrate possibilities of Early Bird communications satellite for television use. Plans called for major part of telecast to be live transmissions of events in various countries. It would include live broadcasts from participating ground stations in Europe and North America, a short documentary history of past events carried on satellite television, and a brief explanation of how Early Bird worked and what it would mean to communications in the future. (ComSatCorp Release)
The Federal Communications Commission confirmed it expected to rule soon on who should own the initial American ground stations providing access to communications satellites. The established international carriers, including AT&T, RCA Communications, Western Union International, and ITT World Communications, had accused ComSat-Corp of exceeding its statutory authority and demanded the right to share in the ownership of the ground stations. (Gould, NYT, 4/27/65, 1, 25)
Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said in an article in Astronautics and Aeronautics for January: “. . . With Ranger 7, the prime factor was the expectation that the Apollo mission would choose a landing area on one of the smooth ‘maria.’ So it was of great value to this program to find out as much as possible about the mare topography. In particular, it was necessary to know if these areas were really lava flows and, if so, how much was exposed lava and how densely the small craters were scattered over the surface. “Ranger gave some of the answers. In some areas, at least, small craters were indeed strewn very thickly. Probably such areas lie along the rays which radiate from some of the more recent large craters. Between these ray regions the surface of the mare appears to be quite smooth. No large rocks or fissures are apparent, although the general roughness may be comparable to some terrestrial lava fields where the lava is of the ‘pahoehoe,’ or fluid variety. However, the absence of any significant number of features showing edges with a small radius of curvature, and the presence of small craters which have been filled with debris, point to erosion as a significant modifier of the primeval lunar surface. This erosion could arise from meteoric bombardment and the effects of solar radiations. Estimates of the depth of surface which has been eroded away range from 5 to 50 ft. . . .” (A&A, 1/65, 18-20) During January: GAO charged that mismanagement of the Nimbus meteorological satellite project resulted in unnecessary costs of $1.2 million. The report claimed that Nimbus’ project manager at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center “did not effectively carry out his responsibility” for flight planning when it became evident that the spacecraft had become overweight and that he allowed the contractor to continue working toward the original design goal “even though it was clear [the effort] would be futile” because of booster limitations. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, rebutted the GAO allegations: “The costs which were incurred on the Nimbus project during the 5V2 months between May 1961 and November 20, 1961, were for the development of the fully redundant Nimbus system to satisfy the requirements of the Plan for a National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. . . . Our effort to achieve the redundant system in the first Nimbus flight was continued as long as possible. ... we did not want to take the step of dropping the redundant system, even for the first flight, until we were sure we had to.” (gao Nimbus Rpt., 1/65; M&R, 2/8/65,9)	_
Laser beams could be used to track satellites, a group of scientists reported at a news briefing at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. The briefing followed a two-day meeting discussing efforts to track explorer xxii and explorer xxvii satellites which were orbiting the earth at a height of about 700 mi. Dr. Henry Plotkin, Head of Gsfc’s Optical Systems Branch, said the experiments had indicated that: 1) a beam of laser light from the ground could be directed with sufficient accuracy to strike satellite reflectors; 2) turbulence in the atmosphere would not break the beam enough to interfere with its lighting up the satellite; 3) very short bursts of light from lasers could be used to measure the range of a satellite precisely by means of timing the flight and rebound of the pulse; 4) reflected light could be photographed against a stellar background to provide angles by which the satellite could be identified very accurately. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxvii, 13th Soviet spacecraft orbited in the last two months. Initial orbital data: apogee, 300 km. (187 mi.); perigee, 184 km. (114 mi.) ; period, 89.3 min.; inclination to the equator, 51.8°. Tass said the unmanned satellite would gather data to prepare equipment for manned flights; instruments were functioning normally. (Pravda, 8/4/65, 1; upi, NYT, 8/4/65, 4)
Defense Communications Agency had awarded contracts to six firms to conduct parallel systems design studies for the Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project: ComSatCorp, General Electric Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., Philco Corp., rca, Defense Electronic Products, and Space Technology Lab. The fixed price contracts ranged from $135,000 to $196,000. The studies, to be completed in three or four months, would be used as a basis for design of any advanced operational satellite communications system, (dod Release 402-65)
explorer xxix, first nasa satellite to use a gravity-gradient system for stabilization, had pointed its instrumentation toward earth and was expected to be programed for operation within several days. Achievement of the desired attitude was confirmed by magnetic and solar sensors and by marked increase in the strength of radio signals. Project officials at NASA gsfc and Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory reported four explorer xxix geodetic measurements systems had been checked out and were performing as expected; the fifth, using laser beam reflectors, would be tested when the spacecraft had completed its stabilization phase, (nasa Release 65—354)
More than 50 million Europeans—including viewers behind the Iron Curtain—had received same-day transmission of the Tokyo Olympic Games via U.S. satellites syncom iii and relay i last October, nasa announced, (nasa Release 65—2)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) urged the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to consider priorities in the U.S. space program. He noted that the Agena Target Vehicle failure which postponed the Oct. 25 Gemini vi mission might have been avoided if the modified Agena had undergone flight-testing before the Gemini mission attempt. Reiterating his view that “the last two Pegasus [satellites] shots were not clearly necessary,” he suggested: “. . . this modified Agena rocket could have been test fired by means of utilizing the last two Saturn I rockets, which carried the additional Pegasus satellites instead. Such a test might have avoided the failure. . . .” (CR, 11/2/65, A6259)
cosmos lxxix was orbited by U.S.S.R., Tass announced. The satellite contained instrumentation “to continue space research under the program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962.” Orbital data: apogee, 359 km. (223 mi.); perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.); period, 89.7	min.; inclination, 64.9°. (ap, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 8/26/65; gsfc SSR, 9/1/65; U.N. Registry/inf. 117)
ComSatCorp filed with the FCC its intent to contract for 24 satellites that could be used by ComSatCorp to provide a global communications service for DOD. The satellites would be made available for three launchings which DOD had slated for the early part of 1966 on either a Titan me or Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. DOD would pay only for service rendered following successful launch, with Com SatCorp assuming the risk if the satellites did not work satisfactorily in orbit. This proposal was separate from the program managed by ComSatCorp to develop an international commercial communications satellite system. (ComSatCorp Release)
South African Prime Minister Hendrik F. Verwoerd said his government would not admit American Negroes if they were assigned to work in satellite tracking stations operating in South Africa. The Johannesburg Sunday Times commented: “The United States will have to decide whether it can afford morally to overlook Dr. Verwoerd’s remarks.” (Lelyveld, NYT, 6/27/65)
Soviet press published first technical details and a sketch of the communications satellite molniya i, launched April 23. The satellite, which was visible nine hours a day from Soviet ground stations, had been used for experimental transmissions of television programs, including color, between Moscow and Vladivostok. According to the drawing and the text description, molniya i had an airtight cylindrical body with conical ends, one of which contained a rocket engine used to correct the orbit, as well as other solar orientation devices. Expanding like spokes of a wheel from the cylinder were six long panels of solar batteries to supply electrical power to the satellite for retransmission of signals received from earth. It was equipped with two parabolic antennas, one active, the other in reserve. These were pointed toward earth with a high-precision direction finder for earthbound transmissions, molniya I would make two 12-hr. revolutions around the earth every 24 hrs. One loop would take it over the Soviet Union during daytime periods, when it could be of most use for transmissions. The other loop would take it over the United States. (NYT, 5/31/65, 6)
NASA announced Pegasus C meteoroid detection satellite was equipped with small aluminum sub-panels that at some future date an astronaut could, if desired, detach and bring back to earth. The panels would provide the first actual samples of meteoroid impact and would have tested some 43 types of thermal coatings. Pegasus C would be launched July 30, 1965, into 332 mi.-altitude circular orbit at 28.9° inclination—close to a nominal manned flight path—rather than into an elliptical orbit like that of pegasus i and ii. (nasa Release 65-228; msfc Release 65-175)
In response to newsmen’s questions, a spokesman for the State Dept, said the U.S. planned to continue operating its two satellite tracking stations in South Africa despite the warning by South African Prime Minister Hendrick Verwoerd that Negro Americans cannot be employed there. Of the two tracking stations, dod operated one and NASA the other. The dod station employed about 50 American technicians, almost all civilians, and about 25 South Africans. The NASA station had only one American, a liaison officer; other employees were South Africans—some of them non-white. (Halloran, Wash. Post, 6/29/65, A16)
OGO I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) spacecraft had completed its first year of operation in space Officially classified as a failure when a major objective—three axis stabilization—was not achieved, the 1,200-lb. satellite launched Sept. 4, 1964, had exceeded its one-year design lifetime and was still transmitting valuable data from 16 experiments. OGO i’s scientific objectives were to conduct time-correlated measurements of space phenomena to help in the understanding of earth-sun relationships. Although its scientific usefulness was lessened when the earth-run stabilized orientation was not achieved, 16 scientific papers had been presented by experimenters on findings of their instruments aboard OGO I. (nasa Release 65-294)
ComSatCorp asked the FCC for authority to assemble a third Early Birdtype satellite from existing parts for a future launch. A back-up satellite to early bird i was already assembled; components for a third comsat were completed earlier this year. The application before the FCC requested permission to assemble these components. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp had selected Holmes and Narver, Inc., Los Angeles architectural and engineering firm, for design work on two new earth station sites in Hawaii and Washington—the U.S. ground links in a worldwide commercial communications satellite system. The contract provided for $186,000, plus additional costs for optional on-the-site construction supervision and related services. Detailed drawings and specifications would be supplied to ComSatCorp no later than December 1. (ComSatCorp Release)
PEGASUS II meteoroid detection satellite, orbited May 25 from Kennedy Space Center, had reported “hits” on panels of all three thicknesses of aluminum target material, NASA reported. 14 penetrations had been recorded on the ,016-in.-thick detection panels; five on the .008-in. panels; and 34 on the .0015-in. panels. In the first month report on pegasus n, Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of NASA Space Vehicle Research and Technology, said that although the number of penetrations varied slightly from earlier predictions, “the figures follow closely our statistical computations based on results from pegasus I and explorers xvi and xxm. Continued successful operation of PEGASUS II will give us a good base for use by spacecraft designers in predicting the frequency and size of meteoroids which constitute a hazard to space flight.” Ames referred to a new capacitor fusing arrangement which would enable project engineers to disconnect a single malfunctioning capacitor while leaving other capacitors in the same group of panels working. If a malfunction serious enough to warrant disconnection of the entire panel group occurred, this could be done by ground command. 36 capacitors on PEGASUS II were working improperly during the first four weeks and had been disconnected by ground command to prevent a drain on the spacecraft’s power supply, (nasa Release 65-219; msfc Release 65-168)
Aviation Week reported theory of many U.S. officials that COSMOS LVII, launched by U.S.S.R. on Feb. 22, 1965, had strayed from its programed flight path and been deliberately destroyed the day after it was launched. The alleged reason was to prevent COSMOS LVII from falling into foreign hands. U.S. officials were said to have assumed that COSMOS LVII was a trial run for voskhod II flight because of similar orbits: voskhod ii had 308 mi. (496.7 km.) apogee, 108 mi. (174.4 km.) perigee, 65° inclination: cosmos lvii had 317 mi. (511.3 km.) apogee, 107 mi. (172.6 km.) perigee, and 65° inclination. According to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Satellite Situation Report, 51 pieces of cosmos lvii were in orbit Feb. 28, 1965; 39 pieces on March 15. 1965. The Report also listed cosmos l, launched by U.S.S.R. October 28. 1964. in 88 pieces, (gfsc SSR, 3/15/65, 33, 37; Av. Wk., 4/12 65, 34 )
U.S.S.R. satellites electron i and electron ii were among the new exhibits in the “Kosmos” (Space) Pavillion at the Soviet exposition on achievements of the U.S.S.R. national economy, reported KryVya rodiny. These satellites, launched to study the near-earth radiation belts, were said to have made it possible for Soviet scientists to safeguard the cosmonauts during their flights in this region. (KryVya rodiny, 7/65, 1)
The Wall Street Journal, commenting on President Johnson’s decision to develop Manned Orbital Laboratory, wrote: “The President didn’t enumerate the MOL experiments, but there is little doubt they would involve such possible missions as: —High-altitude reconnaissance over the Soviet Union and China; —Inspection and possible destruction of non-U.S. space satellites; —Antisubmarine surveillance of the oceans . . .” (Beecher, WSJ, 8/26/65, 2)
All but six of the 170 pieces into which Soviet satellite cosmos LVII had shattered after being orbited Feb. 22 had fallen to earth, according to GSFc’s Satellite Situation Report. Another disclosure of the report was that a U.S. satellite orbited March 9 from wtr was orbiting in eight pieces, four of which were transmitting signals, (gsfc SSR. 3/31/65)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxv from the Baikonur launch complex 200 mi. northeast of Tyuratam, Tass announced. The satellite carried scientific instruments for continuing the Soviet space exploration program. Orbital data: apogee, 342 km. (212.4 mi.); perigee, 210 km. (130.4 mi.) ; period, 89.8 min.; inclination, 65°. All systems were functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/18/65, 1, atss-t Trans.; SBD, 4/22/65, 290)
NASA would negotiate with Ball Brothers Research Corp. an approximate $12-million contract for procurement of three additional Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso) spacecraft, bringing to eight the number of satellites contracted for in the Oso series. (NASA Release 65-282)
Four nasa Tiros meteorological satellites observing Hurricane Betsy were providing the most extensive picture coverage of a storm ever obtained in space, tiros X had photographed Betsy Aug. 27 before she reached hurricane strength; since then TIROS VII, VIII, and IX had been photographing her about eight times daily, (gsfc Release G—26—65)
NASA’s actions in releasing foreign satellite information were criticized in a report by the House Committee on Government Operations, based on study by its Foreign Operations and Government Information Subcommittee. Committee stated NASA had deleted from its biweekly Satellite Situation Report certain Soviet launches because they were designated as secret information by Norad. “nasa has not once challenged these security classifications, blindly accepting the military decision. . . .” Compounding the problem, NASA had “publicized the facts about Soviet failures [Sept. 15, 1962, letter from Administrator Webb to Senate and House space committees] after those facts had been carefully deleted from its routine report of satellite information. “. . . NASA has ignored two clear requirements of law—the requirement for civilian control over nonmilitary space activities and the requirement for the fullest possible flow of public information. By yielding, automatically, to the military judgment on what the American people shall know about Soviet space activities, NASA fails to implement its legal mandate. By playing an on-again, off-again secrecy game, NASA tends to confuse the American public. . . . “Therefore, the committee recommends that, in every possible instance consistent with the dictates of national security, NASA exercise its right to challenge military-imposed restrictions by requiring justification and, thus, carry out the mandate to keep the American people informed. . . .” (House Rpt. 197)
France successfully launched a—I, her first satellite, with the Diamant booster from Hammaguir Range, Algeria. Countdown had been interrupted for seven hours when a faulty diode was discovered in the boosters’ third stage. Initial orbital data: apogee, 1,768 km. (1,098 mi.); perigee, 525 km. (326 mi.); period, 108 min.; inclination, 34.65° (compared with planned 2,154-km. [1,562-mi.] apogee, 553-km. [331-mi.] perigee, 53° inclination). The 88-lb. satellite, comparable to the U.S. Vanguard, carried a radio and radar transmitters but no scientific equipment; it was designed for a two-week lifetime. Radio was functioning feebly. Primary purpose of launch was to test the Diamant booster, whose three stages had been tested individually but not as a three-stage launch vehicle. Second and third stages used solid fuel; the first used liquid. (Root, Wash. Post, 11/27/65, Al; ap, NYT, 11/27/65, 1, 4; SBD, 12/11/65, 172)
Hughes Aircraft Co. was the only concern to respond to ComSatCorp’s request for proposals to build four advanced Early Bird-type satellites with options for additional satellites, ComSatCorp announced. Five companies had bid for construction of four transportable ground stations with options for additional stations: Hughes Aircraft Co.; International Telephone and Telegraph Corp.; Page Communications Engineers; and Radio Corp. of America. Delivery of the first satellite and the first two stations would be within eight months. (ComSatCorp Release)
Dr. Joseph Charyk, president of Communications Satellite Corporation, speaking in Kaanapali, Hawaii, said the geographic location of Hawaii ensured that the impact of Early Bird comsat would be “more profound there than in any of the other states of the union.” Hawaii, he noted, would not have to wait, as it does now, to see mainland television programs. Dr. Charyk envisioned a full global communications system by 1967. He predicted Hawaii would become a center for communications traffic of all types. (NYT, 1/31/65, 13)
Viewers in Great Britain and at least 11 Western European nations were able to watch the Gemini 4 lift-off live via early bird i satellite. Picture reception was reportedly clear. ComSatCorp, cooperating with European ground station owners, arranged for free use of EARLY bird I between 8:00 a.m. and 12 noon edt. (Wash. Post, 6/4/65; ComSatCorp Release)
usaf orbited two unidentified satellites with a single Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle launched from Vandenberg afb. (ap, NYT, 4/30/65, 40; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 140)
nasa’s explorer xxvii (be-c ) satellite was successfully launched into orbit from Wallops Island aboard a four-stage Scout rocket. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 796.5 mi. (1,162.4 km.); perigee, 579.7 mi. (921.3 km.) ; period, 108 min.; inclination to the equator, 41°. Primary mission of the 132-lb., windmill-shaped satellite was geodetic measurement: irregularities in the earth’s gravitational field would be mapped by analysis of the Doppler shift of radio signals from the spacecraft. As a secondary mission, EXPLORER xxvii would provide data related to ionospheric studies and would evaluate further the use of laser techniques in deriving orbital and geodetic information and for deep space communication. All systems were operating as planned. (Wallops Release 65-24; nasa Release 65-147; nasa Proj. Off.)
ComSatCorp requested bids from 12 companies by Nov. 22 for site preparation and construction of buildings and facilities for a fixed earth station at Paumalu, Oahu, Hawaii—a U.S. link for worldwide commercial satellite communications. The Hawaiian station and one at Brewster Flat, Wash., were the only fixed stations planned by ComSatCorp. (ComSatCorp Release)
nasa explorer xxiii meteoroid-detection satellite had successfully completed its one-year expected lifetime, NASA announced. The 295-lb. satellite, launched November 6, 1964, from Wallops Station to measure the rate of meteoroid punctures at 300-mi. to 600-mi. altitude, had recorded 122 punctures as of September 30. These results indicated that an exposed area of 10 sq. ft. made of metal one-thousandth of an inch thick would experience penetration by a meteoroid about once a week, (nasa Release 65-351)
President Johnson sent FY 1966 Budget Request to Congress, recommending a total space budget of $7,114 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.26 billion, DOD $1.6 billion, AEC $236 million, Weather Bureau $33 million, and National Science Foundation $3 million. The NASA request provided for initiation of a major new project— Project Voyager, budgeted at $43 million—and intensive study of Apollo-X, with funding of $50 million. Hardware development funds were requested for the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory ($25.1 million), and the Radio Astronomy Explorer Satellite. Advanced research was reduced by cancellation of development of the 260-in.-dia. solid-fuel rocket motor, the M-l liquid-hydrogen engine (1.2-million-lb.-thrust), and Snap-8 nuclear electric power unit. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., labeled the budget an austere one, but said the chances of landing a man on the moon by 1970 were still good. In discussing the new programs, Dr. Seamans said the requested $43 million for Voyager would be spent on project definition of the spacecraft bus and landing capsule to explore Mars in the next decade. This funding would also enable NASA to make a Martian fly-by in 1969 to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle prior to the 1971 and 1973 missions. Major portions of the DOD space budget were alloted for the following: (1) pre-program definition phase of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) ; (2) accelerated research on reentry and recovery of spacecraft; (3) continued development of the Titan in space booster; (4) development of the Defense Communications Satellite System. Two thirds of aec’s budget request was earmarked for development of nuclear rocket propulsion and nuclear power sources for space applications. The nuclear propulsion program, Project Rover, was alloted $84.1 million; the nuclear power source program, Snap, $70.5 million; and advanced projects applicable to space, $12 million. The Pluto reactor program was not included in the budget request. The Weather Bureau would start its investment in an advanced weather satellite system in fy 66 with a $500,000 request for sensors and subsystem studies in conjunction with NASA studies. Funds for three Tiros Operational System (Tos) satellites and four Delta launch vehicles to be delivered in two years, $21.6 million, were included in the budget request. Most of the rest was requested for the National Weather Satellite Center (nwsc) and would be spent to convert the present Tiros command and data acquisition facilities to full-time, operational centers run solely by the Weather Bureau. President Johnson asked Congress for $650 million as a White House contingency fund to meet the possible need to accelerate supersonic transport development. (Text, M&R, 2/1/65, 10—17; Text, NYT, 1/26/65. 26-28; Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 16-17; nasa Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Sea bottom between New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, which was affecting the orbits of artificial satellites, had become subject of a survey by British and American geophysicists on the British survey vessel, Dampier. Gravitational pull of exceptionally dense rock about 24,000 ft. below the surface was so strong it tended to drag the satellites out of their intended orbits. {NYT, 11/23/65, 23)
U.S.S.R. had kept the U.S. under relatively continuous surveillance with photo reconnaissance satellites launched as part of the Cosmos program, said Edward H. Kolcum in an article in Aviation Week and Space Technology. In 1964 14 such satellites were launched, he asserted. The article continued: “Soviet photo reconnaissance payload is believed to be an unmanned version of the Vostok spacecraft, which successfully carried cosmonauts into orbit six times. The unmanned camera mission uses the same launch facilities and same recovery techniques developed from Russian manned satellites. The recoverable section is the pressurized cabin, which weighs about 5,000 lb. when it is ejected from the main spacecraft for a parachute descent on land. . . . “Six of these payloads were recovered after eight days; two after seven days, one after six days and another after five days. One came down after 24 hr. in orbit; one remained up five weeks, another eight and a half weeks, and another, launched Aug. 29, is still in orbit. Departures from the norm are believed to indicate retrofire malfunctions or failures. Most recent Soviet reconnaissance satellite was Cosmos 52, launched Jan. 11 and recovered Jan. 19. . . .” He stated that 11 of the 14 reconnaissance satellites orbited in 1964 were orbited at 65° inclination. The remaining three orbited at 51° inclination—“an inclination that also permits the payload to sweep over the entire continental United States.” The other Cosmos satellites, orbited at 49° inclination, had remained in orbit until they decayed naturally. They were “believed to be scientific applications and military development payloads.” (Av. Wk., 2/22/65, 22)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, Edmond C. Buckley, Director of nasa’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, said that during 1965, data processing facilities would handle 70,000,000 data points per day and that there would be an increase to 200,000,000 data points per day in 1966. He continued: “In fiscal year 1966, effort under this category will be directed toward developing and evaluating techniques for building up the existing telemetry data reduction capability to match the increasing requirements. In order to reduce this tremendous amount of data in an efficient and reliable manner, new techniques must be evaluated for obtaining this additional capability. “The heart of this prototype system is the Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction System (Stars). The development program for this system was initiated in prior years and is planned to continue through fiscal year 1968. The Stars equipment presently includes automatic editing, decommutation, and calibration of the telemetry data. Functions in addition to these will be included in the prototype equipment as the developmental subsystems become available. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 1-87)
NASA launched a second Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station containing French-built radio propagation experiments designed for later flight on France’s fr-1 satellite. The 197-lb. payload reached peak altitude of 120 mi. (192 km.) during the eight-minute flight. First launch had carried an identical payload Sept. 17. (Wallops Release 65-61)
cosmos ci unmanned satellite was launched by the U.S.S.R. “to continue space investigations,” announced Tass. Orbital data: apogee, 550 km. (341 mi.); perigee, 260 km. (165 mi.) ; period, 92.4 min.; inclination, 49°. Equipment was functioning normally. (.Pravda, 12/22/65, 1)
aec said in its Annual Report to Congress that the United States now had four Vela satellites in distant orbits to detect nuclear explosions in space. Two more would be launched this year. U.S. facilities in the Pacific had been brought to a state of instant readiness to resume atmospheric testing should the Soviet Union violate the limited nuclear test ban treaty, (aec Annual Report, 76-77)
Techniques for weather predictions reliable up to two weeks were discussed at Geophysics Corp. of America in Bedford, Mass., by Dr. D. Q. Wark of the U.S. Weather Bureau, Dr. William Nordberg of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and Dr. Jean I. F. King of gca. These scientists had successfully utilized radio waves to collect weather data and were planning to build a new weather satellite which could log greater amounts of data and provide constant coverage. They proposed placing weather buoys in the oceans and weather balloons in the atmosphere equipped to relay data to the orbiting satellite which, in turn, would relay data to ground stations. (Hughes, CSM, 5/6/65)
usaf designated Textron’s Bali Aerosystems Co. an associate prime contractor to supply rocket engines for the Agena space vehicle, it was announced. Change would enable the afsc Space Systems Div. to procure Agena rocket engines directly from Bell Aerosystems. Bell had designed, manufactured, and tested the Agena rocket engine since 1956 under subcontracts from Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. Agena had orbited more than 80 percent of the usaf and NASA satellites and had placed approximately 60 per cent of the free world’s functional unmanned payloads in space. The Bell Agena engine, which had contributed largely to that percentage, had been fired in space approximately 200 times and had achieved a record exceeding 99.3 per cent. (Bell Release)
zond III automatic space station was launched into a heliocentric orbit by U.S.S.R. from a heavy artificial satellite placed in a parking orbit around the earth by a multistage carrier rocket, Tass announced. Tass said that the “trajectory of the automatic station is close to the expected one,” that communications were stable, and that all systems were functioning normally. The purpose of the launch was to “check the station’s systems in conditions of prolonged space flight and the holding of scientific studies in interplanetary space,” Tass said. Pictures of the farside of the moon taken by ZOND ill were later released on Aug. 20. (Tass, 7/18/65; Grose, NYT, 7/19/65, 1, 31; Loory, Wash. Post, 7/19/65)
NASA’s OSO II satellite, which completed its first month in orbit at 11:36 a.m. EST, had circled earth 419 times and daily returned about 7 mi. of tape-recorded data, NASA reported. Designed to provide detailed information on solar x-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet rays, OSO II was functioning normally except for failure of the Harvard College Observatory ultraviolet scanning spectrometer and for sporadic return of data from the spectroheliograph portion of Naval Research Laboratory coronagraph. Earlier problems with data transmissions from gsfc ultraviolet spectrometer bad been resolved. (NASA Release 65-74)
An article published in The New Scientist reported that experts at the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, England, believed that the U.S. communications satellite ECHO II—launched Jan. 25, 1964, and still in orbit—had been pierced by its own launching canister shortly after injection into orbit. According to The New Scientist, the shape of echo ii after launching was flabby and elongated rather than the perfect sphere wanted for some of its communication experiments. Analysis of Malvern’s radar tracks on ECHO II revealed writhing echoes that, according to their theory, arose when the very short radar pulses entered a hole and rebounded from the aluminum-coated interior of the balloon. The Malvern team thought the balloon had a puncture about 18 in. long and 27 in. wide in one side. NASA spokesmen said they did not believe echo II had been punctured by either its launching canister or its launching vehicle and that sightings from more than a dozen radar stations had contradicted the Malvern theory. They added that echo Il’s ability to reflect radio signals had not been seriously impaired and many messages had been bounced off in the last year. (Hillaby, NYT, 1/31/65, 29)
usaf launched unidentified satellite payload with Scout booster. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 159)
TELSTAR II had successfully turned off its tracking beacon as scheduled after two years and nine days of service and 4,736 orbits of the earth, Bell Telephone System engineers announced. This would not affect the comsat’s usefulness, but would conserve energy and permit other satellites to use the channel that was cut off. telstar ii was expected to remain usable for at least three more vears. (UPI, NYT, 5/20/65, 18)	'
Funeral services for Sir Winston Churchill were televised live and by delayed transmission from London via telstar ii communications satellite. Churchill died on Jan. 24. Earlier in the week, pictures of Sir Winston’s body lying in state in Westminster Hall had also been transmitted live via telstar ii. (nbc; cbs; Wash. Post, 1/27/65)
France’s first satellite, FR-1, arrived from Paris at Dulles International Airport and was taken to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for testing. The satellite, to be launched for France by NASA in a joint project to study very low frequency radio waves and the distribution of ionization in the earth’s magnetosphere, would be sent to Ling-Temco-Vought, Texas, where it would be modified to fit a Scout-type rocket. Launching was scheduled for late 1965. Memorandum of understanding for the FR-1 program was signed Feb. 18, 1963, between nasa and the French Space Agency, Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). (nasa Release 65-59; Wash. Post, 9/16/65)
Ten firms had submitted proposals to the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for preliminary design study of the Optical Technology Satellite being considered as part of the Apollo Extension System (Aes). Two contracts would be awarded for parallel studies. Objective of the proposed Ots program was to advance NASA’s capability in space optics technology by performing several engineering and scientific experiments in space. Selected contractors would review existing conceptual designs for Ots and analyze the technical feasibility and justification for the performance in space of experiments being considered. The contractor would then create a conceptual design with onboard experiments. In Phase II, the contractor would perform a conceptual design study of the Ots subsystem to establish a sound base for overall preliminary design. The program would be under NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 65—213; msfc Release 65— 213)
Scientists and broadcasting executives from 20 countries began a fourday conference in Paris, sponsored by UNESCO, on communications satellites and their probable effect on press and radio. (Reuters, NYT, 12/6/65, 3)
Contributions of NASA’s space program to the future of the Nation were outlined by nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dry-den at the Governor’s Conference on Oceanography and Astronautics in Hawaii: “We are building toward pre-eminence in every phase of space activity. ... “We are building a network of large-scale engineering facilities, spaceyards, proving grounds, and spaceports to assemble, test, and launch the space vehicles we need now and in the future. “We are creating new national resources of lasting value in these facilities; in the industrial and managerial capabilities we are developing; and in the growing number of scientists and engineers who are learning about space and space technology. “We are filling the pipelines of hardware and knowledge, and, as measured by the financial resources required, we’re about halfway toward our first manned lunar mission in mid-1965. “We are accumulating, in space, the basic scientific knowledge about the earth, the solar system, the universe, and about man himself. “We are bringing benefits not only to the United States but to all the world through the use of space and space technology. . . . “We are providing a much-needed stimulus to the energies and creativity of people everywhere. . . . “We are bringing about increased economic activity. . . . “And we are making certain . . . that the realm of space now opening up to us shall be a domain of freedom. “It is for these reasons that we have mounted the greatest peacetime undertaking in the history of mankind. . . .” (Text) “The Military Implications of Space” were discussed for the Governor’s Conference by Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander: “Our military efforts in space can be placed into three broad categories: first, the development of space systems to support military missions on earth; second, the development of defensive measures against possible enemy actions in space; and third, the conduct of experimentation and of programs aimed at pushing technology forward. . . .” Schriever noted two examples of unmanned satellite systems: (1) the Nuclear Detection Program consisting of six Vela satellites gathering information on radiation backgrounds in far space and defining an operational nuclear detection system; and (2) communications satellites. He revealed that an initial R&D system to satisfy military communications’ requirements had been authorized by dod for launch early next year and would include up to 23 satellites orbiting earth at random spacing at about 21,000-mi. altitude. The satellites would be launched in clusters of eight from three Titan me boosters and then would be positioned along an orbital path. An advanced system was also planned in which expected life of each satellite would be increased from one and a half years to between three and five years. In the advancement of space technology he listed several major programs: manned orbiting laboratory, space cabin experiments, development of cryogenic rocket engines, development of the scramjet, development of a spacecraft capable of maneuvering during reentry, and the Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Reentry Program (Start). (Text)
ComSatCorp announced it would request proposals from several U.S. manufacturers for a new space exploration communications system that would be associated with “certain space exploration activities, particularly the Apollo program.” Proposals would be for five synchronous-orbit satellites each capable of being launched with a thrust-augmented Delta booster, with options for additional satellites. First delivery would be within eight months. ComSatCorp also established requirements for four transportable satellite earth stations with options for additional stations—first two stations to be delivered in eight months. (ComSatCorp Release)
“The world’s first international school for training specialists in satellite tracking,” would be opened in Tashkent, capital of Uzbekistan in Soviet Central Asia, Tass announced. Fifteen young scientists from Soviet satellite countries and 20 Soviet scientists would pursue each nine-day course. The school was set up within the framework of the U.N. International Commission for Space Research, (ap, NYT, 9/8/65, 5)
ComSatCorp announced it was negotiating with trw Systems, Inc., for development of at least six and perhaps 24 satellites for use in a global system. ComSatCorp said the global system should be in operation by 1968, relaying telephone, television, and data messages between continents. No estimate of the value of the contract was made. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, in Munich for the International Transport Fair, said at a press conference: “The fact is that never to date has a manned American satellite flown over even one square centimeter of Soviet soil.” Von Braun denied rumors that he might accept a position with a European aeronautics and space organization. He was presented with the international aviation decoration, Pioneer Chain of the Compass Card with Diamonds, while at the Fair. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 9/3/65)
British Broadcasting Co. filed a petition with the FCC to request halving suggested fee of $3,825 for a half-hour’s television use of early bird i communications satellite. In addition to ComSatCorp’s charge, any television user must pay an identical fee to the group of 17 European countries that helped finance EARLY BIRD I; this combined fee of $7,650 would cover the cost of transmission only between Andover, Me., ground station and one European point and would not include costs for ground lines to broadcasting stations. One bbc expert, who estimated that at the proposed rates a half-hour transatlantic program would cost more than $11,000, concluded that British broadcasters would be able to use the satellite only for the “most compelling matters.” (Lewis, NYT, 6/13/65, 1)
European Broadcasting Union’s administrative council issued a statement saying it was concerned by the possibility that “prohibitive” charges might make it impossible to transmit television programs over EARLY bird i communications satellite. The council expressed the hope that the first three experimental years of intercontinental satellite television would not be “cut off at the start of commercial satellite operation.” (Reuters, NYT, 5/23/65, 19)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with a Thor-Agena D booster combination, (upi, NYT, 5/19/65, 2)
Participants in the World Peace through Law Conference in Washington, D.C., agreed that advances in international communications, including early bird i communications satellite, were important milestones on the road to world peace. John A. Johnson, vice president of ComSatCorp, told the international communications panel that early bird I had provided a case study of progress in “the development of legal principles and institutions which further international cooperation.” He said global coverage in the satellite communications system was planned for 1967. Prof. Ivan A. Vlasic, McGill Univ., warned we may be facing “a proliferation of competing, possibly even antagonistic communications systems. Given the present state of international relations the chances of conflict are considerable.” Jean Evensen, Norway’s government broadcasting system adviser, felt “a pressing need for ways of enforcing international communications rules. One rebel, one nonconformist . . . can create havoc ... to the damage of the rest of the world,” he said. (Bullen, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/65)
Decision to narrow the choice of type of broadcast satellite it would consider from three to two was announced by ComSatCorp president Joseph* V. Charyk at a stockholder’s meeting in Washington, D.C. Two of the approaches under consideration involved satellites that would operate about 6,000 mi. above the earth: one would have 18 satellites, orbiting in random positions; the other would have 12 satellites, orbiting at “phased” or controlled positions. The third approach, being tested in early bird I, had satellites placed at an altitude of 22,000 mi. in synchronous orbit. In his speech, Charyk revealed that the corporation had decided to drop from consideration the 6.000-	mi. random version. It had been discovered, he reported, that a 6.000-	mi.-high satellite could be controlled more easily than ComSatCorp had believed when it first started studying random satellites as one alternative approach. Moreover, Charyk said, it now appeared that a satellite could be designed that would operate either at 6,000 mi. in controlled positions or at the 22,000-mi.-high, synchronous position. LiOinSatCorp therefore wo: :Id invite satellite designers to offer bids to build this type of satellite. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/11/65, 12) . held in Mar del Plata, Argentina, where it was moved from Buenos Aires because of student demonstrations. A new working group was formed, with Morris Tepper (Chief of Meteorological Programs, nasa) as chairman. Called Working Group VI, for Scientific Space Experiments Concerned with Properties and Dynamics of the Troposphere and Stratosphere, it was formed to “further international understanding of, and cooperation in, the use of rocket and satellite systems and techniques for meteorological research, and to promote international discussions involving meteorologists with scientists of other disciplines in order to provide a good climate for the development of imaginative new approaches to the use of rockets and satellites for meteorological research.” (nas-nrc News Report, Vol. xv, 5/6/65, 6) Dr. 0. Z. Gazenko, physiologist and member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that cosmonauts had no difficulty knowing the orientation of their bodies and experienced no nervous disorders if they were given visual cues. He based his remarks on experiences of Soviet cosmonauts, especially those of Lt. Col. Aleksei Leonov in VOSKHOD ii: “When he saw the spacecraft, he had no problem knowing his orientation, but it was different when he didn’t see the spacecraft.” During the launch phase, the cosmonauts’ pulse and breathing rates were greater than noted during centrifugal tests in ground laboratories. In voskhod II, it took a comparatively long time for the normal levels to be reached, according to Gazenko. Comparison of the data of the Voskhod flights with other space flights showed fewer cardiovascular variations and better responses to stress. He recommended crews of several people since “the feeling of togetherness of cosmonauts is very important.” (Text) Success of the fully stabilized British Skylark rocket in obtaining new astrophysical data was described. Skylark was a single-stage, solid-fuel vehicle designed to carry 150-200-lb. payload to 200 km. (124 mi.) altitude. Using the sun as a reference, Skylark could achieve pointing accuracy of between two and three minutes of arc in pitch and yaw, reported Kenneth Pounds, lecturer at Leicester College, England, and one of its users: “The new Skylark has revolutionized the whole field of rocket research as far as we’re concerned.” He pointed out that many scientific experiments, such as taking x-ray photographs of the sun, could not be done by an unstabilized rocket: “You need 100 sec. or more exposure time, plus roll stabilization, or the photographs will be blurred.” (cospar Rpt.) M.	S. V. Rao, reporting on the Thumba, India, experiments conducted on World Days during the 1964—1965 iqsy, said east northeasterly winds with speeds of 60-90 knots were observed in the stratosphere during the monsoon. In the mesosphere, data revealed a region of unusually strong winds with high shear. Rao reported that radar observations of the rate of dispersion of chaff confirmed existence of complex pattern of high shears and pronounced turbulence in the equatorial mesosphere in the monsoon season. (Text) NASA scientists at Wallops Station, Va., had made a similar rocket launching during the Thumba experiments to get a synoptic picture. Arnold Frutkin, NASA Director of International Programs, said at the cospar meeting that “these data were the first relating to the monsoon problem on a global scale. It shows what very important work less advanced countries can do.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17) Activities in the 1964 U.S. space program were summarized by Dr. Richard W. Porter, National Academy of Sciences delegate to COSPAR:	“. . . Satellite storm warnings, intercontinental television, voice and data transmissions via satellite, all-weather navigational ‘fixes’ for ships at sea, and precise map making by means of satellite observations have become almost commonplace events. Space launchings at frequent intervals are providing a continuous stream of new information of value to science and mankind. ... In total, the various agencies of the United States carried out sixty-one successful satellite and space probe launchings; however, because of the occasional practice of launching several satellites at a time . . . the total number of useful discrete payloads in Earth orbit or escape trajectory was seventy-seven. . . . “In addition, the United States launched seven large high-altitude rocket probes, in the range from 700 to 1100 km., and well over one hundred other scientific sounding rockets, most of which reached altitudes between 110 and 250 km. Twelve hundred twenty-three small meteorological rockets, having a payload of about 5 kg. and a maximum altitude of about 60 km. were fired on regular schedules by the meteorological rocket network and more than one hundred scientifically instrumented large balloon flights were made during the period. “Technological advances made during this period which will contribute significantly to the space-research capability of the United States include the launching of three SATURN I booster rockets, capable of putting about 7500 kg. of useful weight into Earth orbit, one titan IIIA booster, and successful tests of the CENTAUR liquid hydrogen rocket. Electrostatic ion accelerator rocket propulsion devices were tested in space during 1964, and more recently a nuclear reactor with thermoelectric energy conversion devices successfully began an endurance run in space which is still continuing. Passive gravity-gradient stabilization techniques have been perfected by means of additional satellite tests to the point where this technique is ready for useful employment in a variety of space applications. The highly directional properties of a lasar beam were successfully used in tracking a satellite. Significant improvements were also made in sounding rocket, high altitude balloon design and in data conversion facilities.” (Text) K.	Maeda, chief Japanese delegate to the sixth international space symposium of cospar, told Missiles and Rockets Japan would launch its own satellite with its own launch vehicle within the next three years. A four-stage, solid-fueled rocket would be used, with the Mu rocket as first stage. The satellite, to be used solely for scientific research, would weigh between 50-100 kgs. and be sent into a 500-1,000-km. (311-621-mi.) orbit. (M&R, 5/17/65, 9) At a news conference during the cospar meeting, A. A. Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate, said that in view of the difficulties of soft landing on the moon, the Soviet Union would probably try to soft land another Lunik before attempting to land cosmonauts. He said the lunar surface must be known in detail and “should be examined by automatic stations.” Because of the problems involved, he added, “it is not possible to set any date for a lunar landing.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17)
USAF launched a Thor-Agena D booster with an unidentified satellite toward polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB. (upi, Denver Post, 1/17/65)
European contributions to international space communications were recommended by Dalimil Kybal, Senior Consulting Scientist, Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. Summary of his article in Air Force and Space Digest: “Contrary to the views of those Europeans who tend to think of European and American space communications systems as separate entities, existing international agreements clearly call for a global system. Europe, as it develops space technology skills, ought to concentrate on developing next-generation satellites as replacements for existing hardware, in keeping with the competitive approaches contemplated in the international agreement. . . .” (AF Mag., 7/65, 60-61)
Tabulations prepared by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center showed that more than 1,000 man-made objects—satellites, spacecraft, capsules, and assorted bits and pieces of them—had been placed in orbit since Oct. 4, 1957. Of these objects 243 were satellites launched by the United States or its allies and 94 were Soviet-launched satellites. 103 U.S.-sponsored satellites and 16 Soviet satellites were still in orbit. Of those no longer in orbit, 140 were U.S. and 78 Soviet. Many satellites had separated into two or more space objects or had broken apart accidentally or by design to produce space junk. GSFC records identified 469 hunks of junk of U.S. origin and 182 of Soviet as having orbited the earth at one time or another. Of these, 372 U.S. and 16 Soviet objects were still in orbit, (ap, NYT, 2/7/65, 80)
nasa and the Federal German Ministry for Scientific Research (BMwF) signed a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperation in a program of space research on the earth’s radiation belts. First phase of the program would consist of sounding rocket launchings and balloon flights to test instrumentation for German experiments. Following successful completion, the second phase would attempt to place a German scientific satellite in polar orbit by 1968. The satellite, to be designed and constructed in Germany, would be launched from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle provided by NASA. No exchange of funds between the two organizations was contemplated. Results 6f the experiments would be made available to the world scientific community. (NASA Release 65-238)
In a luncheon address to the National Security Industrial Association in Washington, D.C., Lt. Gen. W. A. Davis (usaf), Vice Cdr. of Air Force Systems Command, discussed AFSC accomplishments in 1964:	. . Important strides were also made in the area of space. We carried out intensive studies on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). Last month the Secretary of Defense announced that proposals are being requested from industry for design studies to assist in developing the cost and technical information needed to proceed with full scale development of the MOL. Titan hi, the Standard Launch Vehicle 5A, completed two highly successful test launches. Systems Command also provided support to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This included the use of the Atlas-Agena combination to launch Ranger 7 on its successful photographic mission to the moon and Mariner 4 on its way to Mars. We also conducted the first launch of the man-rated Titan II. It was very successful. “There are a number of tasks ahead of us in space. One of our most promising present programs is the Titan ill space launching system. The Titan in will be used to launch the 24 satellites for the interim Defense Satellite Communications System. It will also be used to launch the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), which is designed to determine man’s capability to perform military functions in space. The mol will have an important bearing on our future space capabilities.” (afsc Release)	.
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant mission results: “U.S. scientific satellites achieved the following firsts: discovery of the radiation belt, determination of the earth’s irregular geoid, ionospheric topside sounding (with Canada), solar spectroscopy, x-ray and ultraviolet satellite astronomy, polar orbits, and highly eccentric orbits to map the earth’s magnetosphere. Our deep space probes achieved the first successful direct monitoring of the interplanetary environment, the first lunar surface detail, and the first successful flight to Venus. We may soon achieve the first successful flight to Mars, if mariner iv completes its mission. In launch vehicle development, this program has yielded the first rocket stage using the high energy propellant combination of hydrogen and oxygen. It has also yielded the first and only all solid propellant space booster. U.S. meteorological satellites have yielded the following firsts: daylight cloud photography, night cloud observations including surface and cloud top temperatures, world cloud coverage, global heat balance and stratospheric temperature measurements, and direct cloud picture transmission to local users. Our communication satellites have been first in the following achievements: erection of large structures in space and their use as passive reflectors of radio signals; active repeating of radio signals at various altitudes and orbits of interest to system designers; transoceanic and intercontinental relay of teletype, facsimile, voice, data, and television; and achievement of the first true geostationary orbit. “The specific record of 1964 space missions of the Space Science and Applications Program ... is particularly informative because most major program areas achieved at least one highly significant success in 1964. Of the 10 scientific satellite missions attempted, 7 achieved full success and 2 partial success.” Dr. Newell observed that syncom ill communications satellite had been placed in a “virtually perfect circular equatorial orbit,” then maneuvered “to within about 1 mile of its station over the western Pacific where it successfully performed all its planned experiments. . . . The Syncom maneuver was comparable to the feat of Ranger VII in flying to within 6 miles of its target on the Moon. “Having completed our experiments with Syncoms II and III, we are turning them over to the Department of Defense. ... If required, full-time communications could be provided between the United States and southeast Asia by Syncom m. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 136-62)
Federal Communications Commission approved live television coverage from the aircraft carrier Wasp of Gemini vi recovery in the Altantic Ocean. This would be the first live transmission from a recovery area since the U.S. man-in-space program began. Television signal from the Wasp would be sent to early BIRD I which would relay it to the satellite ground station in Andover, Me., for transmission to the three television networks. (NYT, 10/22/65, 3)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB, with Thor-Agena D launch vehicle, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 8/18/65, 19)
alouette i, Canadian scientific satellite launched by NASA on September 29, 1962, had completed its third year in space and was still operating normally. Satellite was using the swept-frequency topside sounding technique to gather information about ionospheric electron density and distribution during the four-to-six hours daily it was activated by command from the ground, (nasa Release 65-312) September 29: Bureau of Naval Weapons announced it had placed two more navigation satellites in orbit. The two 135-lb. spacecraft, launched June 24 and Aug 13, were intended “to augment the now operational all-weather satellite navigation system and to allow for more frequent position fixes by ships at sea.” (ap, Balt. San. 9/29/65)
Sigvard Eklund, general director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, told Tass that Soviet Union had a new type of nuclear reactor that could be used as a power station in space. He said the Romashka (Daisy) reactor provided electricity “on the basis of direct conversion of heat given out by a chain reaction from nuclear fission,” and that such a source could “feed scientific instruments on sputniks or satellites.” (Wash. Post, 12/12/65, A28)
ComSatCorp, rejecting petitions by seven communications carriers to reduce its authority, strongly supported Fee’s decision giving ComSatCorp “sole responsibility for the design, construction, and operation” of three ground stations to support the Corporation’s global satellite system for commercial communications. Answering the charge that station ownership and operation should be assumed by the carriers on a competitive basis, ComSatCorp said the operational date of the global system would be needlessly delayed if ownership of stations were decided on a case-by-case basis. To the complaint that the Fee decision gave ComSatCorp control of “terrestrial facilities” for traffic-processing between interface points and the stations themselves, ComSatCorp replied that it would “look first to the carriers to provide” the facilities. Further, “should Com-SatCorp determine, in any particular situation, to propose construction of its own communications links, the soundness of any such proposal would, of course, be subject to scrutiny by the Commission with full consideration of the views of all interested parties.” Against the allegation that ComSatCorp-constructed terrestrial facilities would introduce costly “backhauls,” ComSatCorp said backhauling was “routine and unavoidable” throughout the communications industry. (ComSatCorp Release)
Paris newspaper Le Monde reported that first launch of a satellite by the Diamant booster might come at the end of November, before the December 5 presidential election, and might include an attempt to put the A—1 satellite—an 80-lb. experimental spacecraft with an orbital life of several weeks—in orbit. In case of an A-l failure, Le Monde added, a second launch might take place before Dec. 5. Mid-January was quoted as the deadline for orbiting the D-l satellite, and d-1b might be launched at an earlier date. (Av. Wk., 9/20/65, 29; M&R, 9/27/65, 9)
NASA disclosed plans for the new Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) that would appear to hover over a given spot on earth to check out communications, weather, scientific and engineering ideas. There would be five in all, with four in synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude. First Ats was scheduled for launch in 1966; two more would be launched in 1967; the last two in 1968. Primary aim of the Ats program would be to find out (1) what happens to satellites in synchronous orbit, and (2) what can be done by a satellite continuously above one area of the earth. Among experiments planned were color television transmission, the first attempt to “talk” among unmanned satellites and aircraft, and photographing cloud formation changes in one place over a long period of time, (nasa Release)
NASA’s TIROS IX successfully injected into a polar orbit by a three-stage Delta rocket launched from Cape Kennedy. The spacecraft was to have gone into a circular orbit about 460 mi. above the earth but the second stage of Delta burned 11 sec. too long and pushed TIROS IX into an elliptical orbit with apogee 1,602 mi., perigee 426 mi., inclination 81.6°, and period 119 min. First NASA attempt to place a satellite in near-polar sun-synchronous orbit from Cape Kennedy involved three dog-leg maneuvers. In a sun-synchronous orbit the precession (westward drift) of the satellite would be about 1° daily, the same rate and direction as the earth moves around the sun. A hat-box shaped structure, tiros ix was an 18-sided polygon, 22in. high, 42-in. in dia., weighing 305 lbs., with one of its flat sides facing earth when initially injected into orbit. Ground signals to the control system tipped the craft up 90° so that it assumed the appearance of a fat wheel rolling on a track around the earth. Two cameras were placed on the perimeter opposite each other so that as the wheel rolled
David H. Hoffman, aviation editor of the New York Herald Tribune and Arthur C. Clarke, British science writer, were cited by the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association for outstanding articles in 1964. Mr. Hoffman received the James J. Strebig memorial award for his series on air safety. Mr. Clarke was honored for an article published in Life magazine on communications satellites. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/23/65)
Plans for the side-by-side orbiting of Canadian Alouette and U.S. Explorer satellites to study the ionosphere were announced. Previously scheduled for Nov. 23 from Western Test Range, the launch had been postponed until at least Nov. 26 because of telemetry problems with the U.S. satellite. Double-launch project was called Isis-X (International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies), (ap, NYT, 11/21/ 65, 11; Wash. Post, 11/21/65, A14)
J. Gordon Vaeth of the U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Weather Satellite Center told the American Meteorological Society that the Weather Bureau was developing a system in which buoys moored in the ocean would broadcast weather data to communications satellites that would rebroadcast it almost instantaneously to almost any point on earth. Mr. Vaeth said the initial optimum number of buoys would be 300, spaced about 600 mi. apart in major ocean regions. They would be moored at known, fixed points and would send data on sea and air temperature, wind direction and velocity, and barometric pressure. Relays from the satellites would be by very-high-frequency radio and would be picked up on the ground by inexpensive receiving stations, aircraft, or ships at sea. . Mr. Vaeth saw the buoy network as an ideal vehicle for international cooperation in meteorology. (Schmeck, NYT, 1/28/65, 50)
The possible implications of President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory were discussed by Raymond Senter in The New Republic: “President Johnson’s decision to allow the Air Force to build and launch five manned orbital laboratories (mol), at a cost of $1.5 billion or more, is likely to increase tensions between the US and the USSR and to spark a similar military space program by the Russians. If so, the Air Force will certainly urge further escalation of its own military space program, raising the specter that space will become a fantastically expensive battlefield of the future. . . . “It is, however, possible that mol will demonstrate the feasibility of a few American and Soviet spacemen in their respective spacecraft operating a continuous space watch. If it does, and if both nations exercise restraint, it could have a stabilizing effect, as have our mutual unmanned reconnaissance satellites. If man can be an efficient ob; server in orbit for extended periods, the time may come when the U.S. should invite the United Nations to maintain a continuous space patrol, with a multi-national crew, to warn of any impending or surprise attack.” (Senter, The New Republic, 9/11/65, 9)
Soviet-French communique was issued after six days of talks between Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and French Foreign Minister Maurice Couve de Murville in Moscow expressing the desire to sign “an appropriate agreement” on space cooperation. This apparently referred to a Soviet invitation that France join in a communications satellite system which would compete with the U.S.-led ComSatCorp, to which France already belonged. (Rosenfeld, Wash. Post, 11/3/65, A9)
usaf launched unidentified satellite payload with Thor fw4s booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965,142)
NASA announced two Radio Astronomy Explorer satellites (rae-a and rae-b) would be designed to investigate low-frequency (long wavelength) emissions from our galaxy, its planets, and the stars. These emissions are mostly intercepted by the ionosphere so that little can be learned about them from ground-based receivers. This would be the first attempt to map the galaxy for low-frequency emissions. The 280-lb. spacecraft would be launched by Thrust-Augmented Delta into circular orbits at altitudes of about 3,700 mi. and would measure the intensity of the signals, their frequency, times of emission and, within limitations, define the regions of space in which they originated. Proposed designs called for the development of two 750-ft., V-shaped antennas that would be mounted opposite each other, forming a giant X. They would be anchored to the basic spacecraft, a cylinder of about 40-by-40 in., capped by two truncated cones. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center would design, integrate, and test the two spacecraft. First launch was not expected before 1967. (nasa Release 65-20)
pegasus i satellite, launched by nasa Feb. 16, was functioning normally and recording information to ground stations on the size and frequency of meteoroid “strikes” or impacts on all three sensor panel groups. Scientists at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center said the number of penetrations of the panels was not greatly different from the expected level. PEGASUS I had a wing-like structure 96 ft. long and 14 ft. in width, offering more than 2,300 square ft. of area instrumented to detect collisions with meteoritic particles. The basic information on the penetrating power and frequency of meteoroids was needed for the design of future spacecraft. In addition, data on temperature, power levels, and the intensity of radiation were being received. The latter were also as predicted, (msfc Release 65—45)
Group headed by Junkers Flugzeug- und Motorenwerke AG, and including Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., had been selected by the European Space Research Organization (esro) to develop the Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite (Heos). Junkers team was selected from eight international groups competing to build Heos, which would gather interplanetary particle data. Heos would be the first satellite developed in West Germany, but it would include the combined technology of several nations. Value of the over-all contract for satellite development was about $6.5 million. (Av. Wk., 12/13/65, 36)
Soviet Union launched cosmos LXIX artificial earth satellite containing scientific equipment for the study of outer space. Orbital parameters: apogee, 332 km. (206 mi.) ; perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.) ; period, 89.7 min.; inclination to the equator, 65°. All instruments were operating normally. (Jzvestia, 6/26/65, 1, atss-t Trans.; Prav-da, 6/26/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Britain’s Blue Streak Rocket, first stage of the European Launcher Development Organization’s (eldo) satellite project, was successfully launched to an altitude of 150 mi. from Woomera, Australia. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 3/23/65)
AEC’s 970-lb. snapshot spacecraft carrying Snap-10A nuclear reactor was successfully launched from Vandenberg AFB by an Atlas-Agena booster into nearly circular polar orbit; 820-mi. (1,320 km. I apogee; 788-mi. (1,269 km.) perigee; 112 min. period; 90.17° inclination. Four hours after injection into orbit, radio command from earth activated the 250-lb, nuclear reactor by moving internal shielding that had kept the emission of electrons from the uranium-235 fuel element from reaching the chain reaction stage. The reactor would provide electric power for a 2,2-lb. ion engine. This was the first attempt to test a reactor-ion system in orbit. Twelve hours after launch, radio signals from the Agena vehicle carrying the reactor indicated it was producing 620-668 watts of electricity—some 20r/< over its designed power. Electricity generated by the reactor would be stored in a 480-lb. bank of batteries and released as the ion engine was put through start-stop tests during a three-month period. The engine would manufacture its own power by electrically vaporizing the 3Yz oz. of the metal cesium in its fuel tank into atomic particles and expelling them at high speed through a nozzle to provide thrust of two-thousandths of a pound. aec said the satellite would stay aloft more than 3,000 yrs.—far beyond the 100 yrs. it would take for the reactor’s radioactive elements to decay to a safe level. The reactor would be shut down after a year, the ion engine after about three months. If successful, the test would signal the first operation in space of a light, compact, propulsion system that would produce power over long periods on small amounts of fuel for (1) surveillance and patrol satellites functioning in orbit for years, and (2) manned spaceships capable of speeds of 100,000 mph on trips to distant planets now beyond the reach of conventionally-fuelled rockets. Also orbited was U.S. Army secor iv geodetic satellite. (Hill, NYT, 4/5/65; ap, Wash. Post, 4/4/65; upi, Chic. Trib., 4/5/65; aec Release H-60; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 139; Atomic Energy Programs, 1965, 151)
Self-organizing flight controller,” featuring device that could cope with unexpected flight conditions of satellites and aircraft, was being developed by afsc Research and Technology Div. Applying “probability state variable devices,” bionics researchers had recreated function of a living nerve cell in a device called “Artron” (artificial neuron). Networks of Artrons in electronic cluster functioned like living neurons: they became self-organizing, achieving problem-solving, and learning new ways to capitalize on their mistakes and find new ways of performing a given task. AFSC stressed that flyable self-organizing flight controller was 5-10 yrs away, (afsc Release 50.65)
ComSatCorp invited design proposals for a multi-purpose satellite having at least 20 times the communications capacity of EARLY bird I. Firms throughout the world were asked to submit proposals. ComSatCorp said more than one study contract could be awarded. Proposed new satellite would make nationwide and international distribution of television feasible, provide a sending and receiving capability between ground stations and ships at sea or aircraft in flight, provide complete interchangeability from one type of service to another within a single satellite, and permit access to these services by any number of earth stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
France was exploring with the U.S. the possibility of establishing an international space launching center in French Guiana, John Finney reported in the New York Times. Center’s location near the equator would make it possible to launch satellites directly into either equatorial or polar orbits valuable for both scientific and communications satellites. Preliminary surveys were under way. (Finney, NYT, 12/20/65, 8)
Transfer of control of syncom ii and SYNCOM ill communications satellites from NASA to DOD was completed. Under direction of the Defense Communications Agency, the three telemetry and command stations for maintaining precise control and positioning of the satellites would be operated by usaf at locations in the Seychelles Islands, Hawaii, and Guam. Army would be responsible for earth communications facilities used with the Syncom satellites except for two shipboard terminals owned and operated by USN. Army’s Strategic Communications Command would continue to man and operate all ground terminals. syncom ii—launched by nasa July 26, 1963—would be maintained at a position between 60° and 80° east longitude; syncom III— launched by NASA Aug. 19, 1964—would be positioned between 170° and 174° east longitude. Both satellites were in orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude. NASA would continue to receive reports on the telemetry from the two satellites from DOD and would continuously evaluate their performance in space, (dod Release 451—65)
OGO II, NASA geophysical observatory satellite launched Oct. 14 at Western Test Range, ceased normal operation about 24 hrs. after its attitude control system gas supply was depleted. Gas depletion was associated with automatic maneuvers to restabilize OGO II because one or more of its horizon scanners tracked temperature gradients (possibly cold clouds) near the earth’s surface rather than the horizon itself. Although NASA considered the mission a failure, OGO II had provided valuable data from 19 of its 20 onboard experiments. (NASA Release 65-368; nasa Proj. Off.)
Formation of a program to achieve a more powerful Atlas booster for future Agena and Centaur missions was announced by NASA. Presently designated slv-3x, the program would seek a 21,000-lb. propellant capacity increase in the standard Atlas booster by making the top of the vehicle cylindrical and would increase the thrust of three Atlas engines by using modified Saturn H-l fuel injector and improved turbines, afsc Space Systems Div. would act as NASA’s procurement agent. NASA Lewis Research Center would supervise; General Dynamics Convair Div. was expected to receive the contract. Use of an uprated Atlas would increase the Surveyor mission capability by 600 lbs. and would permit similar payload increases for Lunar Orbiter, Ogo, Oao, and Applications Technology Satellite (Ats). (NASA Release 65-192)	.
Laser beam was bounced off nasa’s explorer xxii ionosphere satellite and photographed by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists Robert Iliff and Theodore Wittanen. This was first such photo and was important verification of feasibility of use of laser for both satellite tracking and geodetic purposes. When such laser reflections off satellites were photographed against a star background’from two ground stations of known locations and other ground stations in the field, triangulation of the simultaneous photos would locate the position of field stations with an accuracy hitherto not possible by other means. This success with Largos (Laser Activated Reflecting Geodetic Optical Satellite) also set a distance record for photo or photoelectric detection of reflected laser signals; slant range to satellite was 950 mi. (afcrl Release 2-65-2)
U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS XCII unmanned satellite, equipped to continue studies of the infrared and ultraviolet radiation of the earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 329 km. (204 mi.) ; perigee, 199 km. (123 mi.); period, 89.8 min.; inclination, 65.02°. All systems were functioning normally. Soviet Prof. Aleksandr Lebedinskiy told Tass that two spectrophotometers would point vertically part of the time and at the horizon part of the time. One instrument would cover the spectrum from seven to 20 microns and the other from 14 to 38 microns; it would take 20 sec. to obtain one spectrogram. (Tass, 10/16/65)
