nasa would negotiate six-month study contracts totaling $200,000 with General Electric Co. and rca to determine "feasibility of a satellite capable of broadcasting directly to conventional home FM radio and/or short wave radios.” Contracts would be managed by nasa ossa, (nasa Release 66-161)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
Global television relayed by U.S. and U.S.S.R. satellites could be used as a political instrument, threatening the independence of some countries and causing far-reaching changes in world relationships, warned Eurospace, organization of 160 European aerospace industries, in a memorandum released in London. When ordinary home television sets began to receive programs from these satellites "the national independence of developed countries without similar means of expression might be threatened by this persuasive new weapon,” memorandum said. Eurospace warning, released three days after an announcement that U.K. and other European nations had joined U.S.-dominated Intelsat consortium to launch system of world-spanning comsats by 1968, urged Europe to play its own major role in space "before it is too late.” Intelsat’s space communications system would utilize Early Bird-type satellites which Eurospace did not consider "powerful enough to have noteworthy political or economic repercussions.” (Reuters, Wash. Post, 3/15/66, A16)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown testified before the House Armed Services Committee that Ufo reports investigated by usaf under Project Blue Book indicated no threat to our national security: "Based upon 10,147 reported sightings from 1947 through 1965 . . . the Air Force has succeeded in identifying 9,501 of these objects. Virtually all of these sightings were derived from subjective human observations and interpolations. The most common of these were astronomical sightings. . . . Other major sources of reported sightings include . . . satellites, mirages, and spurious radar indications. The remaining 646 . . . are those in which the information available does not provide an adequate basis for analysis, or for which the information suggests a hypothesis but the object or phenomenon explaining it cannot be proved to have been there or taken place at that time.” Dr. Brown assured committee that USAF would contract a group of scientific experts to conduct an "in depth study” of selected Ufo sightings. (Text; AP, Wash. Post, 4/22/66, A4)
According to count by North American Air Defense Command’s (norad) Space Defense Center, NASA’s launch of essa i (Tiros OT-3) meteorological satellite brought total of objects currently in orbit to 1,000. Of 209 earth-orbiting payloads, U.S. had 162; U.S.S.R., 41; France, two; U.K., two; and Canada, two. norad counted nine U.S. deep-space probes and debris of eight others; U.S.S.R. had ten, with debris of two more. Remaining objects were "space debris” or "junk.” Space Defense Center had catalogued 1,982 objects, but nearly half had decayed or had been intentionally deorbited. (norad Release 66-2-2)
NASA’s pageos i (Pageos A Passive Geodetic Earth-Orbiting Satellite) was launched with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster from wtr into near-circular polar orbit: 2,645-mi. (4,258-km.) apogee, 2,603-mi. (4,191-km.) perigee, 182-min. period, and 87° inclination, pageos i was an aluminum-coated Mylar balloon of the echo i type. Balloon was folded and packaged inside spherical canister ejected into space as launch vehicle reached orbital velocity. Canister then separated in half by explosive device, and folded satellite automatically inflated to 100-ft.-dia. sphere, pageos i carried no instruments. By reflecting sunlight, satellite would provide orbiting point source of light to be photographed over projected five-year period to determine size and shape of earth to a degree never before possible; in orbit, satellite should be as bright as star Polaris. Simultaneous observations from 41 portable camera stations around world would be used to construct three-dimensional geodetic reference system. Resulting satellite triangulation network would make it possible to obtain distance between two surface points on earth 3.000	mi. apart to an accuracy of 32 ft. Project was managed by LaRC. (nasa Release 66-150; essa Release 66-32; NASA Proj. Off.; LaRC Researcher, 1/1/66, 1, 6; Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A5)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
"Love as an emotion will play a very important role in the future in the populating of outer space,” Soviet scientist Igor Zabelin wrote in Moskva. "In the future when mankind will fulfill its mission of populating outer space, men and women will be sent in spacecraft somewhere for many years.” Noting that "when a couple lives together for five to seven years, they may get sick of each other and very often there is a divorce,” Zabelin warned that such coolness could cause grave problems in outer space, (tipr, Wash. Post, 12/4/66, M7) During 1966: In 1966, NASA attempted 36 major launches with 34 successes. Of 29 NASA missions, 22 were successes, dod orbited 70 payloads in 43 launches. U.S.S.R. launched 43 payloads and France, one. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by surveyor I and lunar orbiters i and n, the soft-landing on the moon by surveyor I, and the five two-man Gemini space flights, surveyor I transmitted more than 10,000 photographs of the moon; the two lunar orbiters returned a total of 635 lunar photographs. Engineering data from these spacecraft indicated Apollo Lunar Module (Lm) could land and operate safely on the lunar surface. In Project Gemini, NASA conducted five two-man space flights, successfully concluding the project [see Nov. 15] and bringing U.S. manhours in space to 1,993 hrs. 34 min. (compared to 507 hrs. 16 min. for U.S.S.R.). Major ground and flight tests in Project Apollo accelerated preparatory to 1st three-man Apollo/Saturn spaceflight, planned for early 1967. Three Uprated Saturn I’s were launched; Saturn V stages for the 1st flight model passed their final ground test firings. Atlas-Centaur liquid-hydrogen-fueled booster completed its development testing, demonstrating restart capability in space. Applications satellites launched were nimbus ii meteorological satellite, three essa satellites inaugurating essa’s operational meteorological satellite system, and Intelsat ii-a communications satellite for Com-SatCorp. The first Applications Technology Satellite, ATS I, was launched into synchronous orbit. Scientific achievements included orbiting of OGO hi, pageos I, explorers xxxii and xxxiii satellites, and pioneer vii interplanetary spacecraft. More than 300 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched. A total of 20 flights of the X-15 research aircraft were conducted; X-15 No. 2 piloted by Maj. William J.	Knight set a new record speed of 4,233 mph (mach 6.33). nasa-usaf flight research investigating sonic booms got underway in six flights with XB-70 aircraft; research for the U.S. supersonic transport program continued. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle made 14 unpowered flights, and HL-10 lifting body made its first flight. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was static test firing of the 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 3.5 million lbs. of thrust. Two test series of Nerva nuclear reactors were conducted. One, in 110 min. of power operation, demonstrated stability and controllability of the hot-bleed cycle nuclear rocket engine. The other involved first successful full-power operation and a restart operation, ending the program with an accumulation of more than 105 min. of reactor operation at full or near-full power. usaf flight tested its powerful Titan III booster and used it to orbit the first seven Idcsp satellites of an eventual worldwide military comsat system. Of the 43 Soviet payloads, 34 were Cosmos satellites and five, Luna spacecraft. Notable among these were cosmos cx, orbiting two dogs for prolonged period; cosmos cxxii, apparently first Soviet weather satellite; luna ix, achieving first soft-landing on the moon; and luna x, achieving first orbit of the moon. Also orbited were two molniya i com-sats and the 12-ton proton hi unmanned spacecraft used for cosmic-ray research; Yantar I ion-engine payload was flown in suborbital spaceflight test. France orbited her first instrumented scientific satellite, diapason i, the second satellite built and launched by France, (nasa Release 66-319; Major NASA Launches; nasc; Tass; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim) During 1966: International space events were highlighted by the U.N.’s agreement on a space treaty to govern "activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies.” The draft treaty—suggested by President Johnson May 7—was negotiatedby the Legal Subcommittee of theU.N. Committee onthePeace-ful Uses of Outer Space. On December 19 the U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution endorsing the treaty, subject to ratification by five nations including U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. By the end of 1966, 72 countries had cooperated with the U.S. in space research activities. Six countries joined the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat), bringing the total membership to 54. France and U.S.S.R. entered into agreement on cooperative space research, including experiments in astronomy and communications. (U.S. Aeron, & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim)
First test transmissions of long-range radio and television communications between Moscow and the Far East via third molniya i comsat, launched April 25, were successful. Pictures were of good quality. Tass said the satellite would be used to "further refine the system of long-range, two-way television and telephone-telegraph radio communications and pilot operations.” (Tass, 4/27/66)
luna xii was launched by U.S.S.R. on trajectory toward the moon "to study the systems of the artificial satellite and near lunar space,” Tass announced. All systems were functioning normally, and spacecraft was traveling close to planned trajectory. (Tass, 10/23/66)
ComSatCorp asked fcc for authority to build $5-million earth station near Moorefield, W.Va., to supplement ComSatCorp-operated facility at Andover, Me. Station would be in operation by late 1967, handling all types of commercial communications and supporting two Atlantic satellites, early bird i, and the proposed Apollo system. (ComSatCorp Release)
France failed to launch research satellite from Hammaguir Range because of malfunction in ignition system of three-stage Diamant booster. At T—0 in countdown, the Diamant booster remained on launching pad. (Reuters, NYT, 2/13/66, 3)
Australian mobile space tracking station soon would begin seven-week, nonstop operation on Thursday Island off Cape York Peninsula, according to Australian News and Information Bureau announcement. Minister of Supply Denham Henty had said mobile station, part of nasa’s Anna geodetic satellite project for measurement of size and shape of the earth, would transmit data to U.S., via a fixed station near Adelaide, for analysis at Johns Hopkins Univ.’s Applied Physics Laboratory. (NYT, 5/1/66, 70)
aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg believed man could modify weather in this century through a global center operating a vast satellite system, AP reported. With international cooperation, he said, a worldwide forecasting system could become operational in 20 yrs.; later it might be possible to actually control the weather. (AP, NYT, 12/2/66)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from wtr with Atlas-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Main battery system of oao i Orbiting Astronomical Observatory had failed, NASA officials at KSC announced: "Overheating of the OAO. primary battery, a problem which became critical late yesterday, has resulted in complications leading to degradation of the power supply from all three batteries aboard the spacecraft, and telemetry signals no longer are being received. "Efforts to overcome the problem have been unsuccessful and the OAO mission appears to have been lost.” Officials added, however, that before satellite had failed it had demonstrated a key maneuver of the OAO program by successfully locking into a series of stars for precise aiming. OAO I had been launched from etr April 8. (AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 71; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, BIO; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/11/66)
NASA Convair 990 jet aircraft began ARC-managed, preliminary flights in support of NASA’s Nimbus C weather satellite scheduled for launch from wtr May 13. Four gsfc experiments installed in jet would test new spacecraft sensors for weather measurement and collect data at altitudes over 40,000 ft. for comparison with data obtained by Nimbus spacecraft over the same areas, (nasa Release 66-107)
Decisions on the direction of post-Apollo activities in space would require a "two-pronged effort by the part of our economy interested in the evolution of space products,” suggested Boeing Co. vice president George H. Stoner before aiaa Forum on "After Apollo, What Next?” in Washington, D.C.: ". . . industry must assist NASA and the federal government in formulating succeeding national space goals for the research that will produce fruitful progress toward understanding our universe and toward building a store of knowledge about specialized space techniques. . . . Industry and government agencies other than NASA must explore and continue to find ways to compete successfully in the world market place and in the international technological race on the large scale development projects that characterize our modern society. . . .” Stoner offered several specific suggestions for post-Apollo activities: (1) communications satellites that would take advantage of the natural access to anywhere on earth provided by spacecraft; (2) applications of space-based activities to ballistic missile defense; (3) expansion and refinement of equipment for survey of earth affairs from space; (4) dramatic reduction of launch costs; and (5) continuing exploration of space and its technologies by NASA astronauts and scientists to learn more about our universe. (Text)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-203 mission was successfully launched from Complex 37 down etr to obtain flight information on 2nd stage (S-IVB) and instrument unit (Iu), which reflected Saturn V configuration as nearly as possible. Two-stage Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) launch vehicle boosted unmanned payload composed of S-IVB stage, Iu, and nose cone into 117-mi.-altitude circular orbit (88.21-min. period, 31.94° inclination). S-IVB engine burned once in earth’s atmosphere and was shut down. Engine’s capability to restart after coast, as would be necessary during the Apollo mission, was demonstrated. No reignition was planned on this mission. Photos of liquid hydrogen fuel behavior were transmitted to four ground stations by one operable TV camera; attempts to repair malfunctioning second camera before launch had failed. During fourth orbit, while performing pressure differential test of S-IVB stage common bulkhead, internal pressure in the stage built up "well in excess of design values,” and the stage fragmented. Initial evaluation of flight data indicated that all mission objectives were attained. Success of mission—second of three preliminary missions preceding first manned Apollo flight—was critical in meeting lunar exploration timetable. 58,500-lb. S-IVB, heaviest satellite ever orbited by the U.S., was developed by msfc and launched by ksc under direction of NASA Hq. omsf. (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-157; Wilford, NYT, 7/6/66, 1; upi, Wash. Post, 7/7/66)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Scout booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 155)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
B/G J. C. Maxwell, director of faa Sst development, discussed supersonic air travel in Aerospace: . . The national sst program, though small (from a dollar point of view) when compared to the national space program, nevertheless may well have a more immediate impact. The challenge inherent in producing an economically attractive supersonic aircraft has already identified and created demands for improved manufacturing techniques, simple yet reliable electronic and communications equipment, advancements in extrusion and machine tooling techniques, more efficient (and less costly) fuels and lubricants ana many other needs. "The economic aspects are more easily definable. "Concerning the potential market for the SST, varying estimates have been made based on the expected growth of air transportation over the next 20 years and beyond. . . . "Conservatively speaking, we now look for a three-fold increase in long-haul revenue passenger miles flown by the airlines of the world by 1980 and a five-fold increase by 1990. ssts could carry almost half of this traffic. . . . "Obviously, the sst program will have a significant impact on the U.S. balance-of-trade position. Based upon past experience along with current encouraging signs, we expect that the export market for a U.S.-made sst will be about half of the total production rate. Over a 20-year period, this could result in a gold inflow approaching $10 billion.” (Aerospace, 5/66) During May: Space research programs of the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. were opening the way for solving earth’s future overpopulation problem and mankind’s future raw material needs, Soviet Prof. E. Kolman wrote in Mirovaya Ekonomika i Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniye, a publication of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. He referred to estimates that in 400 yrs. the earth would have a population of about 900 billion people, equivalent to about 10,000 people per square mile. In such a situation, this planet would not be able to give all its people even elementary living space, let alone food. Therefore, he said, "escape into cosmic space . . . will become inevitable.” Professor Kolman mentioned the stimulating impact of the space program on progress in science and technology and the likelihood of developments useful in more mundane areas of human activity. He cited the use of meteorological and communications satellites as examples of terrestrially useful byproducts of space research. (NYT, 5/22/66, 85)
usaf launched unidentified satellite by Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. (M&R, 2/7/66, 11; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
ComSatCorp asked fcc for authority to construct a $6,500,000 highcapacity earth station in Peach Tree Valley, Calif., to communicate with, and perform tracking, telemetry, and command duties for, orbiting satellites. ComSatCorp would withdraw Oct. 6 application for a second antenna at Andover, Me., station pending fcc action on California application. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp requested fcc authority to build six 250-lb. advanced synchronous satellites, for global commercial communications system. Launches would begin in 1968. (ComSatCorp Release)
Addressing the aas in Hampton, Va., NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said: ". . . as a science, space astronomy simply cannot thrive in separation from ground-based astronomy. In fact, the phrase 'space astronomy’ is a disquieting one. The discipline is astronomy, the objective of which, broadly speaking, is to advance our understanding of the universe in which we live. The word 'space’ in space astronomy refers simply to the fact that sounding rockets, satellites, and space probes are new tools that the astronomer can use in wrestling with the difficult problems of astronomical observation. In perspective, the astronomical community has before it the task of using these new tools in effective combination with ground-based observing so as to best advance the science of astronomy.” Dr. Nancy G. Roman, NASA Chief of Astronomy Programs, ossa, said: "So far, all space astronomy has been automated. However, as the manned space program matures, plans are being made to incorporate the flexibility of manned operation to the program to an increasing extent. ... We recognize that even simple operations by man could greatly extend both the lifetime and the versatility of an oao, and therefore have been looking into the possibilities of using man in such maintenance activities. Looking further ahead, we also realize that eventually astronomers will want larger telescopes in space than are possible with the current series of oao’s. Therefore we have had a study conducted on the possibility of building, mounting, and using a telescope of approximately 120 inches in space. The problems are far from trivial, but they also do not appear insurmountable, given the resources necessary for the job.” (Texts)
"In the last analysis, the only reason for having a space program is to satisfy the needs of society,” editorialized aiaa President Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff in Astronautics & Aeronautics. "Unless the space program serves people in a useful way, it will be transitory and fade into history as a curiosity. It will not even be enough for the program to serve people by measuring interesting scientific data. It must eventually serve the masses of people of the Earth, if it is to command substantial resources.” Communications, geodetic, navigation, and meteorological satellites, and other satellites designed to study and manage the world’s natural resources could, in Bisplinghoff’s estimation, contribute to meeting man’s needs, but international cooperation would be essential. (A&A, 11/66, 54-55) During November: Viewing space program in "historical perspective,” Solomon W. Golomb wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "The Manhattan Project established that we could run a program for three years and two billion dollars. This was the size limit for maj or technological projects until Apollo escalated the level to ten years and thirty billion dollars. The next major goal will be the establishment of permanent colonies on other planets. This may mean a commitment of 50 to 90 years and a price tag measured in Terabucks.” (A&A, 11/66, 14)
Accelerated programs for launching communications satellites had improved prospects of earning profit in 1967, reported ComSatCorp president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk at annual shareholders’ meeting in Washington, D.C. Predicting a 100-fold increase in ComSatCorp’s revenue potential during five-year development plan, Dr. Charyk said: ". . . we have taken firm steps for the development of even larger and more versatile satellites for deployment on a global basis in 1968. These spacecraft will weigh approximately 240 pounds in orbit and will have a capacity for 1,200 two-way telephone circuits or four television channels.” He also noted ComSatCorp had proposed to essa that it conduct joint feasibility study with IBM to develop satellites to collect, process, and disseminate weather data on a global basis. (Vartan, NYT, 5/11/66, 65; Fouquet, Wash. Post, 5/11/66, E6)
nasa successfully launched explorer xxxii (ae-b) aeronomy satellite from ETR with three-stage Delta booster. The 2nd stage burned 8 sec. longer than planned—failing to cut off and running to propellant depletion—and boosted the satellite into a higher orbit than planned. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,688 mi. (2,717.7 km.), as opposed to planned 750 mi.; perigee, 180 mi. (289.8 km.); period, 116 min.; inclination to equator, 65°. Launch was third time Delta 2nd stage had failed to shut down on time and sent 3rd stage and payload to higher altitudes. Built by Gsfc, and the last of the original satellites outlined by nasa when it was established in 1958, the 495-lb., 35-in.- dia. explorer xxxii was designed to investigate temperatures, composition, densities, and pressure in the upper atmosphere and their diurnal, seasonal, and annual variations on a global basis, nasa later announced that adjustment of onboard programing of spacecraft’s sensors had compensated for higher apogee and useful scientific measurements would be taken that were not planned originally. All eight experiments onboard were functioning "as expected” and spacecraft was spin stabilized at the required 30 rpm. First aeronomy satellite, explorer xvii, was launched April 3, 1S63. Results included first direct measurement of neutral helium; first in situ measurements of concentrations of neutral atmospheric constituents at satellite altitudes as a function of time and solar activity; first data revealing difference by a factor of two (approx.) in value for atmospheric density as determined from onboard sensors and from changes in satellite’s orbit; first detailed description of diurnal and latitudinal behavior of summer ionosphere near altitude of F2 maximum over eastern U.S. at time of solar maximum. Results had indicated more specialized measurements were needed to reveal basic atmospheric processes, explorer xxxii incorporated many improvements aimed at achieving this objective, (nasa Releases 66-96, 66-139; AP, Wash. Post, 5/26/66, E17; WSJ, 5/26/66, 1)	_
U.S.S.R. began series of carrier rocket tests in two areas of the Pacific west and northwest of Midway Island. (AP, NYT, 7/5/(56, 28) April 25; Third molniya i satellite was orbited by U.S.S.R. to assist "development and further improvement of a satellite radio and TV communication system (sovcomsat),” Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 39,500 km. (24,545 mi.); perigee, 499 km. (310 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 50 min.; inclination, 64.5°. Equipment included broadcasting system "as well as instruments of a command-measuring set, an orientation system, orbital correction devices, and power supply” for "further development of onboard systems, satellite equipment, and onground tracking facilities.” (Tass, Pravda, 4/26/66, 6, uss-T Trans.)
Fourth stage of Mu-1, Japan’s newest and most powerful booster, was successfully tested in low-pressure chamber in Noshiro, Univ. of Tokyo scientists reported. Mu was scheduled to orbit Japan’s first satellite by 1968.	(AP, Balt. Sun, 11/8/66)
Dr. Norman F. Ness of gsfc Laboratory for Space Sciences described in Science the new view of earth’s magnetic field afforded by satellite mapping. Among developments in space physics, he pointed out studies in planetary magnetism leading to comparison of earth with a "magnetic comet” and results obtained by mariners ii and iv indicating the unique strength of earth’s magnetic field, compared with those of Venus and Mars. He noted the importance of these data and other satellite measurements for paleomagnetic research. (Science, 3/4/66, 1041-52)
Possible space developments in 1970’s were listed by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight: (1) improved propulsion, including nuclear; (2) merging of aeronautics and astronautics in development of lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry capability; (3) lunar surface exploration and possible establishment of lunar bases; (4) manned earth-orbiting space stations; (5) unmanned probes within solar system and manned expeditions to planets "whenever that becomes promising and practicable”; (6) voice and TV direct communications from satellites to home receivers "throughout large sections of the world,” and advances in operations and research on other applied satellites. (Text)
Two tape recorders in nasa’s nimbus ii meteorological satellite had failed but spacecraft continued to transmit daytime and nighttime cloud-cover photos. Loss of first recorder, used to store data from Medium Resolution Infrared Radiometer (Mrir), would prevent scientists from receiving information on earth’s heat balance, water vapor, and temperatures in the atmosphere. Failure of second recorder, used in measuring satellite’s engineering performance, would force nimbus ii to transmit information each time it passed a ground station instead of storing it for more convenient playback. Since its launch by nasa May 15, nimbus ii had met all mission objectives and transmitted more than 200,000 weather photos on a global scale, (nasa Release 66-203)
ucla announced plans to build its own satellite to study earth’s magnetic field and interplanetary space. Feasibility studies financed by 155,000 NASA grant were being conducted by Hughes Aircraft Co. and Philco Corp. (dpi, NYT, 10/15/66, 33)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 153)
Home-built photo-receiver set of rca electronics engineer Wendell Anderson in Morristown, N.J., received photos of North Atlantic storm taken by essa i meteorological satellite—first known usable pictures ever received from an orbiting satellite on home-made set. Equipment, which included 25-yr.-old ham radio, 20 ft. of copper tubing, television antenna, mast, sheet of chicken wire, wooden laundry hangers, sawed-off rolling pin, and $25 microscope, cost $600—$31,000 less than an essa ground station. Anderson used antenna to pick up signals on ham radio, taped signals on recorder, reducing them to series of electrical impulses that could be changed into light signals, then beamed light through reverse end of a microscope onto spinning sheet of film to record photos. (O’Toole, NYT, 3/3/66, 31)
U.S.S.R. would continue intensive exploration of space in 1966-70 period, Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh reported to general meeting of Academy. He listed these general programs: manned space flights; exploration of physical conditions on moon and nearest planets; and development of use of satellites and rockets for long-distance communications systems. (Tass, 6/28/66)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Atlas-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Alex P. Aven, owner of an Oklahoma City, Okla., petroleum consulting firm, was sworn in by NASA Administrator James E. Webb as consultant to the Administrator on management. (NASA Release 66-112) May 10-13: NASA successfully launched 18 Areas and Hasp meteorological sounding rockets to 200,000-ft. altitudes at intervals ranging from four minutes to six hours to investigate daily cycle of wind and temperature variations in upper atmosphere, compare results of various rocket and balloon measuring systems, and study effects of radiation from the sun on meteorological instruments. Instrumented payloads descending by parachute transmitted atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure data, and ten specially instrumented high-altitude weather balloons, interspersed among rocket firings, transmitted information as they rose to 130,000 ft. Radar tracked both balloon and rocket payloads to determine speed and direction of high-altitude winds. Launches were managed by nasa Langley Research Center and sponsored by NASA, USA, usn, usaf, and essa. (nasa Release 66-118; Wallops Release 66-25) National Academy of Sciences delegate Dr. Richard W. Porter, summarizing activities of 1965 U.S. space program, said a manned lunar landing by 1970 would be a "difficult goal” but U.S. had made "substantial progress.” Dr. Porter presented an analysis of data transmitted by NASA mariner iv Mars probe which appeared to support theory that earth sometimes has comet-like tail stretching past orbit of Mars. On Feb. 5, 1965, a peculiarly timed solar eruption sent series of intense proton clouds into space, five of which were detected within 48 hrs. by mariner iv and two other U.S. satellites in near-earth orbit. Second and third clouds were reported by mariner iv three to five hours prior to their detection near earth, possibly because solar eruption had blown earth’s tail to enormous length, forcing two clouds to detour through tail in order to penetrate earth’s magnetic field. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli A. Blagonravov summarized 1965 U.S.S.R. space program, and said luna x, which entered lunar orbit April 3, had recorded radiation pattern from lunar surface similar to that from basaltic part of earth’s crust. Apparently lunar surface exhibited no differentiation equivalent to granite on earth, indicating that earth and moon were created separately, luna x had found level of moon’s magnetic field barely above that of interplanetary space; small increase was attributed to moon’s passing through earth’s magnetic tail at time of measurement. Implication was that moon is cold throughout, since liquid metal core would produce large magnetic field. Report suggested that new minerals would be found on the moon because of unusual chemical reactions caused by its extreme temperature range, the impacts of micrometeorites, and rains of high-energy radiation. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Soviet delegate A. G. Prishchep, in a joint paper with colleague V. I. Vashkov, revealed that U.S.S.R. planetary probes were assembled in clean rooms and sterilized with two-fold process involving moist heat to prevent dryness and a gas mixture, harmless to the skin, which might have important surgical applications. Gas mixture contained 50% ethylene oxide—extremely poisonous substance which is dangerously explosive when combined with oxygen—diluted with 40% methyl bromide for safety reasons. General Electric scientists H. G. Lorsch and M. G. Koesterer reported that current sterilization cycles varied from treatment at 320° for three hours to baking at 200°F for 14 days. They argued that no more than 10 billion microbes should exist within a spacecraft prior to beginning of sterilization if reasonable chance of killing virtually all of them was to be assured. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/12/66, 79; Beller, M&R, 5/16/66, 17-18) Drs. Herbert Friedman and R. W. Kreplin, Naval Research Laboratory, reported that solar radiation level would probably exceed highest ever recorded in 100 yrs. during 1969-1970—time of first projected manned lunar landing. Basing their prediction on measurements of solar x-ray emissions taken by explorer xxx (iqsy Solar Explorer) satellite, Friedman and Kreplin explained that x-rays, which could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, warned of approaching sunspots before they could be seen. Solar activities in the form of sunspots and gaseous flares occurred in 11-12 yr. cycles, but there was also a gross cycle which reaches its greatest intensity every 80 to 100 yrs. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/13/66, 19; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Dr. Bessel Kok, Research Institute for Advanced Studies, described a small instrument which could determine the existence of life when landing on another planet. Designed on the assumption that even the simplest forms of life use water and such common chemical compounds as phosphates and nitrates, device would trace the transfer of nonradioactive isotope—Oxygen 18—from these chemicals to water. (Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Reports on little-publicized efforts were presented to the meeting: (1) Italy’s platform for launching San Marco earth satellite at sea was in African port of Mombasa and would be towed shortly to site where U.S. Scout booster would launch satellite into equatorial orbit; (2) Pakistan was conducting monthly firings of rockets that injected copper chaff into stratosphere to disclose winds in that region over subtropics; (3) U.S.S.R. had fired 150 meteorological rockets—almost half from shipboard—and U.S. was firing about 120 monthly; (4) Romania had used orbital data from Washington and Cambridge, Mass., to photograph echo I and echo ii comsats in coordination with Soviet expeditionary stations in Egypt and Mali; (5) Sweden, Finland, Russia, and East Europeans had joined in observing orbital flight changes of echo i and echo II attributable to density variations in wisps of air at satellite altitude; and (6) East German scientists reported their conclusions on upper air structure derived from real-time transmissions from NASA explorer xxh satellite. It was estimated that 60 stations in various parts of the world were monitoring satellites that sent out "blind” data. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/66, 10E; Sullivan, NYT, 5/16/66, 88) Dr. A. I. Lebedensky, Soviet Academy of Sciences, reported that Luna ix photos revealed lunar surface was steadily eroding, at least in some places. He suggested that erosion could be caused by solar winds or impact of micrometeorites. Lebedensky pointed out two peculiar features on luna ix’s photos which supported his theory. First was series of streaks, resembling mineral veins in earth’s bedrock, on floor of crater where luna ix had landed. It had previously been assumed that moon’s surface was buried deep in debris churned up by meteorite impacts. Second was presence of rock-like objects on small pedestals similar to those on earth where soft but rock-strewn surface had been eroded. Stones, which ranged in size from one foot to less than one inch across and whose pedestals appeared as high as they were wide, "were the most unexpected and important result of the flight,” Lebedensky said. "Our conclusion is that the stone is harder than the ground around it and screens the ground underneath from the erosion effects of solar winds and micrometeorites.” Lebedensky admitted the possibility that erosion was peculiar to the crater or a particular region of the moon, but saw no obvious reason why this should be true. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/17/66, 28; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/17/66, A17) Radio occultation measurements from mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, Mars flyby indicated that regions on the surface of Mars might vary in height by three miles (five kilometers), jpl scientist Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore reported, (jpl Release) Venus was rotating clockwise only once every 243 days, but during that period it seemed to be synchronized with earth, Dr. Richard Goldstein, chief of jpl Communications Systems Research, told the meeting. Dr. Goldstein also reported that radar probes of winter 1965 when Venus was nearest earth indicated prominences with the ability to depolarize microwaves. "They may well be mountain ranges,” Dr. Goldstein said, "although large fields of boulders would also depolarize microwaves. On earth, of course, such areas usually indicate the presence of nearby mountains.” (jpl Release) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli Blagonravov, addressing the annual cospar press conference, said France and U.S.S.R. had been negotiating —within the framework of cospar—on cooperation in space research which might extend to incorporation of French instruments in Soviet satellites "if this should be asked for.” Asked if he could imagine similar close cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Blagonravov said there was no need for it; if the situation arose, it would be better for them to cooperate in processing data obtained from their own satellites. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/20/66, A5)	.
Summarizing two years of negotiations between France and U.S.S.R. on cooperative satellite communications program in Astronautics & Aeronautics, Andrew G. Haley said questions of (1) access of French scientists and technicians to Soviet launch sites, and (2) size of orbit for French satellite to be launched with Soviet vehicle were still unsettled. (Haley, A&A, 8/66, 15-6)
nasa explorer xxix (Geos-A) geodetic satellite, orbited Nov. 6, 1965, had developed problems which affected planned investigations: accurate measurement of spacecraft’s attitude had become difficult; had precise attitude information could not be included in Mutual Visibility Program for observing stations. Failure of one of four flashing lights had reduced utility of some observing cameras, and interference had occurred between secor transponder and Doppler beacons, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Government of Pakistan announced plans to use comsats to relay telephone communications between East and West Pakistan. Two satellite tracking stations would be built—one in each province—and would be operative by 1968. (Reuters, NYT, 8/18/66, 38)
ComSatCorp’s third annual report revealed that early eird i, operating since June 28, 1965, as the first commercial communications satellite, had earned $2,138,577 as of Dec. 31,1965. Report omitted any corporate earnings statement, explaining that "with Comsat’s singular structure— and its newness—we are not yet able to present the corporate financial statements in a conventional mode.” With fcc approval, "the Corporation has adopted the accounting practice of deferring all revenues and expenditures until the commencement of full operations.” Financial statement showed, however, that $9,677,000 had been spent for "the construction of the Early Bird satellites, the cost of the launch in April [6,] 1965 and expenditures for satellite system equipment.” By the end of 1965, 75 of early bird i’s 240 two-way voice channels had been leased—64 by at&t, nine by Candian Overseas Telecommunication Corp., and one each by itt and rca. Corporation also earned $8,083,745 in income from temporary investments, compared with $4,312,714 in 1964. Report noted that membership of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) had grown from 20 to 48 countries during 1965, and cited plans to launch two improved satellites in late summer of 1966 "to provide communications support” for nasa’s Apollo program. (Text) During week of April 1: Pulsed laser beam communications system which could penetrate cloud of plasma or charged gases surrounding spacecraft during reentry and avoid communications blackout was patented by General Electric Co. engineers Dr. Kiyo Timiyasu and James R. Whitten. Principal use of invention would he in line-of-sight communications between earth stations and spacecraft, but two land stations not in line of sight also could exchange information by using cloud reflections. (Jones, NYT, 4/2/66, 32)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 157)
Fee’s Oct. 1 deadline for filing comments on whether or not private entities should be allowed to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use was extended to Nov. 3. Initially fcc had requested that comments and proposals be submitted by Aug. 1. Complexity of proposals submitted by ComSatCorp and the Ford Foundation on that date and resulting questions and discussion had necessitated two extensions of the deadline. (Adams, NYT, 9/9/66, 77)
Potential of manned space flight in Apollo Applications program was examined by Peter Chew in National Observer. He suggested "... earth-orbiting astronauts .. . may be able to locate and track icebergs . . . spot fish-feeding grounds . . . support oceanography . . . produce agricultural, mineral, and fresh water surveys.” Manned satellites could provide "worldwide television coverage” and serve as "relay points for deep-space communications.” (Nat,l. Obs., 1/11/66; CR, 2/8/66, A609-10)
U.S.S.R. launched luna x unmanned spacecraft toward the moon "to test a system insuring the setting up of an artificial moon satellite with the aim of exploring near-lunar outer space and also testing systems installed aboard for placing the station in a selenocentric or near lunar orbit,” Tass announced. Spacecraft was following a trajectory close to the calculated one and onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 4/1/66, 1, uss-t Trans.; Tass, 3/31/66; Loory, Wash. Post, 4/1/66, A3)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Thor-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Japan’s first attempt to orbit satellite failed when Lambda 4S-1 rocket went off course after ignition of 4th stage. The 8.48-ton, 55-ft. booster was launched from Uchinoura Range, Kyushu Island, and carried 57.2-lb. instrument package designed to radio back scientific information on the ionosphere. Scientists from the Univ. of Tokyo had scheduled second launch attempt—using 39-ton Mu rocket—for December. (NYT, 9/27/66, 16; Tech. Wk., 10/3/66, 13)
New York Times characterized 1966: "In all future histories of lunar exploration the year 1966 will hold an honored and important place. In effect, it was the year of the moon, the year in which a dazzling array of Soviet and American instrumented capsules photographed, measured and probed the moon to an extent never before known. As a result of the successful flights of the Soviet Luna vehicles and of the American Surveyor and Lunar Orbiters, it is probable that more detailed information about earth’s natural satellite was gained in 1966 than in all the rest of human history. . . .” (NYT, 12/31/66, 18C)
U.S.S.R. transmitted to U.S. for first time information obtained from its only known meteorological satellite, cosmos cxxii, launched June 25. Previously, U.S.S.R. had relayed only conventional observations from land stations, ships, and balloons. Direct telecommunications channel between Moscow and Washington, D.C., had been established after March 1963 signing of bilateral agreement for exchange of meteorological satellite data under June 1962 space cooperation accord. (Bird, NYT, 8/20/66, 1; AP, Wash. Post, 8/21/66, A6)
ComSatCorp would conduct communications test in which U.S. and European computers would "talk with each other” for a month in fall 1966 via early bird i comsat, reported New York Times. Test could lead to daily exchange by satellite of business, scientific, and technical information, and to establishment of U.N. "voice of peace” agency—a world bank of medical, technical, and educational knowledge—proposed at November 1965 White House conference on international cooperation. (Clark, NYT, 7/10/66, 43)
Third year in space began for two experimental Vela nuclear detection satellites launched by dod Oct. 16, 1963, into near-circular orbit at 52,174-mi. (84,000-km.) altitude. Satellites had demonstrated successful R&D program and had provided effective capability to detect nuclear explosions in space, dod had overall responsibility for Vela program; arpa had overall direction with support of aec. (afsc Release
fcc adopted a Notice of Inquiry inviting comments by interested parties to be submitted by Aug. 1, 1966, on five specific questions concerning legality, compatibility with the Communications Satellite Act of 1962, and economic and technical feasibility of proposed fcc authorization of nongovernmental communications satellite facilities. (Text)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xii, launched into lunar orbit Oct. 22, had completed 220 orbits, taken "unique photographs,” and was continuing its mission, Tass reported. Satellite had transmitted data on lunar x-ray and gamma radiation and micrometeoroids. (Tass, 11/26/66)
Japan scheduled launch of her first earth satellite for March 26 with four-stage, 8.6-ton Lambda booster. Planned orbit would have 723-km. (480-mi.) apogee and 290-km. (180-mi.) perigee. If successful, Japan would become fourth nation to orbit spacecraft. (NYT, 2/27/66, 33; upi, Wash. Post, 2/27/66)
Wilhelm Forster Observatory, West Berlin, reported U.S.S.R. had launched a satellite at 7:20 a.m. edt from space center in Baikonur. Spokesman said it had not been determined whether spacecraft was manned, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said report appeared to be in error and had apparently stemmed from misinterpretation of Soviet transmissions associated with tracking of previously launched Cosmos spacecraft. He added that if the U.S.S.R. did attempt launching, nothing got into orbit. U.S.S.R. made no comment. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/20/66)
U.N. World Meteorological Organization—in report on plan for World Weather Watch to be initiated between 1968 ana 1970—warned it would be "foolhardy” for man to attempt to modify weather on large scale with current limited knowledge of atmospheric forces. Plan called for use of satellites; a relatively dense network of land and ocean weather stations, manned and unmanned; drifting sea buoys; balloons; and other instruments to probe the world’s atmosphere. High-speed telecommunications systems would centralize findings for analysis and relay latest detailed information to meteorologists everywhere. This would enable them to forecast the weather "both with improved accuracy and for a longer time ahead.” (NYT, 10/22/66,,12)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Titan III-B-Agena booster from wtr. (U.S, Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 159)
Thailand and Malaysia joined Intelsat-—International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium headed by ComSatCorp—bringing total number of member nations to 50. ComSatCorp said it "warmly welcomes this aspect of the development of the consortium and the intention of other countries to increase Intelsat membership even further in the near future.” Yugoslavia and Romania had also shown interest in Intelsat and were considering joining. (ComSatCorp Release; Clark, NYT, 5/3/66, 9)
Edgar G. Bush, senior technician at gsfc since 1959 and designer of first micro-electronic circuitry used for flight computers, died of a heart ailment. Bush had designed computers for vanguard hi, Explorer satellites, and Lunar Orbiters. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/66, B5)
usaf launched three unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 148)
Application of space age technology to traffic control was near, Chairman of the Board of the Ford Motor Co. Henry Ford II told the Young Men’s Business Club of Greater New Orleans meeting in New York. He said plans would soon be presented to the Government for a nationwide traffic control system based on earth survey satellites for aerial reconnaissance. They would be linked by computers to urban traffic control centers and "to the stoplight in the corner and even the car radio. . . . As fantastic as it may seem, we believe such a system will be technically feasible and economically sound.” Technical capacity for development of system had been gained from experience of the Philco Corp., a Ford subsidiary, in designing and operating msc’s Flight Control Center. Philco’s communication system was being used on Gemini 'missions. (NYT, 7/22/66, 27)
170 usable terrain photographs from Gemini v mission flown by Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., Aug. 21-29, 1965, included pictures of South Africa which would provide valuable information about continental drift, gsfc geologist Dr. Paul D. Lowman said in interim report at NASA Hq. on 13 scientific and technological experiments carried aboard gemini v. Color photos of South Africa’s Namib Desert revealed 7-million to 8-million-year-old rock formations. Presence of similar formations along east coast of South America could indicate two continents had once been closer together, Lowman explained. Photos also pinpointed "a major diamond area” between rock formations and the sand dunes. Kenneth Nagler, U.S. Weather Bureau, told the meeting that gemini V pictures, some in color, had provided meteorologists with more detail of cloud systems than had orbiting Tiros satellites. (Text)
lunar orbiter ii executed plane change—possibly the first ever accomplished by satellite in lunar orbit—to obtain information about moon’s gravity field and gain experience in flight operations at high inclinations, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-316)
ComSatCorp asked fcc for authority to build six advanced synchronous satellites—four to be launched and two as backups for development of global commercial communications system. Proposed satellites would weigh 250 lbs., and have 1,200 voice-quality telephone channels and five-year operational life compared with 85-lb. early bird i’s 240 voice-lity channels and 18-mo. planned life. (ComSatCorp Release;
Press briefing was held at LaRC on results of nasa’s lunar orbiter i mission, launched Aug. 10 from etr to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. The more than 200 photos transmitted by the spacecraft revealed a rugged lunar landscape covered with thousands of craters. Ridges and hills were more gently sloped near moon’s center and became progressively smoother in the west. Presence of large rocks, or "blocks,” proved that surface was firm enough to support manned spacecraft. Of the nine sites photographed, the Ocean of Storms where surveyor i was resting appeared safest for manned landing. Classified as a dark mare— flat, waterless plain with relatively few craters—it had 20 per cent fewer craters than any of the other sites. U.S. Geological Survey scientists Dr. Harold Masursky and Dr. Lawrence Rowan suggested that the photos showed evidence of volcanic activity. Citing a small cone-shaped hill on line of a geologic rift near surveyor i ana a large crater on the back of the moon, apparently filled with congealed lava, Dr. Masursky said: "The moon is not a cold, dead, lifeless planet. It looks close to being as dynamic as the earth.” Dr. Rowan noted that major faults on the lunar surface seemed to run in two general directions—northeast-southwest and southeast-northwest —and concluded that much of the volcanic activity probably occurred along these lines. LaRC scientist William Michael said nonphotographic data on the satellite’s orbit indicated moon might turn flat side toward earth, not bulgy side as generally believed. He said displacement of moon’s center of mass toward earth could explain both a flat face and moon’s slight wobble, which had been accounted for previously by the "bulge” theory. Micrometeoroid detection experiment had not recorded any "hits” during satellite’s eight weeks in lunar orbit in contrast to earth-orbiting satellites which often registered a hit every two weeks. Project Manager Clifford H. Nelson announced that Lunar Orbiter B—second of five satellites in series—would be launched between Nov. 6 and 11 to photograph area slightly north of that scanned by lunar orbiter i. (Clark, NYT, 10/7/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/66, A3; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 10/7/66, Al)
Communist sources speculated that U.S.S.R. would launch "a large satellite carrying several men . . . just before the Nov. 7 anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution,” and another, the world’s largest satellite and carrying eight men, by the end of 1966, AP reported. (AP, NYT, 10/16/66, 28)
Unidentified usaf satellite was launched from Vandenberg Afb by a Scout booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
ddr&e Deputy Director (Strategic & Space Systems) Daniel J. Fink, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., said: "We in the Department of Defense have always looked upon space less as a matter of adventure and more as a matter of necessity; we explore its potential not because it is 'there’ but because we have needs that are 'here.’ It is not that wre have identified fundamentally new missions since the early days of our space effort. We have, however, begun to recognize new applications for space-based systems, particularly in the tactical field. The opportunities are tremendous—and sometimes so are the problems. We are no longer as enamored with the 'how’ of developing a satellite system. We now take a hard look at the 'why’ of choosing one approach to solving a military need over another—and this most assuredly includes competing earth-based systems as well. We have come to recognize that our launch vehicle capability coupled with better sensors permits us to do more missions from synchronous orbit. We also are beginning to sense that there is a high potential for combining operational functions in a multiple-purpose satellite where common sensor packages and orbital parameters exist.” (dod Release 341-66)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966,147)
ComSatCorp petitioned fcc to deny itt’s request to construct a fourth satellite earth station in Puerto Rico. ComSatCorp said "public interest would best be served” if it, rather than itt, owned the station, and revealed plans to seek permission to construct and begin operating the facility by mid-1968. (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/1/66, Ell; NYT, 3/12/66, 22)
usns Kingsport, first ocean link in U.S. research in satellite communications, was retired from nasa’s networks and returned to dod. In July 1963 Kingsport had participated in world’s first demonstration of communications by satellite in synchronous orbit when a message was sent in 45,000-mi. loop from Kingsport anchored in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, to syncom ii comsat and back. Several days later, she was part of first direct exchange of radio message via satellite, linking Lakehurst, N.J., terminal station with land circuits at Lagos. On Aug. 4, Kingsport and Lakehurst transmitted and received via syncom ii first satellite exchange of news copy and photo facsimile. Several days later, caught in a squall 40 mi. offshore, she became first terminal station to establish satellite communications from the open sea. Two months later, she participated in first trans-ocean press conference by satellite: stationed at Rota, Spain, she connected syncom ii communications between United Nations in New York City and NASA Hq. in Washington, D.C., with the International Telecommunications Union Conference in Geneva. Kingsport first demonstrated the practicality of communications by satellite during manned space missions March 16, 1966, by relaying voice reports from Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott via syncom ii to Hawaii ground station, (nasa Release 66-79)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Burner II booster. (Tech. Wk., 9/26/66, 15; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
fcc ruled that users of satellite communications must operate through common carriers instead of dealing directly with ComSatCorp to prevent "serious adverse effects upon the well-being of the commercial telecommunications industry and the general public it serves.” Ruling, which resolved controversy between ComSatCorp and common carriers, would protect carriers from reduced traffic volume resulting from direct user-ComSatCorp relations, (fcc; WSJ, 6/24/66, 6)
Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of nasa’s Inventions and Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to become a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College, (nasa Ann.) Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-gradient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2) Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could propel a 7,000-lb. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3) Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1) Richard Johnston, Chief of msc Crew Systems Div., said that to work effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more streamlined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device such as "stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investigation of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, overheated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks. (Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s Gemini program and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoietic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Results of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclusive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being examined as possible causes. (Tech. Wk, 10/17/66, 16) Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and G. D. Glod reported "significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R. used drugs in manned spaceflight both for "therapeutic purposes or to increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.” Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants; cardiovascular preparations; and antiradiation medications. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13) Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most important problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had developed a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver into working position, which included raising one hand over the head and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body reaction and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Av. Wk., 10/17/66, 30-31) Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of gemini v-Titan II booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a "near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage” to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IVB). (Av. Wk, 10/24/66, 32) H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13-14) Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966, in cosmos cx. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they emerged from capsule, but fihn sequence taken four months later showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neurological regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13) Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of iaf. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
European conference on satellite communication, meeting at The Hague, Netherlands, requested ESRO to study feasibility and desirability of European comsat. (NYT, 11/25/66, 4)
Representatives of Intelsat (International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium) toured NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and received briefing on msfc programs and research projects, (msfc Release 66-77)
Comment on lunar orbiter i mission: New York Times: "Unfortunately, the decision made a half decade ago was to give priority to the Apollo program for landing a man on the moon . . . Lunar Orbiter’s achievements remind us that there is no pressing necessity for putting manned lunar flight first. If President Johnson should decide to slow down the Apollo project by cutting its budget appreciably, scientific investigation of the moon with instrument satellites could continue and be richly productive. "In a few years pictures of the earth’s orb as seen from distant space will become commonplace. Tomorrow’s schoolchildren will find it hard to believe there was a time when no human eyes had seen the full crescent arc of earth’s globe from the perspective of the moon or beyond.” Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: "Looking rather like a crumbly piece of Roquefort, there it was—Earth, as seen from the Moon by a camera aboard Lunar Orbiter 1. The picture was a black-and-white, but no matter. Since the Moon has no appreciable atmosphere, Earth will never take on the bright orange and yellow hues of a harvest moon. And since there are no forests, no lakes, no oceans, no snowcovered fields on the Moon, Earth will never be framed, for lunar lovers, in the sylvan or aquatic settings that lend so much enchantment and mystery to earthly views of the Moon.” Sam Shenton, leader and secretary of the International Flat Earth Society, claimed that the circular body shown in lunar orbiter i’s photos Aug. 25 was not really earth, but "one of the non-luminous bodies between us and the moon.” He admitted that photos of the earth had been "a great shock” to the 24-member society. (NYT, 8/19/66, 29; 8/27/66; Phil. Eve. Bull., 8/27/66; Reuters, Wash. Post, 8/29/66, A3) During August-September: usaf Chief of Staff Gen. J. P. McConnell discussed military future of manned aircraft in NATO’s Fifteen Nations. Aeronautical technology in fields of propulsion and composite materials— and less radical improvements in performance, navigation aids, fire control systems, and conventional ordnance—indicated that "by 1975 we will have increased by major increments the speed, range, altitude, payload and over-all versatility of manned aircraft for military roles.” Noting that X-15 could fly faster and higher than V-2 ballistic missile, General McConnell said he believed "that well in advance of the estimates that most people would make, Air Force pilots will be flying genuine aerospace craft that can take off under their own power, operate in space and return to a controlled landing.” (NATO’s Fifteen Nations, 8-9/66) During Summer: First four sessions of Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space were summarized in an article by NASA Deputy General Counsel Paul G. Dembling and Daniel M. Arons, Attorney-Adviser, nasa Office of General Counsel, in Journal of Air Law and Commerce. (J/Air Law and Commerce, Summer/66, 329-86)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Scout booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
nasa would negotiate $800,000 contract with rca for design sludy of imp oved Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) for national operational weather satellite program. Proposed 500-lb., cylindrical satellite would be 5 ft. high and 4li ft. in diameter—compared with current 300-lb. satellites 2 ft. high, 3H ft. in diameter—and would incorporate camera system now carried in two operational spacecraft. Stabilized by flywheel and magnetic attitude control system, satellite would always point to earth, and its infrared radiometers would scan entire world’s cloud cover at night, (nasa Release 66-115)
ComSatCorp filed with fcc a $31,985,000 fixed-price contract with trw Systems, Inc., for research, development, and production of six advanced synchronous satellites for global commercial satellite service. Cylindrical, 240-lb. satellites would have 1,200 two-way voice channels and five-year operational life and would handle all types of communications. (ComSatCorp Release)
White House announced agreement for establishment of an esro station near Fairbanks, Alaska, to receive telemetry from and send commands to esro scientific satellites. This would be first foreign ground station on U.S. soil. (Pres. Doc., 12/5/66, 1740)
usaf successfully launched the OV1-IV and OV1-V scientific satellites into circular orbits from Vandenberg afb with Atlas-Agena D booster. OV1-IV satellite bore photosynthetic organisms to determine effects of zero-g and four types of thermal control coating samples to test durability and resistance to heat and radiation. Each of two thermally insulated sample holders on satellite carried two control surfaces and four circular samples, slightly less than an inch in diameter. Protected during launch, coatings would be exposed to space environment and thermistor measurements of erosion, corrosion, and changes in color telemetered during anticipated year in orbit. OV1-V measured optical radiation of earth, background, and space, (afsc, RTD Release 37.66; M&R, 4/4/66, 8; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
Dr. Clifford A. Spohn (Col., usaf, Ret.) had been appointed director of operations at essa’s National Satellite Center, succeeding Arthur W. Johnson, who had been appointed deputy director of the facility, (essa Release 66-8)
nasa selected Westinghouse Electric Corp. for an $8-million contract to install semiautomatic systems in tracking stations to speed compilation of satellite data. The data acquisition system would be used in nasa’s Applications Technology Satellite (Ats) program; it would make possible reduction of data within 90 days of satellite launch. Systems would be installed at Rosman, N.C., Goldstone facility, and Toowoomba, Australia, tracking stations. (WSJ, 12/1/66, 8)
British Research Council had offered to pay one half the $ 11.2-million cost of constructing a 150-in. telescope in Australia, largest in Southern Hemisphere. Similar offer from Univ. of California was pending before Australian Government. (NYT, 10/26/66, 1) nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that "through the creative use of the capabilities that we are building up, space may ... be used as one of many approaches to alleviate” problems of "famine, disease, over-population, and the need for more and better education” facing developing nations. Dreams of eventual space travel were "pure fantasy,” according to Cal Tech astronautics professor Dr. Jesse L. Greenstein. He urged, however, that a greater portion of national expenditures be devoted to achieving interstellar communications—a task that "may ultimately become the greatest scientific adventure.” Dr. Robert P. Sharp, professor of geology at Cal Tech, noted that although "earth scientists” were playing important role in national space program, it was also important that they "look downward into our own planet. . . . Our understanding of these distant bodies will depend to a good degree upon how well we understand our own plain earth.” Likelihood that revolutionary improvement in communication on earth would transform society was suggested by John R. Pierce, research director of Bell Telephone Labs. Communications Sciences Div. Satellites would greatly expand potential of backward countries and would help build a sense of national identity in underdeveloped areas. "Technology is moving faster than our ability to assimilate it,” scientist and industrialist Dr. Simon Ramo postulated. Dr. Ramo urged development of new class of men called "socio-technologists” who could "effectively link scientific developments with social betterment.” Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, professor of theoretical physics at Cal Tech, said society must give new direction to technology, diverting it from applications that yield higher productive efficiency into areas that yielded greater human satisfaction. A symbol of this sort of change would occur when man no longer wanted to channel resources into "building bigger, noisier aircraft” or when society decided to divert a new highway around a virgin forest rather than build through it. (Texts; Bart, NYT, 10/26/66, 23; Duscha, Wash. Post, 10/26/66, A9; NYT, 10/30/66, 52)
Revolution in military communications "to which we are now fully committed and which we are actively pursuing,” was discussed by William Beecher in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "At this writing, the Pentagon plans a May launch of the first eight of a series of 14 to 22 repeater satellites in its Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (Idcsp). The first eight, riding piggyback on a Titan III-C test booster, will be deposited into random orbits about 21,000 mi. up. Within 60 days thereafter, another six repeater satellites together with two gravity-gradient experimental satellites will be similarly orbited. If all 14 of the communications satellites function perfectly, sufficient coverage will be provided to obviate the need for a third shot of eight, Pentagon experts say. "Although meant primarily to perfect the technology of space communications, after a relatively short test-only period, this Idcsp would be made available for high-priority worldwide military traffic—for instance, important communications between Washington and Saigon. . . . "Then, in 1969 or 1970, the Defense Department hopes to put up a fully operational system, called the Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project (Adcsp). As John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, described it in recent Congressional testimony, 'This system will take advantage of advances in both booster and communications technology which will permit the establishment of an economical, highly reliable system capable of providing many secure, jam-resistant, long-range communications circuits to support vital security operations wherever they occur.’ ” (Beecher, A&A, 5/66, 10)
nasa’s pioneer vii (Pioneer B), second in new Pioneer series, was successfully launched from etr’s Launch Complex 17A by Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into orbit around the sun where it would chart magnetic fields emanating from the sun; measure the quantity, energy levels, and direction of the solar wind; and differentiate between solar and galactic cosmic rays. The 140-lb,, drum-shaped satellite had perihelion of 1.01 astronomical units (au), or 93.93 million mi. (151 million km.); aphelion of 1.125 au, or 104.625 million mi. (168.45 million km.); period of 402.95 days; inclination of 0.0946°. All systems were reported turned on and operating satisfactorily. Two days following launch, pioneer vii successfully completed maneuver which locked its high gain antenna on earth and stabilized its orbital path. First of five flights in current Pioneer program—managed by arc— was pioneer vi, launched Dec. 16, 1965. Overall program objective was to provide continuing measurements over the solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space. (NASA Release 66-211; NASA Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 8/18/66, LI; Wilford, NYT, 8/18/66, 15; upi, Wash. Post, 8/20/66, A9)
White Paper released by U.K. Defence Minister Denis Healey said RAF would buy 50 F-lll variable wing bombers from U.S. for 2.1 million pounds ($5,880,000) each and that plans for new British aircraft carrier had been dropped. F-lll aircraft operating from land bases would take over the strike-reconnaissance and air-defense functions of carriers. First Sea Lord, Adm. Sir David Luce, resigned in protest; Navy Minister Christopher Mayhew had resigned Feb. 19. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/66, Al; Lewis, NYT, 2/23/66, 1, 5; Meyer, Wash. Post, 2/23/66, All	_	_ Reconnaissance satellites, adapted for peaceful observations of earth’s surface, would bring revolutionary scientific and economic advances, Willis B. Foster, Director of Manned Space Science in NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications, predicted: "Remote sensing from space has unique capabilities, particularly in the opportunity it provides for repetitive synoptic coverage of the earth’s surface. . . . Spaceborne sensors will add to the knowledge of the figure of the earth, its mass distribution, and its magnetic and gravity fields. Movement of glaciers, growth of deltas, growth of crops, and even growth of populations can all be followed with this type of survey.” (Text) Austin M. Stanton, president and board chairman of Varo, Inc., said features of space such as airlessness, weightlessness, extreme temperature, and radiation could be "exploited as a completely new realm” for manufacturing. He said the earth might ultimately be encircled by a "vast doughnut-like ring 150,000 miles in circumference,” of articulated orbiting manufacturing facilities: "As a businessman, I propose that the time is ripe for a profitable industrial venture in space. ... It will not be difficult to persuade investors to venture into buying stock in the new companies for three reasons: the predictions of the early advocates of astronautics have been fulfilled; the efforts of space agencies have been spectacularly successful; and . . . the communications satellite venture seems sound.” (Hill, NYT, 2/27/66, 60) The massive investment in technology and manpower created by space programs could be used to handle pressing problems associated with anticipated population growth on earth, suggested Dr. Peter A. Castruccio, director of IBM’s advanced space programs. Satellites could survey earth from space, pinpoint tillable land and examine staple crops using infrared techniques to detect diseases invisible to the naked eye. Seas could be mapped, isolating concentrations of fish and edible seaweed, and growing consumption of water offset by using satellites to map snow fields and glaciers. Underground rivers could be detected from space by measuring the tiny difference in soil temperatures above them; such streams were estimated to have 3,000 times the water present in all known rivers. Other fields, such as weather control and geological survey searches for fuel and minerals, could also be handled from space. (M&R, 2/28/66, 9, 12) "The ultimate goal of weather modification and control may be realized only if man himself is placed in a Space Meteorological Lab,” suggested Sidney Sternberg, vice president and general manager of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc. He said the "ability and bandwidth of transfer of information between experiments and experimenter could not be duplicated by unmanned observations.” (M&R, 2/28/66, 12)
Industry bids to AFSC for study of new integrated satellite system as followon to the Midas early warning satellite would be due June 24, Aviation Week reported. Proposal request included studies for sensor payload and spacecraft. Primary sensors would be optical, covering the infrared, ultraviolet, and visible spectra. (Av. Wk., 5/9/66, 23)
Mystery of how the universe began could be solved within 15 to 20 yrs. if U.S. would use the $100 million spent on one manned Gemini mission for five new 200-in. telescopes, MIT professor Dr. Philip Morrison suggested at New York meeting on cosmology. Morrison said three or four telescopes equal to the one at Mt. Palomar could be built for the f>60-to $80-million cost of one Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) and would provide more information on the origin and nature of the universe than the satellite. Meeting was sponsored by American Institute of Physics and National Assn, of Science Writers, Inc., with NSF support. (NYT, 2/5/66)
France’s report for the Register of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of her successful Nov. 26, 1965, launch of A-l scientific satellite from Hammaguir Range, marked first such report by nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. (Text)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey attended ceremony at nasa Hq. celebrating successful launch of essa i, essa’s first operational meteorological satellite. During ceremony, first pictures taken by essa i, launched by nasa from etr Feb. 3, were released; nasa Administrator James E. Webb administered the oath of office to nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; and the Vice President presented nasa Exceptional Service medals to Dr. Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Programs; Herbert I. Butler, nasa Chief of Operational Satellites, gsfc; and David S. Johnson, essa Environmental Satellite Center Director. Vice President Humphrey praised the spirit of cooperation between nasa and Dept, of Commerce, noting that "science leaves no room for jurisdictional disputes.” He said of NASA’s Administrator and Deputy Administrator: "I know of no two men who are more dedicated to our space program than Jim Webb and Bob Seamans. Their devotion is almost sacrificial.” (nasa Release 66-29)
ComSatCorp Chairman of the Board James McCormack said ComSatCorp was contacting communications and broadcasting companies to get largest possible consensus on costs and technological feasibility of domestic multipurpose communications satellite system, and would present plans to fcc by Aug. 1. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/23/66, E7; Bishop, WSJ, 4/25/66, 32)
essa i (Tiros OT-3), first meteorological satellite in Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) series, was launched from etr for Environmental Science Services Administration (essa) by NASA with three-stage Thor-Delta booster into nearly polar, sun-synchronous orbit to provide cloud coverage of entire sunlit portion of the earth at least once daily. Before achieving orbit, spacecraft performed three precise "dogleg” maneuvers initiated by airborne autopilot system, injecting it into orbit: apogee, 523 mi. (842 km.); perigee, 433 mi. (697 km.); period, 100 min.; inclination, 91.9°. During first orbit, essa i was spin-stabilized at 10 rpm with spin axis in plane of orbit. Entering second orbit, spacecraft responded to ground control command to begin turning on its side into cartwheel position. Maneuver was expected to be completed 24 hrs. after launch; television cameras would be turned on 36 hrs. after launch. Cartwheel shaped, essa i contained two Vi-in. vidicon cameras mounted 180° apart on each side so they could view earth every six seconds. Camera system could send pictures directly to command and data acquisition stations at NASA Wallops Station and Gilmore Creek, Alaska, or store photos on its tape recorder for readout when satellite passed within 1,500-mi. radius of a ground station. essa I (Environmental Survey Satellite No. 1) was 11th successful Tiros (Television Infrared Observation Satellite) to be launched by NASA in 11 attempts. It was first of two Tos operational meteorological satellites planned and financed by essa to provide daily cloud-cover pictures to ground stations on a global basis, essa (at that time U.S. Weather Bureau) had also funded tiros x (OT-1), launched by NASA July 2, 1965. (nasa Proj. Off.; essa Release 66-7; upi, NYT, 2/4/66, 37)
First launch of usaf’s Titan III-B-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb placed an unidentified satellite into polar orbit, (sac twx; Av. Wk., 8/8/66, 29)
ijsaf’s OV3-II research satellite was launched from Vandenberg afb by Scout rocket into orbit with 991-mi. (1,595-km.) apogee; 198-mi. (319-km.) perigee; 104-min. period; and 82° inclination. Launch was planned so satellite would be in orbit during Nov. 12 South American solar eclipse to provide data on charged particle variations in extreme upper atmosphere before, during, and after eclipse. Satellite, designed to remain active in space at least one year, would also extend knowledge of electron and ion density structure found in outer radiation belt by NASA’s discoverer xvii. (Vandenberg afb pio; dpi, Phil. Sun. Bull., 10/30/66)
High military potential of space was discussed by Hanson W. Baldwin in New York Times'. ". . . the advent of the military man in space is inevitable. For man can supply the judgment that no machine can offer; he can monitor and correct and interpret the instruments and aids essential to space flight; he will be able to repair satellites and assemble space platforms. He will pilot tomorrow’s fighting machines in the cosmos. And in time he may actually be able, with a whole host of scientific aids, to control the weather with all the tremendous military and social consequences this implies.” (Baldwin, NYT, 11/20/66, A7)
msfc awarded Univ. of Michigan two-month, $29,930 study contract to develop 20-channel "infrared sensing technique to survey the earth’s natural resources.” Operating on orbiting satellite, system would survey possible mineral deposits, analyze soil for growth potential, diagnose "health” of crops, and predict bountiful fishing areas, (msfc Release 66-167)
dod awarded General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. $4-million contract to refurbish and update 23 retired Atlas icbm’s to launch upper-stage vehicles for Abres (Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems), Nike target, and scientific satellite programs. (General Dynamics Release)
U.S.S.R. announced that cosmos cxxii, launched June 25, was collecting meteorological data which would be sent to other nations in accordance with 1962 agreement with U.S. Satellite carried "instruments for taking TV pictures of the clouds, cameras to photograph clouds by infrared rays on the day and night sides of the earth, and instruments to measure radiation in the earth’s atmosphere.” (Tass, 8/17/66)
usaf’s OV3-IV research satellite was launched by NASA from Wallops Station by Scout booster. Orbital parameters: 2,933 mi. (4,720 km.); perigee, 398 mi. (640 km.); period, 142 min.; inclination, 41°. The 173-lb. satellite carried plastic spheres of simulated human tissue containing linear energy transfer spectrometers to record effects of space radiation and determine how much radiation damage an astronaut’s body could undergo in similar manned flight, how long man could stay in space at one time, and how often he could safely return to space environment. Satellite would also give measurements on Van Allen radiation belts and gauge decay of residual radiation in man-made Starfish Belt. Equipment, expected to relay data for one year, was functioning normally. (Wallops Release 66-35; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 152)
Patent for system with direction finder that would assure ground stations continuous and efficient communication with orbiting satellites was granted electronics engineers Henry P. Hutchingson, Applied Research Lab., Sylvania Electronic Systems, and Dr. Paul R. Arendt, Army Electronic Command Labs., Fort Monmouth, NJ. Equipment could also correct "Doppler frequency effect” caused by relative movement of satellite and station. (Jones, NYT, 7/23/66, 29)
Tape recorder for Advanced Vidicon Camera System on NASA’s nimbus ii meteorological satellite had failed, but camera could still transmit cloud-cover photos when within range of North American receiving stations. Launched from wtr, nimbus ii had successfully passed its final test objective of two months of continuous operation July 15. Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) camera system and High Resolution Infrared Radiation (Hrir) system were still operating. (nasa Release 66-243)
usaf’s OV1-VIIIT satellite was launched with Atlas D booster from Vandenberg afb into near-circular retrograde orbit: apogee, 627 mi. (1,009 km.); perigee, 619 mi. (996 km.); period, 105 min.; inclination, 144°. Balloon-shaped satellite—made of soft aluminum wire mesh covered with a plastic "skin” which disintegrated after inflation—would act as a passive comsat to reflect signals transmitted to it between earth stations, determine whether wire would be rigid enough to maintain spherical shape, and test theory that "open-mesh” structure would reduce drag and solar pressure in space environment, (afsc Release 140.66)
A laser to function as a ground-based device to recharge an orbiting satellite’s batteries was suggested by Dr. Charles H. Townes, MIT, and Dr. Arthur L. Schawlow, Stanford Univ., co-inventors of the laser, in a paper before the Optical Society of America’s meeting in Washington, D.G. Report predicted exploitation of the laser would grow into a billion-dollar industry by 1970. (Clark, NYT, 3/16/66, 45M)
Three earth-orbiting objects not identified "with any launching or country of origin” were reported by gsfc Satellite Situation Report. Two had inclination of 85° and the third, 35°. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/66; Clark, NYT, 11/1/66,19) September 30-October 2: Series of Nike-Cajun and one Nike-Apache sounding rocket were launched from nasa Wallops Station and Natal, Brazil, in gsfc experiment to obtain temperature, wind, pressure, and density data at intervals throughout 24-hr. periods near fall equinox. Using exploding grenade technique, experiment investigated thermally driven diurnal tide theory of upper atmosphere. Wind motion was studied by photographically tracking smoke puffs from upper grenade using Apache rocket motor. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl) During September: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, in an interview with Technology Week, predicted that U.S. would land men on the moon in 1969—probably before U.S.S.R. He said the Johnson Administration had definite plans for "very active post-Apollo schedule,” but refused to "put a time schedule on what comes next.” Post-Apollo activities would include exploring the moon, increasing our knowledge of the planets, expanding earth-orbiting capability, both manned and unmanned, and developing maneuverable, reusable spacecraft. The Vice President foresaw no possibility of merging usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program with any of NASA’s manned projects. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 12, 13) During September: U.S. and U.S.S.R. were exchanging daily six to eight weather satellite photographs with nephanalyses. First U.S. transmittal began Sept. 6 with pictures from essa i meteorological satellite, launched Feb. 3. On Sept. 11, U.S.S.R. began sending pictures from cosmos cxxii, launched June 25. Regions photographed—primarily Atlantic Ocean and Western Europe-—had been matched so operations of satellite systems could be compared. Joint effort to improve transmission quality had been proposed since transmission seemed to degrade photographs: U.S. scientists found Soviet photos "poor” in quality; Soviet scientists described U.S. photos as "usable.” Receipt of photos from cosmos cxxii had enabled U.S. to analyze satellite’s instrumentation: cosmos cxxii carried pair of 48° TV cameras canted 16.5° to each side of orbital plane to provide coverage of about 690 mi. of earth. Cameras overlapped field of coverage by 1°; frames transmitted so far had 10 per cent overlap. (Av. Wk., 9/26/66, 26-7; Schmeck, NYT, 9/27/66, 15)
Anticipating launching of Pacific satellite in late 1966, ComSatCorp filed tariff with fcc for Pacific services. Monthly rates ComSatCorp would charge authorized common carriers would be $2,700 between U.S. mainland and Hawaii; $4,900 from U.S. mainland to Japan; and $3,800 from Hawaii to Japan. Tariff for service to NASA for Project Apollo would be equivalent to level of charges applied to other commercial satellite channels. ComSatCorp also said it planned reduced rates for Atlantic services, to apply when second satellite became operational. (ComSatCorp Release)
U.S. invited NATO allies to use its military comsat system temporarily and to collaborate in joint development of new system specifically for the alliance. U.S. would make time available on its seven-satellite military network launched by usaf Titan III rocket June 17. To adapt system to NATO’s needs, it was proposed that new ground station be built in Naples to operate with one under construction in the Netherlands and another operating in West Germany. In early 1968, satellite would be launched from U.S. site into synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. (35,903-km.) altitude for alliance’s exclusive use. It could be built by consortium of member countries. Eventually, comsat system was envisaged whose relays would permit use of ground stations small enough to be carried on a truck which could be used by military units on the move. Cost of plan was said to be some $50 million. Proposal would be on agenda of next meeting of nato’s foreign ministers, set tentatively for Dec. 15-16. (Mooney, NYT, 9/29/66, 1; Nossiter, Wash. Post, 9/29/66, A22)
essa ii (Tos OT-2), second meteorological satellite in Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) system, was launched by NASA from etr for essa with three-stage Thor-Delta booster. Launch vehicle performed three "dogleg” maneuvers before injection into near-polar, near-circular, sun-synchronous orbit. Initial orbital parameters: apogee, 885 mi. (1,425 km.); perigee, 843 mi. (1,357 km.); period, 113.5 min.; inclination, 101.16°. A cylindrical, 18-sided polygon, 290-lb. essa ii was equipped with two Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) camera systems for photographing local cloud cover. During first orbit, spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 10.9 rpm with bottom of spacecraft toward earth; during second orbit, orientation maneuvers initiated by ground command began to turn satellite on its side; after 18 orbits—approximately 33 hrs. after launch —essa ii would be in cartwheel position. Combination of cartwheel configuration and near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit would permit 100% photographic coverage of earth’s cloud cover during daylight hours with a given area photographed at the same local time each day. Primary objective of essa ii (Environmental Survey Satellite No. 2) flight was to provide direct readout to worldwide network of Apt receiving stations. essa financed, managed, and operated the Tos systems, gsfc managed NASA participation in the project. Tracking operations were responsibility of stadan. First satellite in Tos system, essa i, was launched Feb. 3. (essa Release 66-14; nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/28/66, Al; ufi, Wash. Post, 8/1/66, A4)
U.S.S.R. launched spacecraft, possibly from Cosmos series, which exploded into 32 pieces detectable by radar, gsfc Satellite Situation Report would later reveal that 12 pieces of debris remained in orbit Nov. 15; 20 had reentered. Spacecraft was second Soviet satellite to explode in six weeks [see Sept. 17]. (gsfc SSR, 11/15/66)
usaf had launched reconnaissance satellite over U.S.S.R. that could photograph Soviet military bases and return film packages on command from ground control, Dick Lyons reported in Washington Post. Key components were high-powered camera that could photograph objects several feet in diameter from 100-mi. altitude; cluster of film packages— cassettes—that could be dropped from satellite at random and picked up by recovery aircraft; and an Agena vehicle which could be maneuvered from ground. A new version of Samos spacecraft, satellite could remain in orbit for weeks or months—until its supply of film packages was exhausted—and might also be able to transmit TV pictures to U.S. ground stations. (Lyons, Wash. Post, 9/12/66)
NASA awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and RCA $90,000, six-month contracts to study characteristics for proposed Orbiting Data Relay System (Odrs) which would eliminate gaps in communications and provide continuous contact with spacecraft. Studies would probe kind of synchronous satellite and ground facilities required to relay data from spacecraft in earth orbit to NASA’s mission control centers at GSFC, JPL, and msc. (nasa Release 66-119)
Sociological repercussions of the space age might be most important to historians, suggested Robert Toth in the Washington Post: "In just nine years since the first man-made moon went aloft, the fact that man can escape his Earth has become so accepted Americans are almost blase about new manned flights. "It is too early for anyone to guess how such developments may affect the deeper thoughts of self and one’s place in the world and in the universe. But it is not too much to say that, even before man reaches the moon, he has begun to get a new perspective of himself and his place in the universe from the space adventure.” (Toth, Wash. Post, 11/10/ 66, P6) A total of 211 medium- and high-resolution photos of 13 potential Apollo landing sites were taken during mission’s photo acquisition phase. Readout would be completed Dec. 13. Among photos transmitted, described as "consistently high in quality,” was a picture of the crater Copernicus taken from an angle inaccessible to earth cameras. Dr. Martin J. Swetnick, NASA Hq., describing the closeup as "one of the great pictures of the century,” said: "It provides new information, which certainly will lead to better understanding of the processes and structures on the moon.” (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 11/16/66, A18; Sullivan, NYT, 12/1/66, 1, 36) Docking of spacecraft with gatv was in 2.3 revolutions—4:14 get. After plans to use gatv propulsion system to place gemini xii into higher orbit had to be abandoned because of gatv malfunction, gemini xii rendezvoused with Nov. 12 total solar eclipse over South America and made motion and still pictures of eclipse through spacecraft windows. Aldrin then began first of two standup Evas: hatch opening was at 19:29:01 get with closure 2 hrs. 29 min. later. Nov. 13’s activities revolved around Aldrin’s umbilical Eva: hatch opening was at 42:46 get with closing 2 hrs. 8 min. later. While on 30-ft. umbilical, Aldrin performed measured work tasks at Agena docking adapter and at work station in spacecraft adapter section. He also attached 100-ft. tether stowed in Agena adapter to Gemini docking bar in preparation for tethered operations, gemini xii backed out of Agena docking collar about 47:37 get and gravity gradient appeared to be established by one revolution later. Tether exercise lasted 4 hrs. 17 min. After failing twice to sight sodium vapor clouds released in upper atmosphere by French sounding rocket launched from Hammaguir Range and performing experiments with a space sextant, crew began experiencing problems with maneuvering thrusters on spacecraft. In second standup Eva, Aldrin jettisoned unused equipment and conducted additional experiments and photography. Hatch-open time was 66:04 get for 51-min. duration. Total Eva time for gemini xii mission was 5 hrs. 28 min. Retrofire took place Nov. 15 at 94:00:01 get; reentry in 59th revolution after 94 hrs. 34 min. in space was normal. Splashdown in the Atlantic was at 94:34:31 get. gemini xii landed about three miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Wasp and about four miles from aiming point. Astronauts were picked up hy helicopter within 20 min. Naucmher 10-30: Two historic lunar photographs returned by NASA's lunar ohbiter if. one, the first close-up photograph of the crater Copernicus, taken Nov. 23, is an oblique view from 28-mi. altitude; the other, the first detailed view of lunar domes, taken Nov, 25, confirms the moon's long history of volcanic activity. The domes range from 2 to 10 mi. in diameter and from 1,000 to 1,500 ft. high; they are best seen to the south and west of the crater Marius (upper right). White House announced promotion of Aldrin from usaf major to lieutenant colonel. Lovell had been promoted to usn captain after cemini vn mission. A Presidential statement read by Press Secretary Bill Moyers said the flight was "the culmination of a great team effort, stretching back to 1961, and directly involving more than 25,000 people in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, and other Government agencies; in the universities and other research centers; and in American industry.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-272; Msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 2; Wilford, NYT, 11/12/66, 1, 14; 11/13/66, 1, 34; 11/14/66, 1, 2; 11/15/66, 1, 17; 11/16/66,1,30; O’Toole, {Fash. Post, 11/12/66, Al, A4; 11/13/66, Al, A4; 11/14/66, Al; 11/15/66, Al, A10; Pres. Doc., 11/21/66, 1701-2) November 12: Total solar eclipse which moved across South America at 2,000	mph for 2 hrs. 42 min. received extraordinary scientific scrutiny: 800 scientists from 12 nations utilized $90 million of equipment, nasa’s activities were conducted in cooperation with Argentine and Brazilian scientists as part of an international program. Eclipse formed 55-mi. strip of total blackout beginning in Pacific Ocean west of Peru, crossing southern Peru, Bolivia, northern Argentina, southern tip of Brazil, and extending into South Atlantic. NASA-Ames Convair 990A jet aircraft "Galileo,” a flying research laboratory carrying 26 scientists, successfully rendezvoused with four other instrument-equipped aircraft and raced the eclipse at 575 mph as it moved out over the South Atlantic. Other NASA activities included: five NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched within two hours from Cassino, Brazil, in Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to measure D and E region electron densities and temperatures, absorption profiles 1216 A and 1450 A, and collision frequencies. First rocket ejected trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud for comparison of electron density profile with wind profile; however, no photographs of vapor cloud were obtained. Third rocket carried Brazilian experiment to study extreme ultraviolet. All rockets and instrumentation, except for mass spectrometer on third flight, performed satisfactorily. Specially constructed launch and tracking site was manned and operated by personnel of Wallops Station and the Brazilian Space Commission. Photographs were taken by nimbus ii meteorological satellite and by Astronauts James Lovell, Jr., and Edwin Aldrin, Jr., orbiting in Gemini xii spacecraft. AFCRL launched three Nike-Hydac sounding rockets from a site near Rio Grande, Brazil. Instrumented payloads, which reached 71-mi. (115-km.) altitudes, measured positive-ion mass composition, solar radiation, electron density and temperature, and positive-ion density. Data were telemetered to ground receivers. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Japan, the Netherlands, U.K., New Zealand, and France participated in observations which would increase knowledge of the solar forces and their effects on earth’s atmosphere and provide data for use in space travel, radio communications, and weather prediction, (nasa Release 66-285; Wallops Release 66-55; De Onis, NYT, 11/13/66, 35; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/13/66, A16; AP, Wash. Post, 11/12/66, A16; oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8; nasa Rpt. srl)
usn had issued to General Dynamics Corp. a $20-million supplemental agreement to an existing contract to install satellite communications systems aboard each of three former Navy tankers that would serve as ocean-going tracking stations for NASA’s Project Apollo. (Gen. Dynamics Release 1267)
Izvestia described how the Communist Party anthem was transmitted from LUNA x to earth: "Before the launching, an electronic generator was installed in the artificial moon satellite to radiate in a definite sequence electric oscillations of the frequencies necessary for reproducing selected fragments of the melody. . . . The use of semi conductors made it possible to substantially reduce the weight and volume of the set and considerably increase the range of transmissions. The 'music’ signals of the set installed in the Luna 10 could be received even from the neighborhood of Venus. "The increase in range and the overcoming of cosmic noise were achieved by means of special narrow band-pass filters. The cycle of functioning of the instrument reproducing 'Internationale’ consists of two parts: generating in a certain sequence signals of various frequencies —10 seconds—and creating intervals before the repetition of the melody—45 seconds. The instrument is switched on by a signal from the earth.” (Tass, Izvestia, 4/28/66)
Proposal for fleet of 25 stand-by spacecraft which could be launched within three hours of a distress signal to rescue astronauts stranded in orbit was submitted to NASA by MIT aeronautics students. Each 13,000-lb., four-man Nero (Near Earth Rescue Operation) spacecraft, designed with wing-like lift similar to M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, would be launched with Titan III-C booster to rendezvous with target; it would glide to a landing at a jet airport. Vehicles could also repair crippled satellites, resupply manned orbiting laboratories, inspect unidentified satellites, and remove orbiting debris. System could be implemented with current technology and be in operation by early 1970’s at total cost of $2 billion. (Wilford, NYT, 12/6/66, 60C)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afr with AtlasAgena D booster. {Tech. Wk,, 11/7/66, 10; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 157)
Tests showed that as little as one or more inches of continuous snow cover could be reliably identified from satellite photos, essa’s Office of Hydrology reported. Associate Director of the Weather Bureau William E. Hiatt commented: "An increased capability of assessing snow accumulations, especially in remote sections where observation stations are limited, could result in faster appraisal of river conditions and contribute to more timely release of river forecasts and flooding warnings.” (essa Release 66-71)
msfc awarded Emerson Electric Co. a 10-wk., $34,990 study contract to determine feasibility of recovering small metallic coupons from wings of pegasus ill meteoroid-detection satellite, orbited by NASA July 30, 1965.	Using sample wing with attached coupons, Emerson would analyze possible approaches an astronaut could make to satellite and types of equipment he would need to perform coupon-retrieving mission, (msfc Release 66-162)
Soviet Foreign Minister Audrey Gromyko and French Foreign Minister Maurice Couve de Murville signed agreement in Moscow providing basic framework for space cooperation during next ten years. Major objectives of compact—which initially scheduled several common experiments, including an astronomy test to be conducted from Archangel, U.S.S.R., and Kerguelen, French islands in the Indian Ocean —were missions with Imp-type satellites and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft. (SBD, 6/28/66, 344)
lunar orbiter i impacted on moon’s hidden side at 9:30 a.m. edt on command from earth. The spacecraft was deliberately crashed to obviate possible interference with mission of second Lunar Orbiter (Lunar Orbiter B) scheduled for launch Nov. 6. First U.S. spacecraft to orbit and photograph moon, lunar orbiter i, launched Aug. 10, became first satellite to be deliberately destroyed in space by NASA, (nasa Release 66-287; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 10/30/66, A10)
ComSatCorp proposed to faa an aeronautics satellite to handle complex communications for airlines and aid in faa’s air traffic control. Two-channel, 210-lb. satellite would be launched in late 1967—two or three years earlier than previous proposals—into 22,300-mi.-altitude synchronous orbit to provide more reliable very-high-frequency radio communications over North Atlantic area currently served by high-frequency radio system affected by had weather and sunspot activity. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/11/66, D6; Cooke, WSJ, 3/10/66, 32; Clark, NYT, 3/10/66, 19; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/66, A8)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara and U.K. Minister of Defence Denis Healey signed memorandum providing for cooperation in r&d for U.S. Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project—system of up to 22 comsats in near-synchronous, equatorial orbit. U.K. would provide, operate, and fund several ground terminals for communications tests and experiments using dod comsats free of charge, (dod Release 87-66)
usaf OV3-I satellite carrying AFCRL-instrumented 152-lb. payload was launched into polar orbit from Vandenberg afb with Scout booster (slv-IA). Reported orbital parameters were: apogee, 3,557 mi. (5,724 km.); perigee, 219 mi. (352 km.); period, 152 min.; inclination, 82°. Objectives were measurement of charged particle distribution in earth’s magnetic field and acquisition of radiation intensity data for comparison with afcrl satellite measurements in 1960-1963. Previously scheduled for April 19, launch had been postponed after detection of malfunction in launch vehicle’s ground support system, (oar Release; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Practical dividends from investment in space program were cited by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun in an address at Midwest Space Exposition, Jackson, Mich. In addition to "tangible returns” from advances in navigation, meteorological, and communications satellites, he noted uses of space technology for surveying earth’s resources and suggested ultimate benefits, as yet unpredictable, would "dwarf” those he had named. (Text)
Planned expansion of the global communications satellite network of the 50-nation Intelsat was being postponed two years as a result of pressure by the fcc on ComSatCorp. ComSatCorp was majority shareholder and served as manager for Intelsat. Basic question raised by fcc was whether the expansion was too ambitious for the traffic that would be available. Threatened with fcc veto or modification of its application to construct six 1,500-channel satellites for launch in 1968, ComSatCorp notified fcc that deployment of the follow-on 6,000-channel multipurpose satellite had been postponed from 1969-70 to 1972 or later. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 31)
U.K.’s Cable & Wireless, Ltd., would build three ground stations—at Hong Kong, Bahrein Island, and an undisclosed site—for satellite communications, reported the Wall Street Journal. Hong Kong station would cost $7 million and would be operational by 1968. Seventeen firms—including seven U.S. companies—had been asked to bid on the project. {WSJ, 6/17/66, 12)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb using Titan III-B-Agena D launch vehicle, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 9/29/66, 24; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
Theoretical possibility of self-supporting tapered cable extending 22,000 mi. into space from earth and from extraterrestrial rotating or revolving bodies was examined in Science report by John Isaacs, Hugh Bradner, and George E. Bachus, Scripps Institute of Oceanography, and Allyn C. Vine, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Cable, referred to as a "skyhook,” would be extended downward from a satellite in synchronous orbit, become an extension of the satellite, and be held in place by the balance between centrifugal and gravitational forces that keeps any satellite in orbit. Authors of the report conceded in a telephone interview with Harold Schmeck of the New York Times that "present-day engineering is not yet up to the task of making a cable strong enough and light enough for the sky hook project from earth.” (Science, 2/11/66, 682-3; Schmeck, NYT, 2/12/66, 12)
New Soviet launch site near Archangel was discovered by British schoolboys after they had tracked several Cosmos satellites and fed information, including data on orbital intersections, into a computer. U.S. later confirmed U.S.S.R. had been launching satellites from large military base south of Archangel. Only two Soviet launch sites—Baikonur and Kapustin Yar—had previously been publicized. Schoolboys’ information, which appeared in Flight International, represented important break in secrecy surrounding Soviet reconnaissance satellites. (Wash. Post, 12/13/66; 12/19/66, Al, A8; NYT, 12/21/66, 25; Time, 12/ 30/66)
Sun-powered laser developed by Dr. C. Gilbert Young of American Optical Co. under usaf sponsorship had been successfully operated in earth’s atmosphere, producing one watt of power in continuous, highly intense beam of invisible infrared light. A slender, one-inch-long rod of yttrium-aluminum-garnet crystal (Yag), laser was connected to telescope which trapped, focused, and delivered sun’s rays—which replaced conventional lamp and electrical apparatus needed by other lasers for "initial boost”—to crystal rod. Laser’s beam could carry messages between spacecraft and could be used as intense satellite beacon. (AIP News 6)
ComSatCorp suggested separate meetings during week of April 18 with at&t and Western Union to explore use of multipurpose domestic communications satellites and discuss ownership of ground stations. Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, stated: "We believe that there are no inhibitions on Comsat’s ability to provide domestic satellite service, and ... we view earth stations as an integral and critical part of a satellite communication system which must be planned and operated in concern with the space segment. Accordingly, we feel that this responsibility must be reflected in ownership.” (ComSatCorp Release)
Unidentified usaf satellite launched by Thor-Altair booster from Vandenberg afb did not achieve orbit. (U.N. Public Registry, 5/31/66)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
Synchronous-orbit television relay satellite capable of providing direct service to home receivers for an area equivalent to one sixth of continental U.S. could be launched before 1970, according to preliminary company-funded design studies conducted by rca and ge and presented to NASA Hq. officials, Aviation Week reported. Both companies conceded the existence of technical problem areas, including the design of solar cell arrays 15 to 30 times larger than any previously attempted and the lack of a suitable launch vehicle for orbiting 6,000-lb. to 8,000-lb. satellite, but believed solutions could be devised within the existing state-of-the-art. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 115)
Discovery of two powerful x-ray galaxies which might indicate existence of a whole family of celestial objects was reported by Naval Research Laboratory physicist Dr. Herbert Friedman at a news conference in Washington, D.C. The two galaxies—Cygnus A and M-87—were among the strongest of the 10,000 galaxies that emit radio signals and had been detected previously only by optical telescopes and by their radio emissions. "The startling thing about these extra-galactic sources is that their x-ray output is 10 to 100 times greater than their combined output of light and radio waves,” Dr. Friedman said, and he suggested that an x-ray satellite or a "fence-like array of 1,000 Geiger counters erected on the moon” could identify the sources. The discovery supported theory of an "exploding universe” whose evolution over billions of years, and in the future, would be characterized by violent cosmic explosions far beyond the relative calm of the Milky Way. Dr. Friedman, E. T. Byram, and T. A. Chubb obtained data from an April 1965 Aerobee sounding rocket flight. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/66, 2; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/3/66, A3)
U.S.S.R. planned to build two additional satellite tracking stations in Cuba and had sited one near Santiago, Aviation Week reported. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 23)
President Johnson issued Executive Order 11277 designating International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) as an organization "entitled to enjoy, from and after August 20, 1964, all of the privileges, exemptions, and immunities provided by Section 4(a)” of the International Organizations Immunities Act. (Text, Pres. Doc., 5/9/66, 600)
Gamma-ray spectrum of the lunar surface obtained by luna x indicated that the moon’s crust was similar to the earth’s, Tass announced. The satellite had detected lunar gamma rays from two sources: one was "an increased intensity of gamma radiation caused chiefly by interaction of cosmic rays with the surface layer of lunar material”; the other was "natural radioactivity from the lunar rocks associated with uranium, thorium, and potassium. "Compared with the analogous radioactivity of earth rocks, the observed spectrum comes close to the radioactivity of basic rocks— basalts.” (Sullivan, NYT, 4/14/66, 1, 21)
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
ComSatCorp’s Intelsat ii-a ("lani bird”) comsat, launched by NASA from etr Oct. 27, began commercial service under temporary fcc authorization which would expire Feb. 2, 1967. Satellite, which had failed to achieve planned synchronous equatorial orbit Oct. 30, had been moved into modified 12-hr. orbit Dec. 1, to provide maximum visibility: eight to nine hours daily between U.S. mainland and Hawaii; over seven hours between U.S. and Japan; and about four hours between U.S. and Carnarvon, Australia. Authorized communications carriers could use satellite for television and telephone communications about eight hours daily. (ComSatCorp Release; Wash. Post, 12/2/66, FI; AP, WSJ, 12/5/66, 15; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/66, A3)
Japan successfully launched four-stage Mu-1 rocket from Uchinoura Space Center, Kyushu Island, to test lst-stage fuel combustion and booster propulsion. The 70-ft.-long, solid-fueled launch vehicle was launched at 69° inclination and impacted in Pacific after 3-min. 20-sec. flight. Scientists called test "a success.” Mu was scheduled to orbit Japan’s first satellite by 1968. (AP, NYT, 11/1/66)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 159)
Dr. Wallace J. Eckert, Columbia Univ. prof, of celestial mechanics and director of ibm’s Watson Laboratory, received National Academy of Sciences’ 19th James Craig Watson Medal "for his pioneering contributions to the scientific application of electronic computers and to the theory of the motion of the moon.” (nas Release, 3/29/66) Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, examined management role of scientifically trained people and invited their participation in the "governmental decision-making process.” Brown, a former physicist, attributed rising influence of technocrats "to the increasing technical content of modern life” and to "the less narrowly technical orientation of the technically trained.” He noted transition from parttime to full-time scientific advisers in the late 1950’s as "one of the major lasting consequences of the Soviet Sputnik achievement.” (Text) nasa’s ogo i, launched Sept. 4, 1964, and explorer xxviii (imp-c), launched May 29, 1965, had yielded data essential to evolution of an accurate physical description of the universe, according to paper on low-energy cosmic rays presented at aps meeting by Dr. Donald E. Hagge of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Hagge noted satellite measurements and recent "quiet sun year” had given physicists "an unprecedented opportunity . . . for meaningful cosmic ray research.” High-apogee satellites permitted measurement of low-energy particles "not directly observable on the surface of the earth” due to protective atmosphere and influence of earth’s magnetic field. Minimum of "solar modulation”—suppression of galactic particles by sun’s magnetic field upon attempted penetration of solar system—meant that "particles observed during 1965 most nearly represent the true situation outside the solar system.” (gsfc Release, 3/27/66) J. A. Simpson of Enrico Fermi Institute, Univ. of Chicago, reported these satellite experiments had revealed "new features in the cosmic radiation regarding the energy distribution, the chemical and isotopic composition of the cosmic rays at hitherto unattainable energies.” Origin of "ultra-low-energy nuclei,” which reached vicinity of earth during 1965 period of minimum solar modulation, may be supernovae, Simpson suggested. (Fermi Institute Release, 4/27/66) Simpson and J. J. O’Gallagher, also of Fermi Institute, presented results of study of solar flare particle propagation based on simultaneous observations by mariner iv space probe and Imp satellites. Evidence showed that "protons are confined by interplanetary magnetic fields to narrow channels extending outward from the sun” and "particles in these channels are carried around the sun by magnetic fields which co-rotate with the sun.” (Fermi Institute Release, 4/29/66) Paul J. Coleman, Jr., of ucla, presented results of "a recently completed statistical analysis of records of the magnetic field and plasma velocity, obtained in late 1962 with instruments aboard the spacecraft mariner ii,” including "experimental evidence that [hydromagnetic] waves do exist in interplanetary space.” Discussing properties of solar wind, Coleman said mariner ii’s measurements had indicated average temperature of positive ions in plasma was about 200,000°K. He,noted that its high temperature and low density "suggest that the plasma is completely ionized.” (aps Release, 4/26/66) Discussing importance of their NASA-sponsored stellar wind study, S. H. Lam of Princeton Univ. and G. Sandri of Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, Inc., said: "The cosmic radiation that reached the Earth, or any satellite that has been sent into space by man, has been attenuated, or as the specialists say 'modulated,’ by the solar wind. Therefore, we cannot measure directly the constitution of the cosmic radiation as it exists in interstellar space unaffected by the solar wind. Yet, to be able to understand the origin of the cosmic radiation, we must know its true constitution in interstellar space. A proper understanding of the solar wind will greatly facilitate this difficult task.” Lam and Sandri presented electrostatic model for stellar winds at APS meeting, (aps Release, 4/29/66) Discovery of first celestial body, "Cygnus GR-1,” identifiable as a "point source of high energy gamma radiation,” was announced to aps by Univ. of Rochester physicists J. G. M. Duthie, Roland W. Cobb, and Joseph Stewart. Discovery of source, which coincided with a region already identified as an x-ray source known as "Cygnus XR-1,” climaxed five years of research sponsored by NASA and nsf. (Univ. of Rochester Release, 4/29/66) Describing the Alfven Propulsion Engine (Ape) in a paper on hydromagnetic propulsion and drag in space vehicles, M. A. Ruderman, New York Univ., said: "A source of electrical power (nuclear, or solar panels) sufficient to power one hundred common light bulbs could raise the altitude of a 5-ton satellite about 100 miles in a week of operation. By allowing the motor to act as a generator the orbital energy of this same satellite can be converted into electrical energy, contributing sufficient drag to lower the satellite altitude by almost 15 miles per day.” (aps Release, 4/26/66) Cal Tech physicist H. Victor Neher described latitude survey of cosmic rays: "Once we satisfied ourselves that instruments sent by balloons up to altitudes of 140,000 feet, near the earth’s magnetic poles, gave answers directly comparable to those found by Mariners II and IV, it became less important to depend on spacecraft for our data. This was good news because we have a flexibility and control of balloon flights that are not possible with spacecraft.” (aps Release, 4/28/66)
ComSatCorp denied ITT World Communications, Inc.’s accusation of "unjustly and unreasonably” discriminating against ITT in quoting charges to Defense Communications Agency (dca) for 30 satellite circuits between Hawaii and Japan, the Philippines and Thailand: "The rate quoted to the dca for each of the... circuits is, in fact, higher than the rate quoted to the carriers, as it takes into account the additional service costs by Comsat to carry out a responsibility to provide end-to-end service to dca. . . . itt Worldcom may have been confused by advance knowledge as to the Corporation’s planned tariff for satellite channels to be furnished to authorized common carriers, in which the $48,000 charge to the carriers would be revised downward to $45,000 [and] erroneously assumed that this lower charge, which would apply only to authorized common carriers, had been quoted by Comsat to the dca.” (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, incoming president of American Society for Public Administration (aspa), discussed responsibilities of administering a "Great Society” at aspa conference in Washington, D.C. Webb said that ". . . with the seething mass of humanity all around the world, not many of them very happy today, we have a strong requirement for effective administration, precision in the use of public power, for prediction, for planned use of limited resources. . . . "It seems to me that the public administrator in this period . . . must be a bigger, broader person than has been required in the past because the forces he must work with are so much larger, and yet so much more complex. . . . Somehow he must command the respect and following that will convert criticism from destruction of ideas to clarification and perfection of those ideas. ... I believe his performance will be measured ... by the scope and sweep of his vision and adjustment to some forces that will be beyond his ability to prediot or control; also his ability to ride the crest of the wave, that wave of the incoming tide of tomorrow that is now bringing in the fruits of a vital and vigorous society.” (Text) April 16: Preliminary results of flight of U.S.S.R.’s luna x, placed in circum-lunar orbit April 3 to become moon’s first artificial satellite, were announced at Moscow press conference. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Mstislav Keldysh said that considerably less braking power had been required to put a spacecraft in orbit around the moon than had been required in a soft landing. This had made it possible to increase the payload in luna x and to equip it with instruments for important studies of the moon and the space surrounding it. Academician Aleksandr Vinogradov, geochemist, said that study of radioactivity of rocks on the lunar surface had indicated the overall intensity of gamma radiation on the lurain was comparable to the intensity of gamma radiation emitted by terrestrial granites [see April 13]. However, part of it was not due to natural radioactivity but to interaction of cosmic rays and lunar matter. Such radiation was absent in terrestrial rocks because of the shielding effect of the earth’s atmosphere. Lunar rocks were comparable in natural radioactivity to basalt rocks on earth, indicating that "the processes of the formation of the core of the planets of the earth group apparently have the same mechanism.” Prof. Naum Grigorov said readings of luna x’s magnetometer indicated presence near the moon of a weak, homogenous, and regular magnetic field. Streams of ions of small energies were registered. Analysis of materials transmitted by luna x showed the intensity of particles in the moon’s radiation belt was 100,000 times less than in the earth’s radiation belts. Prof. Alexandr Mikhailov, director of the Pulkovo Observatory, said existence of an artificial moon satellite was important not only for physical research, but also for determining more exactly the mass and shape of the moon—information vital for building an exact theory of the motion of the moon and for study of the unevenness of the earth’s rotation. Replying to questions, Academician Keldysh said luna x did not carry photocameras but was intended for physical study of near-lunar space and the moon itself—its nature, ionosphere, radiations, and fields. Satellite would orbit the moon for "a few years.” Duration could not be predicted since parameters of the moon’s gravitational field were not known. Keldysh said that since assembly of large spacecraft in orbit was an important step toward the conquest of outer space, cosmonauts were preparing for the solution of this task. Referring to the problem of manned flights to the moon, he stressed that the most difficult task to be solved was return of the spacecraft into earth’s atmosphere. Keldysh said dogs Veterok’s and Ugolyek’s passages through radiation belts in cosmos cx had had no apparently serious effect on them but that prolonged observations were necessary. (Tass, 4/18/66)
West Germany’s first satellite would be launched in 1968 with U.S. Scout booster to study inner radiation belts and aurora borealis, Science Ministry in Bonn announced. Orbit would have 2,898-km. (1,800-mi.) apogee and 258-km. (160-mi.) perigee. Nine West German firms were participating in joint NASA-West Germany Science Ministry project. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A23; Reuters, NYT, 5/13/66, 12)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Scout booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from wtr with Atlas-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 151)
usaf launched three satellites with a single Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr—one unidentified satellite, ers xvi satellite to test metal-to-metal adhesion of space propulsion materials, and USA’s SECOR vi geodetic satellite. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 152)
Nationalist China would build $10-million ground communications station by early 1969 to participate in Intelsat’s planned worldwide satellite communications system, Reuters reported. (Reuters, NYT, 12/25/66, 40)
nimbus ii meteorological satellite was reported "working beautifully” by gsfc. Among the thousands of photographs transmitted were those of the Gemini IX recovery area. The 912-lb. spacecraft had been launched May 15. (upi, NYT, 5/17/66, 77)
Plan for 500-mph, 80-passenger Vtol air-bus service, developed by mit’s Flight Transportation Laboratory to ease transportation congestion on the East Coast in the 1970’s, was announced By the Commerce Dept. (dpi, NYT, 10/18/66, 76) During week of October 17: House Committee on Government Operations, in report based on August hearings by Subcommittee on Military Operations, urged a ten- to twenty-fold expansion of DOD’s initial comsat system by increasing number and improving performance of both satellites and ground terminals. "Neither the Communications Satellite Corporation nor the other commercial carriers need fear they will lose the Defense Department as a good customer” as a result of this expansion, the report said. (Av. Wk., 10/24/66, 29)
President Johnson transmitted his annual Report to the Congress on United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, calling 1965 "the most successful year in our history.” He said in the transmittal letter: "As our space program continues, the impact of its developments on everyday life becomes daily more evident. It continues to stimulate our education, improve our material well being, and broaden the horizons of knowledge. It is also a powerful force for peace.” He cited U.S. accomplishments in the Gemini, Ranger, Mariner, and Early Bird programs. "Research and development in our space program continued to speed progress in medicine, in weather prediction, in electronics—and, indeed, in virtually every aspect of American science and technology.” Among chief aeronautical developments report cited "design refinement and wind-tunnel testing” of Sst and decision to build C-5A jet transport. Among successful U.S. launches during 1965, DOD had 67 satellites, 34 of which were unidentified. Military space programs were discussed, including Project West Ford; Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol); Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project; and the geodetic Secor satellites. Research was under way on the best means of determining physical characteristics of "uncooperating objects in earth orbit” through observation by ground-based radar. The section on aec said that a third pair of Vela radiation-detection satellites launched in July 1965 was watching for nuclear explosions in space and measuring x-ray emissions from the sun. In a separate chapter of the report, the nasc said: "This Nation’s space achievements during the year were so distinctive in quality and quantity as to cause people, at home and abroad, to conclude the United States had attained the space leadership of the world.” The Council said that in many respects this conclusion was correct "but it would be incorrect and unwise to minimize the vitality and size of the space program of the U.S.S.R.” (Text; CR, 1/31/66, A419; Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 149)
NASA’s Blossom Point, Md., tracking station, prototype station for Project Vanguard, was closed "because of technical progress in space communications.” Blossom Point Station, which had tracked every unmanned earth-orbiting NASA satellite since explorer i was launched Jan. 31, 1958, would become part of stadan Network Test and Training Facility at gsfc. Facility, to be operational by Jan. 1, 1967, would test equipment, modes, and procedures and train personnel for stadan stations, (nasa Release 66-117)
French-built instrumented scientific satellite, diapason I (D-IA), was successfully launched from Hammaguir Range with three-stage Diamant booster. Initial orbital data: apogee, 2,753.5 km. (1,710 mi.); perigee, 503.1 km. (312 mi.); period, 118.6 min.; inclination, 34.04°. Designed with a three-month lifetime, the 20-in.-dia., 49-lb. satellite would transmit information on earth’s magnetic field and test France’s tracking stations. Bretigny Tracking Center near Paris was receiving satellite’s radio transmissions normally. This was second launch of a French-made satellite by France’s Dia-mant booster. First was Nov. 26, 1965, when A-I satellite carrying radio and radar transmitter, but no scientific equipment, was orbited. (French Embassy Release; AP, Wash. Eve, Star, 2/17/66, Al; Wash: Post, 2/18/66, A13)
U.K.’s Associated Electrical Industries, Ltd., General Electric Co., Ltd., and Plessey Co., Ltd., had joined forces to sell ground terminals at $4 million each to countries that wanted to pick up and relay telephone, telegraph, and television signals from communications satellites, reported Clyde H. Farnsworth in the New York Times. The British companies believed there would be market for about 30 terminals in the next two to three years and about 70 to 80 in the next ten years, and said that at least seven nations were already interested in purchasing terminals. (Farnsworth, NYT, 4/1/66, 57)
French Minister of Research Alain Peyrefitte, commenting on the 1967 space budget, disclosed that France planned to launch two D-l-type satellites from Hammaguir Range in February 1967 and one D-2-type satellite from Guiana Range in 1969, Technology Week reported. He said a Super Diamant booster was under development to launch French-built satellites from Guiana, but stressed that main French effort was centered on continuing development of eldo booster. (Tech. Wk., 11/14/66, 3)
USAF Agena D rocket launched from Vandenberg afb with Atlas booster Feb. 15 exploded into at least 40 pieces which fell from orbit during seven-day period, UPI reported. There was no indication that the payload itself was damaged: "It is no longer in orbit, but it may have been a reconnaissance satellite which was brought down and recovered,” UPI explained. Explosive gas in the otherwise empty Agena apparently was detonated accidentally after booster had fired, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/11/66)
gsfc Nimbus Project Manager Harry Press told Aviation Week that Nimbus B would move nasa’s weather satellite program into a second generation research and development effort by starting the measurement of fundamental quantities in the atmosphere necessary in new analytical weather-forecasting formulas. Nimbus B, third and largest in nasa’s meteorological satellite series, would carry seven major experiments: infrared interferometer spectrometer; satellite infrared spectrometer; image dissector camera system; high-resolution infrared radiometer; monitor for ultraviolet solar energy; medium-resolution infrared radiometer; and interrogation, recording, locating system. In addition, Nimbus B would carry Snap-19 radioisotope thermal generators capable of producing 60 w of power to supplement solar panels and determine feasibility of radioisotope generators for ultimate operational weather satellite system. Scheduled for launch in 1967 with Extended Thrust Augmented Thor-Agena D launch vehicle, Nimbus B would use basic Nimbus spacecraft configuration, but would require strengthened structural elements because of its additional weight. Press said the two major control difficulties which had shortened the August 1964 nimbus i mission had been analyzed and corrected on Nimbus C, scheduled for launch in 1966. A larger solar array drive motor, equipped with heat-conducting strap that would lower operating temperature of motor almost 100°C and with improved grease, would be substituted on Nimbus C for smaller motor whose failure had left NIMBUS i’s solar panels locked in near-vertical position when it apparently overheated and its grease failed to lubricate. Also, attempts would be made during Nimbus C mission to rely on the flywheels to dampen spacecraft oscillations and to use the gas thruster system as little as possible, Press said, nimbus i had spun about its roll axis when its depreciating power supply had caused its batteries to feed lower voltages to the attitude control electronics system and the thrusters had fired excessive amounts of cold freon gas. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66, 52, 53)
U.S. Committee on Extension to the Standard Atmosphere (coesa) announced plans to publish new volume, U.S. Standard Atmosphere Supplements, 1966, which would tabulate and detail properties of earth’s atmosphere at all altitudes up to 600 mi.—information necessary to investigate atmosphere’s effect on aerospace vehicle operation and design. Sponsored by NASA, essa, and usaf Cambridge Research Lab., publication would be based on data gathered through tracking of artificial earth satellites and instrumented rockets and satellites, (nasa Release 66-72)
Lowell T. Wingert, at&t vice president, wrote a letter to ComSatCorp urging discussions on development of a large-capacity communications satellite for "long haul domestic communications of all types,” to be owned and operated by ComSatCorp with "equitable access to domestic common carriers” in return for "bearing their share of ComSatCorp’s charges.” He called for ComSatCorp and other interested communications users "to undertake a joint study promptly with the hope of placing this newest type of communications facility into early domestic use.” (NYT3/25/66, 48; at&t Release)
FAA had submitted to aircraft manufacturers a new supersonic transport (Sst) financing plan, reported William Chapman in the Washington Post. Manufacturers, who claimed they could not afford to pay 25% of expected $l-billion cost of next building stage, would be able to contribute a lighter share of development costs than they had been paying under the 75-25% cost-sharing plan arranged by President Kennedy. (Chapman, Wash. Post, 3/31/66, H8) Australia’s Minister of Supply Denham Henty announced that U.S., U.K., and Australia would cooperate in experiments with U.S. Redstone rockets at Woomera Range to study effects of rocket reentry into the atmosphere. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/1/66, A20; Reuters, NYT, 4/1/66, 24) ■> Japanese Transportation Ministry announced a seven-year program to establish system of navigation satellites to be launched in 1972. A new ministry, the Satellite Navigation Research Office, would begin to develop electronic equipment, ground stations, and control systems as soon as the government’s budget for FY 1966 was approved by the current session of the Diet. R&D program would he carried out entirely by Japanese scientists. (NYT, 4/1/66, 59M)
France’s President Charles de Gaulle watched launch of cosmos cxxn unmanned satellite from Baikonur cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, into 625-km. (388-mi.) altitude circular orbit with 65° inclination and 97.1min. period. Tass said all instruments aboard satellite were functioning normally. De Gaulle was first Westerner to witness a Soviet launching and to visit Baikonur space center. (Tass, 6/25/66; Tanner, NYT, 6/26/66, 1; Wash. Post, 6/26/66, A20; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/26/66, A8)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D rocket from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 153)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Thor-Agena D booster. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
Praising June 16 flight of Titan III-C booster which injected eight satellites into orbit, Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown told Pentagon news conference that program cost included $33 million for satellites, $45 million for ground stations, and $10 to $20 million for other system elements. Launch costs were excluded since they were covered by Titan III-C development funding. Satellites were resistant to jamming or interference, but "anyone who puts up an antenna” of the right kind could listen in. What they would hear "may or may not be comprehensible to them” since traffic would be coded. Asked if U.S.S.R, could use satellite system, Dr. Brown replied affirmatively. However, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Thomas F. Rogers stated: "We have arranged so that it would be very difficult for them to have assured use of it.” (Transcript)
usn "Southern Cross” program, attempt to convert fleet communications to secure, long-range over-the-horizon communications using techniques such as satellite relay or troposcatter, was undergoing reevaluation because of competitive pressure for funds for Vietnam war, Aviation Week reported. "Southern Cross” was sponsored by usn Bureau of Ships and administered by Naval Electronics Laboratory. (.Av. Wk„ 1/10/66, 36)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying on the nasa FY 1967 budget request before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that the gap between the U.S. and Soviet space programs still remained and "this budget will not close it. We are as much as 2 years behind the Soviet Union in certain important aspects of space power. In . . . 1965, they launched 52 Cosmos satellites; successfully orbited a 3-man spacecraft; demonstrated a communications satellite capability with 2 Molniya spacecraft; and orbited the heaviest payload by anyone in the world to date, indicating they have developed a new launch vehicle with some WA to 3 million pounds of thrust. Since the beginning of 1966 they have achieved a successful soft landing on the moon and they have reached Venus with two probes. "The Soviet program shows every evidence of a continuing major commitment to long-term, large-scale operations in space. . . . The massive Soviet commitment to a rapid buildup and a long-term program underlines the importance they attached to advancing their space capabilities. It will require a strong and increasing effort initiated no later than fiscal year 1968 and vigorously pushed in the years after the United States has achieved a manned lunar landing to prevent them from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 5)
NASA issued a fact sheet on U.S. international space programs which listed criteria applied to determine value and acceptability of cooperative arrangements in space activity: (1) cooperative project must have scientific validity and mutual interest; (2) cooperative project must be conducted openly, with the scientific results being made freely available to the world scientific community; (3) each participant must accept financial responsibility for its own contribution to the project. Since their inception, nasa’s international programs had involved 71 countries or separate jurisdictions and had included satellite projects, individual experiments flown on NASA satellites, sounding rocket investigations, and a variety of programs in which foreign ground-based observations were coordinated with flight projects. U.S. had concluded bilateral agreements providing for launch of 14 scientific satellites instrumented and, in all but two cases, engineered abroad. Six of these satellites had already been successfully launched (one each for France and Italy and two each for Canada and U.K.). Other satellites would be contributed by the European Space Research Organization (esro), U.K., Canada, Italy, and Germany. U.S. had also opened its own satellites, manned and unmanned, to participation by foreign experimenters. Sixteen such experiments had been accepted for flight. Some 17 countries had entered into agreements with NASA for one or more cooperative sounding rocket projects. Such investigations had been initiated by both U.S. and foreign proposals. They had accounted for roughly 150 launchings in a five-year period with rockets ranging widely in size and type, from boosted Darts and Areas to Nike combinations, Aerobees, Shotputs, British Skylarks, and French Centaures. Ten cooperating countries made substantial contributions to experimental communications satellite work by constructing and operating overseas ground terminals used for TV and radio demonstrations. Conventional weather observations in 42 countries helped interpretation of cloud-cover photographs from weather satellites. A 1962 agreement with U.S.S.R. had resulted in: (1) one-way communications demonstrations using echo ii, (2) some exchange of ground-based magnetic field data in anticipation of an agreed exchange of satellite data, and (3) exchange of conventional weather data over a special communications channel set up between Washington and Moscow on a shared-cost basis pending the availability of satellite data from U.S.S.R. (Text)
NASA announced that nimbus ii meteorological satellite had taken nearly 1 million photos since its launch from wtr May 15. "It has been working better than a finely tuned engine,” said gsfc project manager Harry Press. "Its performance has exceeded everyone’s expectation.” (gsfc Release G-19-66)
Reported that the European Space Research Organization (esro), which met in Paris Nov. 24-26, had agreed that the TD-2 satellite, scheduled for launch in 1969 by Douglas Thor-Delta booster purchased from NASA, would carry nine solar-ionospheric experiments: (1) topside counter to measure radio waves; (2) solar Lyman-alpha radiation experiment; (3) a far ultraviolet spectroheliograph experiment; (4) x-ray crystal spectrometer; (5) solar particle flux experiments; measurements of (6) low energy electron fluxes; (7) energy and particle distribution of charged ionospheric particles; (8) oxygen and nitrogen light emissions; and (9) neutral ionospheric constituents. The 880-lb. satellite would he launched' into near-polar orbit with 620-mi. apogee and 218-mi. perigee, esro planned to launch TD-1 stellar astronomy satellite in 1968. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 33)
usaf would make electronic portraits of satellite shapes to develop catalog of radar images of possible space vehicle shapes, AFSC announced. Measurements on some 24 satellite models would be taken by afsc Electronic Systems Div. at Holloman afb in 2,000 hrs. of tests extending through December, (afsc Release 156.66)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
Radio Corp. of America was being awarded a $4,450,000 usaf definitive contract to supersede previously awarded letter contract for production of communication and electronic components- for unspecified space satellites. Contract would be managed by asfc’s Space Systems Div. (dod Release 652-66)
NASA turned essa ii (Environmental Survey Satellite) over to essa for operation in accordance with June 30, 1964, agreement between NASA and Dept, of Commerce. NASA had supervised design and construction of the satellite, conducted launch operations (Feb. 28), and tracked spacecraft after orbit was achieved; Dept, of Commerce had handled mangement and funding, (nasa Release 66-62)
All F-104G Starfighter aircraft in West Germany’s Air Force were grounded indefinitely as result of Nov. 28 air crash which killed pilot. Since 1962, 65 of Luftwaffe’s 700 Starfighters had crashed, killing 37 pilots. Aircraft was manufactured by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (Shabecoff, NYT, 12/7/66, 15)	_ Agena D booster into elliptical transfer orbit with 22,831-mi. (36,758km.) apogee; 114-mi. (183-km.) perigee; 650-min. period; and 31° inclination. At 16:30 get, apogee motor was fired to place satellite into near-synchronous 22,300-mi.-altitude orbit. It would be allowed to drift 12 days to stationary position over the Pacific at 151° west longitude. One of the most versatile satellites ever developed, 775-lb. ATS I carried 15 communications, technology, and scientific experiments, including camera systems for cloud-cover photos; two-way vhf transponder for voice communications between ground stations and aircraft in flight; electronically despun antenna to continuously direct a radio beam toward earth; and low-thrust resistojet which produced thrust of 450 millionths of a pound. Capable of multiple-access communications, satellite would be able to transmit TV and voice communications among stations in North America, Asia, and Australia. It would also be used to send weather data from essa facility at Suitland, Md., to Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) stations in U.S., Japan, and Australia. Mission objectives were to inject spacecraft into synchronous orbit and place it on station; operate spacecraft for at least 30 days; and conduct experiments. Ats program—a five-satellite project managed by gsfc under ossa direction—sought to investigate technology common to various spacecraft applications through flight experiments carried on spin-stabilized and gravity-gradient-stabilized spacecraft, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-308; Marshall Star, 12/1/66, 1, 4; Wash. Post, 12/8/66, A2; upi, ATT, 12/9/66, 57; upi, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, A15)
International conference on outer space to mark 10th anniversary of first artificial satellite (1967) was proposed by U.S.S.R. Academician A. A. Blagonravov to working group of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. European site was suggested for conference, which "would provide information for peoples in all countries and training for the developing countries.” (Rossi, CSM, 1/26/66)
NASA announced plans to launch two ion engines into polar orbit in late 1968	satellite mission to advance development of ion engines as propulsion units for future long-duration space missions. Second part of lrc’s Space Electric Rocket Test (Sert) program, mission would evaluate inflight performance of electron-bombardment ion engines for six months or more and analyze effects of thrusters and their electric fields on other satellite components, lrc conducted first successful operation of ion engine in space July 20, 1964, in 50-min. Sert I ballistic flight from nasa Wallops Station, (nasa Release 66-262)
Series of small balloons was launched from Christchurch, New Zealand, in joint U.S.-New Zealand pilot project to examine feasibility of Global Horizontal Sounding Technique (Ghost)—plan for using satellite to locate and read out information from large number of balloons floating around earth at constant altitudes. Balloons, circling hemisphere at 20,000-ft., 40,000-ft., and 80,000-ft. altitudes, would be tracked by six stations equipped with high-frequency receivers, stop watches, and sun tables. Program would determine whether small superpressure balloons could fly for extended periods; test temperature, humidity, pressure, and radiation sensors which might be used in operational Ghost system; learn whether balloons would cluster in certain areas; and acquire data on planetary circulation in Southern Hemisphere at various altitudes. Called Southern Hemisphere balloon experiment, project was sponsored by essa and nsf and had the endorsement of U.N. World Meteorological Organization. Data would be analyzed by National Center for Atmospheric Research and Information and shared with all participants and interested nations, (essa Release 66-17)
luna xii had photographed lurain with "a special phototelevision device,” Tass announced in first official statement relating to spacecraft since Oct. 22 launch. Satellite had entered lunar orbit Oct. 25 with 1,740-km. (1,081-mi.) apolune; 100-km. (62-mi.) perilune; and 3 hr. 25 min. period. First photos transmitted—shown on Moscow television less than an hour after announcement—showed clearly distinguishable details of craters and mountain ranges. luna xii was ninth photographic mission to moon. Five had been from U.S.: rangers vii, viii, and ix, surveyor i, and lunar orbiter i; four from U.S.S.R.: luna hi, zond iii, luna ix, and luna xii. (Tass, 10/29/66; AP, NYT, 10/30/66, 43)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos cxi unmanned satellite with scientific equipment to continue space investigations, Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 226 km. (140 mi.); perigee, 191 km. (119 mi.); period, 88.6 min.; inclination, 51°. (Tass, 3/1/66)
U.S.S.R.’s luna x unmanned spacecraft had achieved lunar orbit (1,000-km. [621-mi.] apolune, 350-km. [217-mi.] perilune, 3-hr. period) at 1:44 p.m. est April 3 to become world’s first artificial moon satellite, U.S.S.R. announced at 23rd Communist Party Congress meeting in the Kremlin. Accomplishment was dramatized by direct broadcast from luna x of the Communist anthem, "Internationale.” Tass released details of luna x’s structure and flight. 3,530-lb. spacecraft consisted of two main parts: moon satellite section and engine facilities section. 540-lb. satellite was an airtight package containing radio equipment, telemetry system, equipment for studying the moon and near-lunar space, heat-regulation and power supply systems, and small jet engines to stabilize the flight. Approximately 8,000 km. (4,969 mi.) from the lunar surface, spacecraft was oriented so that jet of the engine was directed against direction of its movement. At approximately 1:44 p.m. est retrorockets fired automatically, slowing spacecraft to 1.3 km. (.8 mi.) per second and putting it in lunar orbit. Twenty minutes after switching off retrorockets, earth command was sent to separate instrumented lunar satellite from engine facilities section, and first radio communications session was held. Equipment was functioning normally and radio communications were stable. There was no suggestion that photos of the lunar surface were being transmitted to earth, or that LUNA x was "tumbling” [see April 3]. (Tass, 4/4/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/4/66, A6; AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/66, A12) Aoril 4: House Committee on Science and Astronautics voted to report $4,986,864,150 NASA authorization bill—$25,135,580 less than $5,012, 000,000 nasa had requested for FY 1967. (nasa lar V/57-58)
NASA nimbus ii (Nimbus C) meteorological satellite was launched from wtr with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena B booster into near-polar orbit with 730-mi. (1,175-km.) apogee, 678-mi. (1,091-km.) perigee, 108-min. period, and 80° inclination. Flight plan had called for 600-mi.-altitude orbit. nimbus ii, three-axis earth-stabilized r&d weather satellite, would flight-test basic technology essential to meteorological satellites and instrumentation necessary to study atmospheric structure. It would also extend meteorological observation to region of electromagnetic spectrum not previously covered. Satellite carried Advanced Vidicon Camera System (Avcs) and Automatic Picture Transmission System (Apt), both of which operate during daylight portion of each orbit; Medium Resolution Infrared Radiometer (Mrir) to store global medium resolution data on earth’s heat balance; and High Resolution Infrared Radiometer (Hrir) to provide high-resolution nighttime cloud-cover photos and cloud-top temperatures. Addition of Hrir data to Apt system was initial demonstration of stored and direct readout day-night cloud coverage capability. 3,000 weather photos would be taken daily by 912-lb. satellite and transmitted to any of 150 Apt stations around the world—eight of which had been modified to obtain nighttime cloud cover. Second in nasa’s Nimbus series of meteorological satellites, nimbus ii was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA ossa, (nasa Proj. Off.; O’Toole, NYT, 5/16/66, 10)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh, flew by helicopter to gsfc for three-hour tour, during which they watched GSFC technicians receive first photos from essa ii meteorological satellite. Successful operation of essa ii officially created world’s first fully operational weather-forecasting satellite network. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/3/66)
Satellite to be launched by U.S.S.R. in near future would carry French instrumentation, French Minister of Research Alain Peyrefitte announced in Caen. France and U.S.S.R. had signed an agreement for joint scientific cooperation June 30. (Reuters, NYT, 11/13/66, 45)
nasa announced Atlas-Centaur booster would replace Atlas-Agena for launching Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) satellites and Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) D and E. Launches were scheduled to begin in 1968. Centaur stage—first to use liquid hydrogen as a fuel—was capable of boosting about 40 per cent greater payload than the Agena into near-earth orbit and about three times the payload on lunar trajectory, (nasa Release 66-328)
ComSatCorp had negotiated $441,412 contract—largest ever negotiated by ComSatCorp with a foreign country—with Nippon Electric Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, for multiplex subsystem equipment for earth stations at Oahu, Hawaii, and Brewster Flat, Wash., which would be completed by 1967. System would modulate signals received from communications carriers for transmission over satellite links, demodulate signals received from satellite for relay to land distribution systems, and provide continuous monitoring for quality of all signals being passed through the system. (ComSatCorp Release)
State Dept, disclosed that "a very small amount” of radioactivity had leaked into the atmosphere from aec’s Sept. 12 underground nuclear test, but the incident did not violate limited nuclear test ban treaty because no radioactive debris had circulated outside U.S. Disclosure was in response to a Soviet inquiry, (upi, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, A2) November 10: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 120-mi. (193-km.) altitude in flight to evaluate experiments for NASA-West German cooperative satellite program. Premature ejection of payload cylinder doors caused overheating and malfunction of an electron detector, but all other instruments performed satisfactorily. Rocket performance, though slightly in excess of predicted, was within normal tolerance range, (nasa Rpt. srl)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with ThorAgena D booster, (upi, NYT, 11/9/66, 4; U.S Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 158)
Washington Post commented on report of satellite collision made by Dr. Hilliard Paige at iaf Congress in Madrid: "Belated disclosure that two Air Force space vehicles collided in space in April, 1965, ought to remind the country that part of its space program is being carried on behind a cloak of secrecy as absolute as that which conceals space operations in the Soviet Union. The open policy of NASA, which has done so much to keep the whole nation interested in and excited about space progress, is in sharp contrast to the policy of the Air Force. . . .” [Ed. note: Satellites were usn, not usaf.] (Wash. Post, 10/13/66, A22)
RCA received $2,500,000 fixed-price usn contract for fabrication, testing, and delivery of six navigation satellites, (dod Release 933-66)
NASA had selected Fairchild Hiller, General Electric Co., and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for negotiation of contracts totaling $450,000 for parallel six-month feasibility studies of missions for five possible second-generation Applications Technology Satellites (Ats). Spacecraft would contribute information useful for orbiting data-relay satellites, deep-space tracking, navigation satellites, data collection, galactic probes, and communication with aircraft, other satellites, ships and ground vehicles, and broadcast satellites. (NASA Release 66-45)
New York Times editorial: "The Soviet-American race to the moon is heating up. Even as the United States-built satellite, Lunar Orbiter, finished photographing the moon, Moscow’s huge Luna 11 also went into lunar orbit. The indicated success of the second unmanned flight of the Apollo moonship—another step toward putting the first Americans on the moon—undoubtedly will speed initial tests of a Soviet lunar vehicle.” (NYT, 8/30/66)
Luna x was continuing in circumlunar orbit with 1,017-km. (632mi.) apolune, 350-km. (217-mi.) perilune, 2-hr. 58-min. period, and 71° inclination, Tass reported. Eighteen radio communications had been held with the satellite "during which a large volume of scientific data had been received.” Scientific equipment onboard included: (1) recorder of meteoric particles for investigating meteor showers along earth-moon route, for seeking dust cloud around the moon, and for registering the micrometeorites in circumlunar space; (2) gamma-spectrometer for studying the gamma-radiation of the lunar surface; (3) magnetometer for refining the value for the strength of the moon’s magnetic field; (4) equipment for studying solar plasma in circumlunar space; (5) equipment for recording the infrared radiation of the lunar surface; and (6) instrumentation for studying the radiation conditions in the moon’s environs. Variations in the satellite’s orbital parameters would be used to investigate the moon’s gravitational field. (Tass, Pravda, 4/6/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
gsfc awarded Hughes Aircraft Co. a $4.275-million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for reconfiguration of three gravity-gradient Applications Technology Satellites scheduled for launch in 1967 and 1968. (nasa Release 66-299)
Proposal by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to establish nonmilitary global navigation system had been rejected by interdepartmental committee after two-year study. Leonard Jaffe, Director of nasa’s Communication and Navigation Programs Div., and chairman of the committee, said in interview with Aviation Week that further research and development were required. "Low-keyed” study effort planned by nasa would include award of more feasibility study contracts to industry and test of navigation equipment on Applications Technology Satellite (Ats) mission, during which voice transmissions would be made to aircraft. Report of committee, which included representatives from nasa, faa, dod, and Dept, of Interior, would be submitted to Congress in several weeks. (Av. Wk., 9/12/66, 38; Tech. Wk., 9/19/66, 3)
oao i Orbiting Astronomical Observatory was launched by nasa from etr with Atlas-Agena D booster into parking orbit and then into planned circular orbit. Orbital parameters: 505.4-mi. (813.3-km.) apogee; 493.2-mi. (793.7-km.) perigee; 101-min. period; and 35° inclination. Satellite's solar panels and instrumented booms would be deployed April 10. First of four spacecraft scheduled for nasa’s Oao program, oao i— largest, heaviest, and most electronically complex unmanned spacecraft ever developed by U.S.—weighed 3,900 lbs., carried 10 telescopes, and contained 44,000 separate parts and 30 mi. of electrical wiring. It carried four scientific experiments to provide astronomers with their first sustained look at the universe from above the earth’s atmosphere, including Univ. of Wisconsin broad-band ultraviolet telescope package and detection devices to study the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Through its complex ground-command spacecraft attitude control system, oao i would be aimed at individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed back to earth in the form of digital data for analysis by experimenters. Oao program was managed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 66-60; NYT, 4/9/66, 7; NYT, 4/10/66, 10E)
luna xi, U.S.S.R.’s second lunar orbiting satellite, launched Aug. 24, was continuing to orbit moon and had completed 1,410 revolutions, Tass announced. All equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 9/14/66)
Photos and temperature data gathered by satellites could be used to study ice movements on Canada’s lakes and rivers, G. P. Williams, Canadian National Research Council, suggested to Canadian Press. Williams said predictions of the formation and breakup of ice would be valuable to forestry workers who used the waters to float logs, and aviators who landed on northern lakes. (Can. Press, NYT, 11/13/66, 46)
Japan’s second attempt to orbit a satellite failed when 4th stage of Lambda 4S-2 booster failed to ignite. First failure was Sept. 26. Both launches were conducted from Uchinoura Range, Kyushu Island. {Wash. Post, 12/20/66, A13; upi, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, A2, A24)
NASA’s ats i satellite took first U.S. high-quality photos of the earth from synchronous orbit altitudes. Photos showed changing cloud-cover pattern over 40 per cent of the earth’s surface, (nasa Proj. Off.)
U.S.S.R. had constructed two stations in the United Arab Republic and Mali to photograph artificial earth satellites, Tass reported. Stations had been equipped by U.S.S.R. and were being operated by Soviet, U.A.R., and Mali specialists. (Reuters, NYT, 4/16/66, 13)
dod was successfully using syncom ii comsat 12 hrs. daily and syncom iii comsat 22 hrs. daily for military communications across the Pacific, Technology Week reported, dod had assumed control of both satellites —launched by NASA July 26, 1963, and Aug. 19, 1964, respectively— July 8, 1965. (Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 9)
Eighth anniversary of launching of vanguard i, second U.S. earth satellite. (nasa Historian)
Tass announced that luna xi had become second U.S.S.R. satellite to circle moon when it entered lunar orbit Aug. 27 with 1,200-km. (745-mi.) apolune; 160-km. (99-mi.) perilune; 2 hr. 58-min. period; and 270° inclination. In first official statement since Aug. 24 launch, agency reported that midcourse maneuver had been successfully executed Aug. 26 and that onboard equipment was functioning normally, luna x began orbiting moon April 3—first spacecraft to do so—but did not transmit photos to earth. (Tass, Pravda, 8/30/66, 1; AP, Wash. Post, 8/25/66, A3)
Versatility of ats 1 satellite, launched by nasa from etr Dec. 6, was demonstrated in program at GSFC. In first test, satellite relayed color TV show from Goldstone, Calif., to gsfc via Rosman, N.C., ground station. In second test, voice signals transmitted from gsfc to Goldstone and beamed by dish antenna to satellite were successfully relayed to three aircraft in flight, demonstrating publicly for the first time that 50,000-mi. earth-to-space circuit could be used with existing airline radio equipment in vhf range. Concurrent with these tests, satellite transmitted high-quality photos of weather over eastern Asia, Pacific Ocean, and western U.S. It had begun relaying photos Dec. 9. nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the press ats I was "a major step forward” toward practical satellites and would have "an impact on everyone in the world.” (Clark, NYT, 12/14/66, 38; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/14/66, A4; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 12/14/66, A12)
Fourth earth-orbiting object [see Sept. 30] not identified "with any launching or country of origin” was reported by GSFC in Satellite Situation Report. Object apparently decayed Dec. 30. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/66) During December: nrc’s Space Science Board was studying possible harmful effects to astronomy and other sciences of proposed NASA project to orbit large reflecting mirror that could illuminate land masses at night, NAS announced. NASA’s support for the study was expressed by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell in a letter to Dr. Harry H. Hess, Chairman of nas Space Science Board: "I am gratified that the committee has promptly undertaken work on this task and am looking forward to their review for guidance with regard to the possible adverse effects of such a project.” (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 12/66, 7)
NASA and ComSatCorp had signed agreement for satellite communications services to support Apollo program. ComSatCorp would provide voice/ data channels and teletype channels in synchronous satellites to be positioned over Pacific and Atlantic oceans by NASA. Draft tariff filed by ComSatCorp with fcc estimated that cost of services would be $8.95 million annually, (nasa Release 66-178; ComSatCorp Release)
usaf Titan III-C booster launched from etr inserted seven Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (Idcsp) repeaters and one gravity-gradient satellite into random, near-synchronous, equatorial orbit, creating nucleus of worldwide military communications system. Apogees varied from 15,911 mi. (25,617 km.) to 16,126 mi. (25,963 km.); perigees from 15,811 mi. (25,456 km.) to 15,829 mi. (25,484 km.). Average period was 22 hrs. 10 min. All seven comsats were reported performing nominally. Satellite to explore feasibility of gravity-gradient stabilization at very high altitudes had successfully deployed its 52-ft.-long booms and was performing as expected. Powered flight of Titan III-C was close to planned parameters. Transtage and payload were inserted into parking orbit, where first transtage burn made necessary course corrections. Second transtage burn—at 110 min. get—moved stage and load into transfer orbit. Third transtage burn—at 06:03:12 get—put satellite dispenser frame and its eight satellites weighing 800 lbs. total into near-synchronous orbit with 15,906-mi. (25,608.6-km.) apogee and 15,801-mi. (25,439.6km.) perigee. At 06:06:52 get, satellites were ejected one at a time over approximate 3-min. period into their preselected orbits. Within six minutes, telemetry signals were received and surface-station tracking and communications tests begun; within two hours, circuits were established through repeaters. Launch was fourth consecutive success of Titan III-C and first total success of its transtage. Fifteen additional comsats would be launched by late 1966 to ensure against failure of one or more satellites. New ground terminal would be installed in Vietnam by midsummer to provide additional command and control circuits, (upi, NYT, 6/17/66. 14; upi, Wash. Post, 6/17/66, A4; Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 16)	'
Space negotiations played important roie in visit of West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard to U.S. Following discussions with President Johnson, joint statement was released from White House: "The President and the Chancellor discussed possibilities for increased cooperation in technology and science and in particular in the field of space research. The Chancellor expressed his satisfaction that effective steps toward increased cooperation in space research have been initiated since his last meeting with the President in December 1965. The President and the Chancellor welcomed the decision to expand the present cooperative satellite program reached as a result of the recent discussions in Bonn between NASA Administrator Webb and Minister of Science Stoltenberg. "The President and the Chancellor agreed that scientific cooperation should be pressed forward for the mutual benefit of both countries and the advancement of human knowledge, preserving opportunities for additional nations to participate and contribute.” President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, later flew from Washington, D.C., to Cape Kennedy for tour of ksc. During speech in Vehicle Assembly Building, President Johnson said he was discussing "with the Chancellor, as well as other leaders, my hope that our scientists can join in joint endeavors to reap the full benefits of space research.” He said he had authorized Administrator Webb "to discuss whether solar physicists from Europe may wish to be associated with the American solar physicists” in program for Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) to be flown "on an Apollo flight in order to study the sun at the height of the solar cycle.” Appealing to the U.S.S.R. for early conclusion of a treaty on outer space exploration, Johnson said: "I earnestly hope that the Soviet Union—whose space achievements have been very great—will feel as we fee] in America: that the rapid evolution of space technology makes ... a treaty between us governing the use of space a most urgent matter ... as we explore the vastness of space, and as we dream of new horizons, we work, too, for the manmade controls that will keep these efforts at the service of man and at the service of peace.” He noted that the U.S. sought and would continue to seek cooperation in space with U.S.S.R.: "We have an agreement to exchange certain kinds of space data. . . . We will soon publish jointly American and Soviet material on space biology and medicine.” The President also mentioned that the U.S, was "on schedule in our plan and our determination to put men on the moon before 1970.” (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1365-6, 1370; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/28/66, Cl)
msfc had selected Boeing Co. and Westinghouse Electric Corp. for parallel feasibility studies of reflector satellite to provide illumination over land masses at night, Technology Week reported. Studies, which would be worth about $120,000 each for 90-day effort, would be made for nasa and dod. (msfc pao; Tech. Wk., 7/25/66, 16)
NASA was negotiating with RCA for $13-million cost-plus-award-fee renewal of previous contract to operate and maintain three data acquisition facilities. Renewal called for engineering and operations services for NASA’s unmanned Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), operation of weather satellite control centers at GSFC, and operation and maintenance of tracking stations at Rosman, N. C., and Fairbanks, Alaska, (nasa Release 66-202)
Prerecorded pictures of dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, transmitted from Soviet satellite cosmos CX launched Feb. 22, were shown on Moscow television. Announcement described the dogs as subjects of biological studies and said such studies "will precede every new and important step of man in space.” Tass said "the condition of the space dogs is quite excellent.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/27/66, uss-t Trans.; Pravda, 2/21/66, 6, uss-t Trans.)
Ford Foundation President McGeorge Bundy announced $ 10-million grant to show potential of educational television through a series of national programs. Series would be carried by Nation’s 125 noncommercial educational TV stations joined by coaxial cable and microwave relay for the demonstration. In a brief to be filed with fcc, Bundy defended Foundation’s Aug. 1 request for formation of nonprofit nationwide satellite system that would carry extensive schedule of educational programs financed by transmission of commercial programs. {NYT,, 12/12/66, 1, 95; Wash. Post, 12/12/66, Al, A4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/12/66, A3)
U.S.S.R.’s launch of two satellites was observed by leaders of eight Communist nations visiting U.S.S.R. for summit talks on Vietnam and Communist China. COSMOS cxxx, for continued space research, entered earth orbit with 340-km. (211-mi.) apogee; 211-km. (131-mi.) perigee; 89.9-min. period; and 65° inclination. Equipment was functioning normally. Fourth MOLNIYA i comsat, for "further testing of . . . long range twoway television and telephonic-telegraphic radio communication,” had orbital parameters of apogee, 39,700 km. (24,658 mi.); perigee, 485 km. (301 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 53 min.; and inclination, 64.9°. Equipment, including broadcasting system, orientation system, orbital correction devices, and power supply, was functioning normally. (Tass, 10/20/66)
Eighth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Despite predictions of a lifespan that would not exceed five years, satellite continued to orbit the earth every 103.9 min. Other orbital parameters, as of Jan. 15, were: apogee, 956.9 mi. (15,406 km.); perigee, 211.9 mi. (341 km.), (msfc Release 66-26)
usaf launched unidentified satellite fr;om wtr with Thor-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 148)
Missiles and Rockets reported prediction of Japanese rocket engineer Dr. Hideo Itokawa that Japan might launch 60-lb. probes to Mars and Venus after orbiting its first satellite in 1968. Itokawa said the Mu series launch vehicle, under development by Univ. of Tokyo Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science, would produce enough thrust— 400,000	lbs.—to launch interplanetary probes. (M&R, 1/3/66, 7)
Five-man nasa board and House Science and Astronautics Committee’s nasa Oversight Subcommittee had begun separate inquiries into failures of ogo I, ii, in, OAO i, and nimbus i. Questions under investigation included: (1) Is the expenditure on observatory satellites wise? (2) Are the projects being carried out on an efficient basis? and (3) Is the taxpayer’s interest being protected? GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark told AP he believed there had been "technical goofs but no management problems” associated with the failures. "Scientifically, we have not had a failure in ogo. Something less than 100 percent but more than 75 percent of ogo’s experiment return has been outstandingly successful. OGO 1 and ogo 2—although classified as spacecraft failures—gave us more data than all other satellites combined up to that time.” (NYT, 8/14/66, 1, 70; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/14/66, A23)
ComSatCorp awarded a $60,000 study contract to France’s Centre National d’Etudes des Telecommunications for engineering analysis of a system of phased communications satellites operating in 12-hr. 30°-inclined orbits. It would include analysis of a 12-satellite or 15-satellite system, amount of coverage, orbit stability, launch conditions, types of communications, and other factors required to maintain a given quality of service over a five-year period. Work would be performed within 180 days. (ComSatCorp Release)
Inter-American Development Bank awarded Page Communications, Inc., $250,000 contract to "determine the most economic locations for ground stations in South America which would be linked to the satellite system, and the means of connection with local telecommunications systems.” Study would be carried out with ComSatCorp cooperation. (idb Release; Wash. Post, 4/16/66, C6)
Four sounding rockets—an Aerobee 150A, two Nike-Tomahawks, and a Nike-Apache—were launched by nasa from Wallops Station at predetermined intervals between 2:13 p.m. edt and 3:11 p.m. edt in conjunction with passage of explorer xxxii satellite. Objective of series was to correlate measurements of properties, characteristics, and conditions of upper atmosphere obtained by rocket-borne experiments with similar measurements made by EXPLORER xxxii, second U.S. Atmosphere Explorer, launched May 25. Project was conducted by gsfc under overall direction of ossa. (Wallops Release 66-45; NASA Rpt. srl)
Report of the White House Committee on Meteorology concluded that global weather experiment using meteorological satellite and network of sensors on constant-altitude balloons, remote land stations, and ocean buoys could be deployed in four years for $50 million. Assignment of overall management responsibility given to single agency to begin design study was discussed in Aviation Week. Designated Ghost (global horizontal sounding technique), project would attempt to extend atmospheric measurements to that 90% of the earth’s surface not yet adequately covered, using meteorological satellite in 600-mi.-altitude polar orbit to obtain pair of readings from all global points every 12 hrs. In addition, 1,000 to 3,000 super-pressure balloons would be floated at six different atmospheric levels to measure wind, pressure, temperature, humidity, and overpressure. NASA Nimbus B meteorological satellite, scheduled for launch in 1967, would carry interrogation, recording, and locating system experiment (Iris) designed to perform ranging and data collection function on which Ghost was based. However, NASA would attempt only limited experiments with Iris involving a check of the system’s ability to locate fixed sensor packages, and track them on slow-moving and fast-moving platforms, Dr. Morris Tepper, Director, Meteorological Programs Div., NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, told Aviation Week. Tepper said any agency providing its own transponders and funding its own equipment could participate in the Iris tests. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66,55)
U.S.S.R. announced annual Lenin prizes. Winners in science included anonymous space experts responsible for luna ix and luna x missions, luna ix made the first softlanding on the moon Feb. 3; luna x became the first manmade satellite of the moon April 3. Prize commemorated Lenin’s birthday and was considered highest in the Soviet Union. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/22/66)
ComSatCorp requested fcc permission to launch satellite which would relay network television programs from their point of broadcast to affiliated stations for transmission to home sets. Request also asked that similar proposal submitted to fcc by American Broadcasting Co. (abc) May 13, 1965, be dismissed. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/5/66, A5)
NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin addressed the American Academy of Political and Social Science in Philadelphia on international significance of space program: ". . . the United States has welcomed direct foreign participation in space research and exploration. The U.S. has contributed its boosters to launch six satellites which were conceived, engineered, instrumented and funded by cooperating foreign countries. Eight more such satellites are to be launched by us under existing agreements and, at this date, other agreements are in early prospect. We have opened our own satellites to foreign experimenters. Some twenty experiments proposed by scientists abroad have been selected on their merits for flight on our satellites. These foreign experiments are contributed to the program; we contribute space in the satellite and its support systems and retrieve the data for the experimenter. Even wider cooperation—with twenty different countries —is achieved through programs which utilize small, nonorbiting rockets to obtain data for which satellites do not commend themselves. In all of these projects, we have shared the tasks and costs in literal cooperation without exporting a dollar.” (Text)
Prof. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, said at the Asia-Pacific Seminar that the U.S. was the only nation in the scientific revolution and that the U.S.S JL, U.K., and West Germany had not yet entered it. He described the scientific revolution as dependent upon man’s brains and not upon water, coal, or iron, as was the industrial revolution. The computer, he said, was the chief symbol of the scientific revolution. (AP, NYT, 1/27/66, 3) January 24-26: At aiaa Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff was elected 1966 aiaa president. Dr. C. Stark Draper, chairman of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture on the role of "informetics” in modern flight systems. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell chaired a special "Space Sciences Report” plenary session which considered priorities in planetary exploration and the interaction of solar wind with the planets. Donald L. Hunter of Kitt Peak National Observatory said Venus exploration was likely to be as interesting as exploration of Mars; high Venusian surface temperature did not rule out possibility of rudimentary life forms, and Venus’ environment might be less hostile than that of Mars. Manned round trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus "swingby,” according to Rollin W. Gillespie and Stanley Ross of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; direct flights would take 800 to 900 days. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal speaker at the Honors Convocation. He said: "Yesterday, President Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress. . . . This year, the process of sorting out priorities and allocating resources has been especially difficult. Abroad, there is the growing commitment to Vietnamese freedom. At home, there is the growing commitment to freedom from poverty, ignorance, ugliness, and unemployment. In addition to these and other commitments, the President’s budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated year after year: to undertake the exploration of space for the benefit of mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more than $5 billion for NASA’s part in this enterprise have been requested. . .. "It is within this framework that the nasa program has been hammered out—not representing the sum of our program demands. However, as we indicated in our budget briefing for the Press this past weekend, we believe we have a balanced program of aeronautics and space research, of science and technology, of large scale manned exploration and unmanned probes and satellites. "We recognize there is an enormous responsibility attached to the planning, justification, and direction of a sum so large during a period so rich in other needs. . . . "We have reached a point where the exploration of space is no longer a promise but a hard fact, where scientific data and tested capabilities are in hand instead of in the future. ". . . The program that we have laid out for nasa for the coming year will meet the highest priorities of scientific and technological needs. It will permit flexible evaluation of the next major steps open to us in space. It will maintain the forward momentum that has been built up with energy and care over the past years. It will permit strong competition for those who wish to outstrip us and meaningful cooperation for those who can find communities of interest with us. It will provide an honest and practical balance between the many elements of scientific investigation, technological application and operational experience. It provides a challenge that will require hard work, hard judgment, and careful appraisal at every step of translation from plan into execution. It does not close to future exploitation the many options that have been built for the nation in the past. Most importantly, it recognizes that true national security is best measured by the useful knowledge in men’s minds and that the great arena of space remains a battleground between the intellect of man and the unknown.” Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was made at the Honors Convocation by L/G James Doolittle (usafr) : "On the second of December 1965 the world became poorer; our country lost one of its foresighted leaders; aeronautics lost a man who had devoted a major part of his life to its advancement; astronautics lost its great ambassador at home and at large and those fortunate of us—who had been privileged to know and work with him—lost a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate. "Dr. Hugh Latimer Dryden dedicated his whole life to the service of his fellow man. He was a doer, but a gentle person—a man who strove prodigiously, but instinctively did the kindly thing. He was eager and courageous. He had been critically ill for several years, but he worked hard and effectively up to a few days before his death. . . . "Hugh Latimer Dryden: engineer, scientist, administrator, public servant, patriot, theologian, realist. With his immediate family and all the nation we, his close friends and associates, mourn his passing. We will long remember him with affection, admiration, respect, and gratitude, for excellence endures.” Goddard Award, aiaa’s highest, was presented jointly to Hans J. P. von Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab., Wright-Patterson afb, for "his contributions to the achievement in 1939 of the first successful application of turbojet propulsion to aircraft”; and to A. W. Blackman, Chief of Propulsion, United Aircraft Corp., and George D. Lewis, Project Engineer, uac Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div., for "their contributions to the understanding of the phenomenon of combustion instability and for their recognition of acoustical liners as a method of suppressing such instabilities in turbojet afterburners and rocket engines.” Sylvanus Albert Reed Award went to Clarence L. Johnson, vice president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and designer of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft and the YF-12A interceptor, for his "production of two triple-sonic military aircraft, for continuing personal design innovation, imaginative engineering, and practical manufacturing techniques that over the years have aided immeasurably in maintaining U.S. ascendency in defensive aerial weaponry.” 1966 Research Award was given to Prof. Shao-Chi Lin, Univ. of California (San Diego), for "basic research in the electric and electromagnetic properties of ionized gases, and for significant contributions to reentry physics.” (Texts; aiaa Release; aiaa Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710)
cosmos cxv scientific satellite was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. "to continue space research,” Tass reported. Satellite was said to have an apogee of 294 km. (183 mi.); perigee of 190 km. (118 mi.); period, 89.3 min.; and inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 4/20/66)
In a press conference, nimbus ii project officials at GSFC said the meteorological satellite was "exceeding all expectations” with the amount and quality of data it was returning to earth. Launched into nearly circular orbit May 15, satellite could "produce in 12 hrs. as much refined weather data as took six months to get out of earlier satellites.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/20/66, A24)
First nuclear power generator in space marked fifth anniversary. Developed by aec to supplement solar power on usn’s 175-lb. experimental navigational satellite transit iv-a, 5-lb. Snap-3 generator had traveled 724,000,000 mi. (over 25,000 times around earth). transit iv-a, launched June 29, 1961, from Cape Canaveral, became oldest operating U.S. satellite in May 1964. (aec Release J-159)
Two meteorologists from U.S. National Environmental Satellite Center were in Geneva to discuss with their Soviet counterparts a cooperative approach on gathering weather information by satellite, including information exchange about meteorological satellite design and operation, Aviation Week reported. Full review of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement was scheduled for May. (Av. Wk., 3/14/66, 25)
France was planning to build rockets bigger than the missiles now being developed for her nuclear strike force, reported an article in Air et Cosmos. One purpose was to enable France to orbit a European comsat without the help of an American-built launch vehicle. A second goal would be to provide France with advanced, solid-fuel boosters that could carry one-ton thermonuclear warheads over intercontinental distances or orbit military surveillance satellites. (Air et Cosmos, 1/21/66)
usaf launched OV3-III satellite with Scout booster from wtr to measure charged particle hazards to space payloads. Orbital parameters: apogee, 2,781 mi. (4,475 km.); perigee, 223 mi. (358 km.); period, 136.9 min.; inclination, 81°. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
usaf successfully launched OV1-IX and OV1-X research satellites pickaback from Vandenberg afb with Atlas D booster. Each 220-lb. spacecraft carried 12 radiation-measuring experiments. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/12/66, Al; Tech. Wk., 12/19/66, 13)
NASA Administrator James E. Wehb told National Conference of Lieutenant Governors in Cleveland that new satellite weather reporting system meant "you say to every other nation the United States is developing this power technique of space, not to get power over you, but to develop power together with you over the limitations of nature.” (AP, Miami News, 6/26/66)
Human voice was successfully relayed via DOD’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (Idcsp) from terminal in Nhatrang, South Vietnam, to Camp Roberts, Calif. U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam would probably use military system to talk to President Johnson in times of crisis. (Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, M7)
Third molniya i communications satellite, launched into elliptical orbit by U.S.S.R. April 25, transmitted television broadcast from Vladivostok. Transmission of televised May Day celebration from Moscow to Vladivostok via satellite had been scheduled for May 1. All equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 4/28/66, 4, uss-t Trans.)
Western Union International, Inc., announced receipt of dod order for 10 Pacific satellite communications channels, permitting company to file with FCC for rate reductions on all its cable and satellite service in the Pacific area. Order and rate reductions were dependent on Fee’s approving Western Union’s previously announced request to lease and operate up to 65 satellite channels in the Pacific area, (djns, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/66, A13) E.	Anderson at Institute of Navigation meeting at U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, Kings Point, N.Y. Ships could be equipped for $2,000 to automatically obtain position fixes anywhere in the world, Anderson estimated. He believed operational system could be designed and built within two years. (NYT, 10/17/66, 60)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. signed agreement with Junkers of Munich, Germany, to "provide technical consultation, perform design work . . . and provide components” for esro’s Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite (Heos)—first to be designed and developed in Germany—to investigate charged particles in space and the effects of magnetic fields on them. Overall contract for satellite, which would be launched by nasa into elliptical orbit in late 1968, was $5.5 million, with Lockheed’s services valued at $500,000. (Lockheed Release)
U.S.S.R. had orbited an atomic clock of the ammonia type in COSMOS xcvn, launched Nov. 26,1965, a brief article in Pravda disclosed. Soviet Academician N. G. Basov, explaining possible uses of an ammonia frequency standard in a satellite, said it "permits carrying on communications with space devices, control over them, and transmission of telemetric information for very great distances. In addition, there is in this case a considerable increase in the operating precision of program timer devices and systems for determining the trajectory of the satellite’s movement.” (Av. Wk., 11/21/66, 36)
U.S.S.R. launched five- to six-ton spacecraft, possibly from Cosmos series, which exploded into 51 pieces detectable by radar, gsfc Satellite Situation Report would later reveal that nine pieces of debris remained in orbit on Oct. 15, the rest having reentered beginning Sept. 20. Launch was first unannounced U.S.S.R. space flight since Jan. 4, 1963. Evert Clark said in the New York Times that launch marked first U.S.S.R. 49° inclination launch from Tyura Tam and that Kapustin Yar had been used for all previous 49° launches, (gsfc SSR, 10/15/66, 22-5; Clark, NYT, 11/1/66, 19; Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/1/66, 3)
alaa met in Washington, D.C. Satellite Educational and Informational Television (seit)—concept of combining television and communications satellites to raise standards of living in less-advanced nations—was discussed by Vincent P. Rock, director of Communications Central. He emphasized lack of literacy requirement for television instruction and noted that it could (1) "transmit skills and knowledge required for modernization of productive activity; (2) transmit fantasy which helps a person understand the role and techniques of association required for participation in a modern society; and (3) transmit information about events and goods required for action in the modern world.” Following his speech, Rock told the press that a demonstration SEIT system would cost about $30,000,000, excluding ground receiving equipment, and could be ready in three years. Transmissions from satellites could either be received on six-foot "dish” antennas and relayed to individual receiving sets or relayed directly to home sets. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 5/3/66) James D. O’Connell, White House Director of Telecommunications Management, warned of frequency shortage for satellite communications by 1970 unless new techniques were devised. O’Connell urged aerospace engineers who started "this communications explosion” to "consider all ideas and concepts” that would squeeze more talk into existing broadcast frequencies. (Clark, NYT, 5/4/66, 23) U.S. should assume active world leadership in direct satellite-to-home radio and television broadcasts which offer tremendous potential for mass education and mass propaganda, suggested Columbia Univ. law professor Richard N. Gardner in a panel discussion. Warning that several nations had already asked international bodies to outlaw general broadcasting from space for fear of "unilateral penetration” or unwanted propaganda, Gardner urged: (1) the Administration to proceed immediately in developing direct broadcast satellites; (2) the organization of a pilot demonstration project, perhaps in India, with U.N. endorsement; (3) the involvement of aid and other international lending agencies in educational use of space communications; and (4) the reassurance of friendly nations that comsats would not he used for propaganda. Murray L. Schwartz, Univ. of Calif. School of Law, told panel that satellites were one more example of a technology that might be moving too fast for existing social institutions. A "knowledge explosion” helped by space communications would accelerate homogenization of society and "one of the great problems is to make sure the homogenization is not too great,” he said. (Clark, NYT, 5/5/66, 17; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/5/66, Al)
cosmos cxvi scientific satellite was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. "to continue outer space research,” Tass announced. Satellite was said to have an apogee of 478 km. (297 mi.); perigee of 294 km. (183 mi.); period, 92 min.; and inclination, 48° 25 min. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/28/66, 1, uss-t Trans.)
NASA tracking station at East Grand Forks, Minn., ceased operation after five years of space tracking. Advances in tracking technology and orbit determination had made site no longer essential for support of scientific satellites; some equipment would be sent to other stations, (nasa Release 66-117)
Five leading European aerospace companies announced formation of consortium to seek European space contracts. Called the European Satellite Team, group’s major goal was $18-million design and construction contract for Esho’s 800-lb. TD-1 and TD-2 research satellites scheduled for launch by NASA in 1969 and 1970. Consortium was composed of Elliott-Automation, U.K.; Compagnie Francaise Thomson-Houston, France; Fokker, Netherlands; Allmanna Svenska Elektriska, A.B., Sweden; and Fabbrica Italiana Apparecchi Radio, Italy. General Electric Co.’s Missile and Space Div. would serve as consultant. (Wil-ford, NYT, 7/13/66; Chic. Trib., 7/13/66) July 12-13; NASA launched five Nike-Apache sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station between 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. edt. Each rocket was programed to eject a vapor cloud of reddish or bluish color as its altitude increased from 50 to 125 mi. Experiments were to measure wind velocities and directions at various altitudes; motion of the trails was photographed from five camera sites within a 100-mi. radius of Wallops. Launches were conducted for gca Corp., under contract to GSFC. (NASA Release 66-181; Wallops Release 66-38)
Validity of satellite measurements of micrometeoroid fluxes in which piezoelectric microphones had been used as detectors was challenged in Science by Carl Nilsson, Australian scientist working at Gsfc. Although these measurements had given rise to theory that earth was surrounded by dust cloud, analysis of 100 hrs. of data from NASA’s ogo II satellite revealed: (1) there had been no detectable signals from sensors that could have been caused by micrometeoroid impact; and (2) the microphone systems had been emitting noise. Nilsson concluded that in past satellite measurements, microphone noises had not been caused by micrometeoroid impact but by reaction of microphone crystals to temperature changes. (Nilsson, Science, 10/9/66, 1242-6)
tiros vii meteorological satellite had operated successfully in orbit three years, traveled more than 445,000,000 mi., and had taken 123,000 pictures of cloud formations, storms, hurricanes, and typhoons with two wide-angle vidicon TV cameras. Orbited from AMR (now etr) June 19, 1963, it tracked major hurricanes and provided information aiding Ranger, Mariner, and Gemini missions. (AP, Balt. Sun, 6/19/66
New "self-healing” solar cell believed at least 50 times more radiation resistant than conventional power supply cells had been developed by rca for gsfc. Unlike previous cells which were made of silicon and protected by transparent shields of quartz or sapphire, new cells contained small lithium additive which sealed gaps produced by bombardment of high-energy radioactive particles and reduced weight of shielding by up to 90%. gsfc physicist Milton Schach described the new cell as a "major accomplishment” and predicted its use would permit flights of over 1,000 days through center of Van Allen radiation belts. Applications were also foreseen for communications satellites, high-altitude military reconnaissance spacecraft, and missions to Jupiter, surrounded by high-energy electron radiation belt. (Wilford, NYT, 8/7/66, 40)
ComSatCorp confirmed it was developing a plan which would have all commercial users of a domestic satellite communications system— telephone and telegraph companies as well as commercial television networks—underwrite educational TV. Funds would come from a portion of anticipated savings to communications users after a domestic satellite system was established. Details of plan would be submitted to Carnegie Commission on Educational Television—a private group making study on needs of educational TV. Carnegie study—to be released in late 1966 or early 1967—was expected to be relied on when Congress considered renewal of Educational Facilities Act—due to expire in 1967-—which concerned educational TV. (WSJ, 8/30/66, 10; AP, Wash. Post, 8/30/66, D8)
nasa had extended operational lifetimes of its three Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites 12 additional months because of their successful operation. Satellites would continue to provide meteoroid data, but researchers would concentrate on studying durability of spacecraft systems and components, pegasus I was launched Feb. 16, 1965; pegasus ii, May 27, 1965; and pegasus ill, July 30, 1965. All had been scheduled to operate 18 mos. (msfc Release 66-264)
afsc announced plans to use seven defense communications satellites, launched from etr June 16, in series of experiments to gather data for design of improved communications systems between ground stations 5,000	to 6,000 mi. apart. Using specially equipped C-121 communications research aircraft, Air Force Avionics Lab. engineers would test: (1) relay of voice and teletype communications through satellite from either aircraft or ground station; and (2) transmission of airborne meteorological reconnaissance data to the ground via satellite. Signals often would travel 50,000 mi. between terminal points, (afsc Release
Colonization of ocean floor would be more useful to man than colonization of the moon, said B. G. Anderson, senior research psychologist for General Dynamics Corp.’s Electric Boat Div. at joint aiaa-usn Marine Systems Conference in Los Angeles. The food and minerals available to man in and under the oceans were more important natural resources— and more easily retrieved—than any likely to be found on the moon or elsewhere in the solar system. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 8/18/66, H4) August 19: usaf launched usa’s secor vii geodetic satellite, ers-xv satellite, and an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, using Atlas-Agena D booster. (17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 155)
essa iii (Tos-A), third meteorological satellite in Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) series and first to include Advanced Vidicon Camera System (Avcs), was successfully launched for essa by NASA from wtr using three-stage Thor-Delta booster on mission to provide daily global cloud-cover photos. Satellite achieved nearly polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 922-mi. (1,486-km.) apogee; 858-mi. (1,381km.) perigee; 114.5-min. period; and 101° inclination. It was expected to transmit first photos to Gilmore Creek, Alaska, receiving station Oct. 3. An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 325-lb. essa iii carried two Avcs systems to provide cloud coverage and an infrared sensor (Ir) to measure earth’s heat balance. Launch was first for Thor-Delta booster from wtr. essa financed, managed, and operated the Tos system; gsfc was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. First two satellites in system—essa i and essa ii—were launched Feb. 3 and Feb. 28, respectively, (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, NYT, 10/3/66, 11; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/3/66, A12)
Dr. George Veis of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory revealed that the earth’s mean radius, measured from satellite observations, was 3,963.203 mi. Radius determination was based on analysis of more than 46,500 observations of 13 different satellites. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 1/22/66)
First program to provide pilots with current satellite photos adapted for their use in flight planning began at Kennedy International Airport under essa direction. Photos transmitted by essa ii and ill and nimbus ii were composited by computer into a single picture showing cloud patterns over eastern North America and the North Atlantic and analyzed by meteorologists, (essa Release)
Ufo was sighted by hundreds of people in Ohio and Pennsylvania, including two deputy sheriffs who followed it for 85 mi. usaf later attributed sightings to combination of a satellite and the planet Venus, (upi, NYT, 4/18/66, 4; Wash. Post, 4/18/66, A7; upi, NYT, 4/24/66, 95; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/23/66, A2)
Edmond C. Buckley, nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, reviewed nasa’s tracking and data acquisition network program: "During fiscal year 1965, the network, under the management of Goddard Space Flight Center, successfully supported four Gemini missions, two of which were manned. So far in fiscal year 1966, three manned Gemini missions have been supported, including the highly successful Gemini VII/VI rendezvous in December.. . . "During 1965, an average of 32 satellites was supported at any given time. This included satellites launched in prior years which were still transmitting useful data plus new satellites which were launched during the year. In 1966, the average number of satellites to be supported is expected to increase to more than 35 including flight of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, the Biosatellite, and Applications Technology Satellite. "In 1967, the average number of satellites to be supported is estimated to exceed 40 with the spacecraft, collectively, contacting the network stations more than 650 times daily. Contributing to the extensive workload in 1967 will be the additional flights of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, Biosatellite, Applications Technology Satellite, and Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. . . . "During fiscal year 1965, the [Deep Space] network successfully supported the Ranger VII, VIII, and IX missions and the cruise phase of the Mariner IV mission. The precise operation of the facilities at Goldstone and the control center at Pasadena in support of the Ranger missions was essential to the accuracy achieved in impacting on the surface of the moon, and to the activation of the cameras and transmission of live television pictures of the moon’s surface. In fiscal year 1965, 85-foot antenna facilities at both Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, became operational and participated in Mariner IV support.. . . "The excellent support provided the Mariner IV mission permitted the spacecraft, after a flight of 325 million miles and an elapsed time of 228 days, to pass Mars with a deviation of only 1,000 miles from the projected fly-by distance of 5,000 miles and to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The Deep Space Network continued to support the Mariner IV spacecraft after encounter and established a new twoway communications record of 191 million miles between network stations and the spacecraft. .. . On January 4, 1966, the Goldstone facility received a signal from the Mariner IV spacecraft over a distance of 216 million miles.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 608, 727-9)
ComSatCorp, on behalf of Intelsat—the international telecommunications satellite consortium—issued requests for proposals (rfp’s) for 210-lb. synchronous satellite capable of providing "airplane-to-ground-to-airplane” communications with two-way channels. Satellite would supplement high-density North Atlantic communications and "permit orderly expansion of the aeronautical service on a global basis.” (ComSatCorp Release)
At dedication of Sherman Fairchild Technology Center, Germantown, Md., plans to use Nimbus B meteorological satellite—scheduled for launch late in 1966—in elephant-tracking experiment were revealed in speech prepared for delivery by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and read in his absence by msfc pao Director, Bart J. Slattery, Jr. Satellite would home in on 25-lb. portable transponder strapped to back of an elephant. Experiment would test use of satellites to monitor wildlife, learn more about animal migration, and develop means of protecting species threatened with extinction. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/18/66, A14; Wash. Post, 10/18/66; Balt. Sun, 10/18/66)
usaf Titan III-C booster launched from etr released unmanned Gemini spacecraft on reentry trajectory and inserted canister containing nine experiments and three satellites into high, circular orbit in successful mission marking first flight test of hardware for DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Power flight of Titan III-C was close to planned parameters. Modified Gemini spacecraft was released at 125-mi. altitude in test to determine whether new heat shield with hatch could withstand reentry temperatures. Traveling 17,500 mph, spacecraft followed 5,500-mi. trajectory, landing only seven miles off target in the Atlantic. Recovery was made by U.S.S. LaSalle. Titan III-C’s transtage restarted twice to achieve planned 184-mi.-altitude circular orbit and release 38-ft. experimental canister, proving booster’s ability to launch long payload. Canister— OV4-III—ejected OY4-IR and OY4-IT comsats and OV1-VI satellite, which achieved separate, circular orbits. Launch, sixth in series of 12 designed to qualify composite Titan III-C for operational service, was characterized by usaf officials as a "major step” in the Mol program. (Wilford, NYT, 11/4/66, 1, 10; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66, Al; AP, Wash. Post, 11/4/66, Al; Av. Wk., 11/14/66, 30; 17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 158)
Control of essa in meteorological satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 3 from wtr, was turned over to essa. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Columbia Univ. oceanographic research ship Vema was fixing position off the coast of Iceland by means of three usn Transit navigational satellites. This marked first civilian use of space navigation systems for oceanographic research. Primary function of satellites, launched in July 1964, was to help guide usn ships and Polaris submarines. (Wilford, NYT, 9/26/66, 41)
Proposal to produce first worldwide live telecast in June 1967 was outlined at Geneva meeting of European Broadcasting Union. ABC, CBS, and nbc news executives expressed interest in proposal but would not commit themselves until details of program, under supervision of British Broadcasting Corp., were resolved. Live television transmission around the world would be possible after ComSatCorp’s planned launching of two communications satellites in fall 1966—one over the Atlantic, the other over the Pacific. (Adams, NYT, 9/7/66)
Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div., speaking at the Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, summarized the history and development of electricity in space exploration and predicted it would play an increasingly important role in the future of the space program: "It is important to remember that the program of space exploration is still young and there is still a vast sea and many space objectives to explore and to learn about. The highest power levels used in space so far have been only a few kilowatts.. . .” Orbital research laboratories, lunar bases, broadcast satellites, and interplanetary spacecraft, he said, would require increasing levels of electric power. (Text)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 160)
In reply to March 2 invitation by fcc to submit comments on whether or not private entities should be allowed to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use, 18 organizations filed responses. Ford Foundation proposed that consideration be given to formation of a nonprofit nationwide television system—operating under Broadcasters Nonprofit Satellite Service (bns)—which would carry an extensive schedule of educational programs financed by transmission of commercial TV programs. Foundation contended fcc had power to authorize such a satellite system and that the act creating ComSatCorp had anticipated additional systems to meet unique national needs. ComSatCorp filed brief saying there was no legal basis for authorizing private organizations to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use and that it would be in the public interest to assign ComSatCorp a monopoly on all such systems. Opinion was accompanied by full technical proposal for multi-use, high-capacity, four-satellite system for domestic distribution of TV, voice, and data signals that would be operational by 1970 at estimated cost of between $110 and $126 million. at&t argued it would be against "expressed national policy” to authorize satellite systems outside the framework of commercial communications carriers and urged fcc "to conclude in this finding that there can be no authorization of private satellite systems.” Carnegie Commission on Educational Television said it was encouraging a study of a comsat system that would be specifically designed for noncommercial television. While conceding that national satellites might be advantageous in some cases, Carnegie Commission warned that such a system presented problems of "educational monopoly and centralized control of instructional and other material.” fcc was requested to take no definitive action until Carnegie’s forthcoming report on educational television was published in late 1966 or early i967. Briefs of broadcasting industry cited urgency for domestic satellite service to cut costs of distributing television and radio programs. This cost reduction for the three networks—cbs, abc, and nbc—was estimated at approximately $50 million a year, nbc said a determination as to how this satellite service should be obtained could not be made in the abstract but "would depend on ... a comparison of the respective merits of specific proposals.” National Assn, of Manufacturers told fcc that manufacturing community should have full freedom of choice either to lease channels from ComSatCorp directly or establish private systems. (CR, 8/2/66, 17131-3; Gould, NYT, 8/2/66, 1, 18; Av. Wk„ 8/8/66, 27-8)
Certificate promoting the late Dr. William Randolph Lovelace II, to rank of major general in U.S. Air Force Reserve was presented to his eldest daughter, Mrs. John Sellman, at usaf Satellite Test Annex, Sunnyvale, Calif., by M/G Ben I. Funk, afsc’s Space Systems Div. Cmdr. Dr. Lovelace, former NASA Director of Space Medicine, died with his wife and their pilot in an aircraft accident near Aspen, Colo., December 1965. (afsc Release 43.66)
U.S.S.R.’s official silence on fate of LUNA xi artificial moon satellite launched Aug. 24 prompted speculation that spacecraft had switched off its beam in orbit, overshot the moon, or crashed. (Wash. Post, 8/28/66, A10; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/28/66, Al)
Skin from three Soviet researchers had been orbited in special sterilized bottles onboard lambda satellite Aug. 19, 1960, and successfully grafted back three days later to test effects of space travel, Trud reported. Experiment had convinced Soviet scientists that human organisms would not be dangerously affected by cosmic rays. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/15/66, El) First of three spacecraft in NASA’s Biosatellite program, 936.5-lb. biosatellite I carried 13 biological experiments to study physiological effects of weightlessness at three different levels: (1) growth and form of entire plants and animals; (2) structure and growth of cells and tissues; and (3) basic biochemistry of the cell. Mission also studied effects of radiation on organisms in weightless environment. Biosatellite program was managed by arc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-312; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, A3; AP, NYT, 12/18/66, 86; upi, NYT, 12/19/66, 66)
dod would use Titan III booster to launch 23 comsats in three launch groups to form a global communications system, M/G Ben I. Funk, Cmdr., afsc’s Space Systems Div., told National Assn, of Manufacturers in New York. Orbiting about 18,20CT mi. above earth, satellites would form system "of high reliability and reasonably long life, secure against interference, and with sufficient capacity to handle a high volume of unique and vital military traffic,” Funk said. He also revealed that USAF was seeking solutions to problems of reusable boosters, maneuvering reentry, lighter-weight materials, and higher performance fuels. (Text, Av. Daily, 2/15/66)
Tass reported that detailed chart of earth’s magnetic field which would enable cosmonauts to determine radiation conditions in earth’s environs had been compiled by scientists using data from Cosmos satellites. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/25/66, A3)
President Johnson announced U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached agreement on space law treaty under consideration by U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space since May 7. Calling agreement "the most important arms control development since the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963,” the President said he would seek fast Senate approval so U.S. would be first nation to ratify it. Primary provisions: (1) moon and other celestial bodies should be free for exploration, use, and scientific research to all countries and international organizations exclusively for peaceful purposes; (2) no country should be permitted a claim of sovereignty or appropriation; (3) no country should be permitted to place weapons of mass destruction, establish military bases, or conduct military activities on moon and celestial bodies; (4) all outer space activities would be subject to international law and should be reported to U.N. Secretary General; (5) cooperative efforts should be made to avoid harmful contamination, conduct scientific research, and assist all astronauts in need of aid; and (6) all stations, installations, and space vehicles on moon and other celestial bodies should be open to other countries on reciprocity basis. Use of icbm’s, reconnaissance satellites, and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) were not affected. Treaty would be considered by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19. (Frankel, NYT, 12/9/66, 1,18C; Gwertzman, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/66, Al; Pres. Doc., 12/12/66, 1781-2; Roberts, Wash. Post, 12/9/66, Al, A8, A10; NYT, 12/20/66, 6)
usaf launched USA’s Secor viii geodetic satellite and unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
Reliable sources said France would build her own "Saros” comsat system to avoid U.S. domination in the field, upi reported. Decision stemmed from realization that if France did not act soon, the Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde would have to be flight-controlled by U.S. satellite when it entered service within the next decade, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/6/66)
Small semi-pressure weather balloon designed to drift indefinitely entered its fourth orbit of the earth, establishing world’s record for flight duration, reported Walter Sullivan in the New York Times. Balloon was one of a series launched March 30 from Christchurch, New Zealand, as part of Southern Hemisphere experiment to examine feasibility of Global Horizontal Sounding Technique (Ghost). Ghost—plan to use satellites to locate and read out information from approximately 10,000 balloons floating around earth at constant altitudes—would express state of entire earth’s atmosphere in numbers which would then be processed by computer to achieve reliable forecasts for two weeks ahead. Participants in Ghost project were National Center of Atmospheric Research, essa, and New Zealand Weather Service. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/5/66, 16)
nimbus ii meteorological satellite, launched by nasa May 15, completed primary test objective of two months (800 orbits) continuous operation; all subsystems were operating according to plan. The 912-lb., lO-ft.-tall satellite had traveled more than 20 million mi., taken more than 150,000 pictures, and received more than 23,000 commands from ground controllers. nimbus ii was now being readied for extensive infrared photo coverage of hurricane breeding areas in Atlantic Ocean, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-187; Marshall Star, 7/27/66, 3)
