U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CLXIV. Orbital parameters: apogee, 320 km (199 mi); perigee, 202 km (126 mi) ; period, 89.5 min; and inclination, 65.7°. Satellite reentered June 14. (AP, NYT, 6/9/67,3; gsfc SSR, 6/15/67)
Development of an advanced direct sensing system for the Nimbus-D Meteorological Satellite, scheduled for launching in 1970, was subject of NASA contract awarded to Radiation Inc., Melbourne, Fla. Interrogation Recording and Location System (irls) would involve development of a satellite-borne device and remote platform electronics to obtain measurements of atmospheric and other data from fixed and free floating sensory platforms, including balloons and buoys. Work would be performed under the direction of gsfc. (nasa Release 67—247)
usaf launched unidentified satellite employing Thor-Burner II combination from Vandenberg afb. (upi, W News, 2/8/67)
Second anniversary of Mars flyby by NASA’s Mariner IV, during which spacecraft flew within 6,118 mi of Mars, took 22 close-up photos of the planet, and transmitted scientific data on Martian atmosphere. Launched from etr Nov. 28, 1964, Mariner IV had traveled 1.3 billion mi during its 959 days of flight and had operated continuously for more than 23,000 hrs—exceeding its 6,000-hr design lifetime by more than 400%. nasa announced that satellite, which was expected to continue operating satisfactorily until early 1968, had been assigned a new mission. It would be used in an experiment to conduct simultaneous comparison of solar radiation during August 1967 “solar system line-up” involving Mariner IV, Mariner V (launched June 14), the earth, and the sun. (nasa Release 67—182)
Messages from President Johnson and Japan’s Prime Minister Eisaku Sato were exchanged between Washington, D.C., and Tokyo in ceremony inaugurating commercial service via ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II—B comsat. In President Johnson’s message, delivered by Chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.), he said: “The beginning of Pacific satellite service tonight is more than a great technical feat: It is a promise of deeper understanding between the peoples of East and West. . . Ceremony also included live color television exchanges and telephone, teletype, facsimile, and photograph transmissions between the two capital cities. Intelsat II—B was launched by NASA from etr Jan. 11. (ComSatCorp Release)
The likelihood of aircraft collisions and ship collisions would be reduced considerably by an advanced navigation satellite, NASA’s Eugene Ehrlich, chief of NASA’s Navigation and Traffic Control program, explained. By providing accurate position fixes, a system of such satellites also could reduce the separation distances between aircraft; automatically steer ships across oceans; warn high-flying supersonic jets of radiation dangers; guide craft around bad weather; monitor airplane systems for possible trouble; and pinpoint ditched planes or ships in distress. “The navigation satellite of 1970-1980 will be an entirely different spacecraft from the presently operational navigation satellites of the United States Navy.” The Navy orbited its first Transit navigation satellite in 1960. Attention had focused on the Navy system recently when the U.S. announced that the previously classified network would be made available to America’s civilian ships. The Navy satellites orbit at 700 miles. NASA envisioned a network of evenly spaced synchronous satellites 22,300 miles above the earth. A ground craft could he in touch with as many as six of them simultaneously for extremely accurate positioning. Mr. Ehrlich said advanced satellites “will contain a position determination capability, communications service, weather relay service and scientific sensors.” He said the Maritime Administration and advanced thinkers in the shipping field had been looking to the day of the automated ship. “The satellite-derived position information would be fed directly into the ship’s computer to keep the ship on a preset path.” Mr. Ehrlich also had said that the reduction of the present widely spaced separation standards for aircraft was estimated to be capable of saving some $46.5 million annually for the North Atlantic region alone. (B Sun, 9/18/67)	_
Two- to 12-day delivery time for letters between U.S. and Vietnam could be appreciably shortened with Satellite Mail (S-Mail) system, National Environmental Satellite Center’s J. Gordon Vaeth suggested in letter to New York Times editor. S-Mail letters would be electronically scanned and converted to radio signals that would be sent by mid-Pacific comsat relay to Vietnam where they would be reconverted and reproduced on a recorder. (NYT, 3/5/67, E9)	•
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb toward polar orbit using Titan III-Agena D booster, (upi, W Post, 12/6/67, A24)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLVII into orbit with 296-km (184-mi) apogee, 202-km (126-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.3° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered May 20. (upi, NYT, 5/14/67; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Glennan Space Engineering Building in Cleveland at Case Institute of Technology was dedicated, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We need more men like nasa’s first administrator . . . Dr. Keith Glennan . .. men who are willing ... to seek out new facts, new concepts of reality as to the current human situation and [who] have the courage to base new and untried political, professional, industrial and technological ventures on information they test and learn to trust.” Recognizing the value of institutions who provide graduate education, he said: “There is little further room to doubt that a high level of basic research, an intellectual activity that must be closely associated with graduate education, is indispensable to an advancing front of scientific knowledge. . . .” Webb referred to a June 1957 speech of J. S. McDonnell of St. Louis who had made predictions to graduating students at Rolla’s Missouri School of Mines. Prediction No. 1 had a satellite circling earth and moon in 12 years. Webb said accomplishment was completed in three months for earth and in two years for moon. Prediction No. 2 had a satellite circling earth and Mars in 23 years. Webb said this was accomplished in seven years. Prediction No. 3 had manned space flight in earth orbit in 33 years. Webb pointed out this was done in four years. Webb continued: “If we look backward, we can easily see that it took 37 years to conquer the earth’s oceans ... by the Caravelle sailing vessel [and] after that 37 years, the mind of man was never the same again. Control of the earth’s ocean avenues by England through the maintenance of a favorable balance of ocean technology was a predominant force for stability in the affairs of men for over 400 years [but] no clear favorable balance of air technology was held by any one nation long enough to create world stability. It was, in fact, a predominant force in the affairs of men for less than 60 years. Space technology will be a dominant force far longer than was the case for those of ocean and air. Not limited as was the ship to the water or the airplane to the air, or by international boundaries, or to the fuel that its tanks can carry, spacecraft are today unlimited tools to explore and measure the environment within which the earth itself moves and has its being.” (Text)
Cosmos CL was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 373-km (232-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Mar. 30. (AP, NYT, 3/24/67; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
Method for obtaining a three-dimensional view of clouds photographed two-dimensionally by weather satellites was reported by AFCRL’s John H. Conover and Itek Corp.’s Ronald J. Ondrejka. Photos used were from Nimbus II mission. The two photos used in this stereo-pair arrangement had to be taken from different points, in this method long used in photo reconnaissance studies. With three-dimensional satellite-photograph presentation, absolute cloud heights could be measured to within a theoretical accuracy of about one km. (OAR Res Rev, 11/67, 11—2)
Large antennas on satellites, missiles, aircraft, and household rooftops might soon be replaced by a tiny two- or three-ounce microcircuit device called Subminiature Integrated Antenna (sia) being developed by usaf. Broad-banded sia would have several octaves of bandwidth to cover entire VHF and uhf range; allow 50-100 times as much inflow of electrical current for sharper TV pictures; replace larger antennas that sometimes revealed presence of combat troops to the enemy; and reduce weight of future air and space vehicles by 10-500 lbs. (afsc Release 40.67)
New York Times questioned Fee’s ability to investigate adequately the organization of a domestic comsat system. “The questions faced by the Federal Communications Commission and Congress ... go far beyond the obvious ones of whether Comsat’s present monopoly in the international satellite field should be extended to the new area or whether private corporations should be empowered to launch separate systems for television or press transmission. . . . “Perhaps the most worrisome aspect of the tangle ... is the incapacity of the F.c.c. to grapple with such problems in total terms. . . . [It] has neither the research staff nor the funds to discharge its planning responsibilities with anything approaching adequacy. The country must now look to it for decisions it is ill-equipped to give on the organization of a new satellite system and on the future of noncommercial TV.” {NYT, 1/8/67, 12E)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Thor-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Oct 4. (Pres Rep 1967)
ITT had signed contract “involving several million dollars” with Indonesian Government to build Indonesia’s first satellite communications earth station near Djakarta. Project was subject to obtaining financing under investment guarantees requested from Agency for International Development (aid), itt predicted that station would be operational within 16 mos. after finances were arranged, (djns, W Star, 6/13/67, A21)
Canadian government should establish a national space agency and develop an extensive space program to avoid losing its control over domestic communications to U.S., report to new Science Council of Canada by a four-man panel of scientists and engineers concluded. Report asserted satellite communications were best means of binding Canada’s five time zones and bringing advances to isolated northern communities. It advocated that Canada “make or buy” her own satellite launching facilities; centralize her fragmented space program for coordinated planning; renegotiate cooperative agreement for sounding rocket launches with U.S. so that Canada could gradually assume complete control of project; and set up a nationwide comsat system within five years. (Walz, NYT, 3/8/67,21)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr; satellite reentered June 12. (upi, NYT, 6/6/67; Pres Rep 1967)
usaf had awarded letter contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to begin Program 612, a new reconnaissance satellite system, Aerospace Technology reported. It was estimated that program would cost $350 million. (Aero Tech, 8/28/67,3)
ComSatCorp Chairman James McCormack, welcoming President Johnson’s message to Congress on communications policy, offered full cooperation “in forwarding the President’s objective of bringing high quality, dependable satellite communications to users throughout the world.” He reaffirmed support of a “global system, and the continuation and expansion of [Intelsat] as the foundation on which to build a permanent structure for this system.” (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA appointed Edward M. Shafer, Assistant General Counsel, to become Associate General Counsel. Shafer’s principal responsibilities had been in the areas of international programs and communications satellites. He had served as Chairman of NASA Board of Contract Appeals since Jan. 1, 1965. (nasa Ann, 11/8/67)
Twenty-sixth meeting of Interim Communications Satellite Committee (icsc)—17-member governing body of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat)—accepted invitation of Japan to meet in Tokyo, May 18-23. ComSatCorp, representing U.S. in intelsat and acting as its manager, announced that international participation had expanded from 13 countries in 1964 (when interim agreements were opened for signature) to 56 countries that now account for more than 95% of world’s commercial communications. Tokyo meeting would be first to be held in Asia, and was second time icsc had convened away from headquarters offices in Washington, D.C., Paris having been site of meeting in July 1965.
ComSatCorp awarded two four-month study contracts-—one to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. for $272,000 and one to Hughes Aircraft Co. for $299,484—for research on advanced high-capacity synchronous satellites. Lockheed had proposed an inertia-wheel stabilization concept and Hughes a spin-stabilized approach for stabilizing a spacecraft in synchronous orbit. ComSatCorp had advised fcc Jan. 19 of plans to award contracts. (ComSatCorp Release)
International space events were highlighted by ratification on Oct. 10, 1967, of space law treaty, approved by U.N. on Dec. 19,1966, and endorsement on Dec. 19, 1967, of a new treaty providing for rescue of astronauts. Draft of space rescue treaty, negotiated by the Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, would become effective following ratification by five nations, including U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. NASA’s international program included orbiting of U.K.’s Ariel III and ESRo’s Esro II and assistance with orbiting of Italy’s San Marco II—first satellite to be launched from a platform at sea. Some 124 scientists from 26 countries participated in research at NASA centers; scientific sounding rockets were launched from six sites in cooperation with Argentina, Brazil, West Germany, India, Japan, and Norway; and by the end of 1967, 84 countries had cooperated with U.S. in space research activities. Kenya, Korea, Peru, and Tanzania joined the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat), bringing total membership to 60. Australia successfully launched her first satellite, Wresat 1. (nasa Re' lease 67—301; EH; ComSatCorp pio; NASA International Programs)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CLXXXVIII entered orbit with 276-km (171-mi) apogee, 200-km (124-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. At 4:20 am, edt, spacecraft was automatically docked with Cosmos CLXXXVI (launched Oct. 27). Tass later announced: “. . . both satellites, equipped with special approach and docking units, carried out a number of complicated maneuvers in space, automatically finding each other, drawing closer, berthing and docking rigidly.” It was history’s first automatic docking in space and was filmed by TV cameras onboard both satellites. U.S. had successfully accomplished first manned docking March 16, 1966, with Gemini VII and Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (gatv) ; in this docking experiment, astronauts controlled the maneuver. After automatic docking, the two satellites continued in orbit with altitude ranging from 124-171 mi. At 7:50 am, edt, after completing 2% orbits, spacecraft were undocked on command from the ground, and placed into different orbits by restarting rocket engines. Cosmos CLXXXVI, larger of the two spacecraft, softlanded Oct. 31 after 65 orbits. Cosmos CLXXXVIII reentered Nov. 2. Cosmos CLXXXIX was launched into orbit with 600-km (373-mi) apogee, 535-km (332-mi) perigee, 95.7-min period, and 74° inclination. (Shub, W Post, 10/31/67, 1; Kamm, NYT, 10/31/67, 1; AP, W Star, 10/31/67, A3; Winters, B Sun, 11/1/67; gsfc SSR, 11/15/67)
In informal remarks at Kennedy Space Center, NASA Administrator James E. Webb predicted that congressional cuts in the space budget would slow up the launch rate and lead to the phasing out of Apollo equipment after man landed on the moon. Webb said that only nine of the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles could be launched before 1970, instead of 13 planned launchings. “I don’t think there’s any doubt that to absorb this cut for $500 million, after already having absorbed a $600 million cut back in 1964, means that we will have to slow up the launch rate,” he stated. The cut had also knocked out any new planetary missions before 1975. Space budget cuts would likely mean die elimination of the Saturn IB from the middle-term space program, Webb explained in a brief press conference. NASA was committed to the purchase of 16 Saturn IB launch vehicles. Three had been flown; the next one would propel the first manned Apollo into earth orbit in mid-1968. NASA planned to switch manned flights to the three-stage Saturn V as soon as possible. The first Saturn V flight, an unmanned test, was scheduled for Oct. 19. The Saturn IB had been planned for continued use on flights not requiring the huge power of the Saturn V, but Webb said that emphasis instead would switch to the Air Force’s Titan HIM launch vehicle, being developed for the military Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Webb listed several future checkpoints: (1) fewer orders for new Apollo spacecraft equipment after the moon landing, in such programs as Apollo Applications; (2) definition of the next system after Apollo, which could be a 100,000-lb space station, or something bigger, launched with Saturn V, or a new launch vehicle; (3) development of new and better concepts since planetary missions have been knocked out until 1975; and (4) massive reorganizational changes a possibility for NASA. Webb and West Germany Minister for Scientific Research Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, at the press conference, stated jointly: five West German scientists would participate in studying Apollo program results, and two research satellites and a solar probe would be launched in West German-U.S. cooperative program. Stoltenberg also said that West German industry would be main contractor for an ESRO satellite for 1969 launching, the “first German satellite.” Webb said Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell had been asked to examine question “How do we . . . decide whether a mission should use man or not use man?” (Text; upi, W Star, 9/21/67; Hill, H Chron, 9/22/67)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr using Scout booster. (Pres Rep 1967)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr using Titan III-B booster; satellite reentered Nov. 5. (Pres Rep 1967)
U.S. scientists, during the next decade, would gain enough experience with meteorological satellites, sensors, and surface station networks, to complete global network for gathering and forecasting weather data, Space/ Aeronautics reported. This would require a real marriage of “the potential of the meteorological satellite and the computer. . . .” (S/A, 10/67, 76)	_	.	<
Compania Telefonica Nacionale de Espana (ctne), Spanish national telephone company, had completed 86.7-million communications satellite ground station at Buitrago (45 mi from Madrid) and would increase its capacity from 36 to 156 channels by 1972. Station had remote-control 82-ft parabolic antenna with klystron amplifier and two 10-kw transmitters to operate in 6,000-megahertz (mhz) band. Station could handle TV relays and could track satellites. (Interavia, 11/21/67, 3)
USNS Mercury, third Apollo insertion-injection tracking ship, left General Dynamics Corp.’s Quincy, Mass., shipyard after successfully completing final contractor instrumentation systems tests. Ship docked in Hoboken, N.J., where it would undergo inspection and instrumentation adjustments before range testing and final preparations in Florida for Apollo 503 mission. Mercury, her two sister ships Vanguard and Redstone, and reentry ships Huntsville and Watertown were part of National Range Instrumentation Ship pool. They would be equipped with special antennas for communications between Apollo astronauts and mission control via Atlantic and Pacific satellites. For Apollo missions they would be operated as part of GSFC-operated msfn, which supported Apollo with tracking, command, and voice and telemetry communications via land lines, microwave, submarine cables, and comsats. Operation of Apollo ships was assigned to wtr; crew was provided by Military Sea Transport Service, and technical instrumentation crew by usaf, (nasa Release 67-305)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from WTR using an Atlas-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Feb. 12. (Tech Wk, 2/13/67, 10; Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 2/15/67)
nasa successfully launched Essa VI (tos-d), sixth meteorological satellite in essa’s Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, from Wtr using three-stage Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta booster. Primary mission objective was to provide global cloud coverage on a regular, daily basis with six-month-nominal and three-month-minimum spacecraft lifetime. Satellite achieved near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 920-mi (1,482-km) apogee, 872-mi (1,402-km) perigee, 114.8-min period, and 102.1° inclination. Wheel orientation maneuver was scheduled for completion during 18th orbit at which time first photos would be programmed and NASA would check out spacecraft before turning its operation over to essa. An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 286-lb Essa VI carried two Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) camera systems modified with improved magnetic shielding to prevent slight banding visible in previous essa apt photos. Cameras would photograph earth’s cloud cover and immediately transmit pictures to local apt stations. Essa VI would supplement Essa II and Essa IV, replacing them when they became inoperable. essa financed, managed, and operated tos system; gsfc was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. Essa I was launched Feb. 3, 1966; Essa II, Feb. 28, 1966; Essa III, Oct. 2, 1966; Essa IV, Jan. 26, 1967; and Essa V, April 20, 1967. All five satellites were still operating, (nasa Proj Off; essa Release 67-82)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXXXVIII into earth orbit with 293-km (182-mi) apogee; 193-km (119-mi) perigee; 89.2-min period; and 65° inclination. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Jan. 27. {SBD, 1/20/67, 98; gsfc SSR, 1/31/67)
NASA successfully launched Essa IV, fourth meteorological satellite in essa’s Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, from WTH using three-stage Thor-Delta booster. Satellite achieved nearly-polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 888-mi	(1,429-km) apogee; 822-mi (1,323-km) perigee; 113-min period; and 102° inclination. Wheel orientation maneuver was scheduled for completion during 18th orbit, at which time first photos would be programed and two-week spacecraft checkout and evaluation program would begin. / An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 290-lb Essa IV carried two Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) camera systems which would photograph earth’s cloudcover and immediately transmit pictures to local apt ground stations. Essa IV was replacing Essa II in the tos system because orbital drift limited Essa II’s usefulness. essa financed, managed, and operated tos system; gsfc was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. Essa I was launched Feb. 3, 1966; Essa II, Feb. 28, 1966; and Essa III, Oct. 2, 1966. (nasa Proj Off; essa Release 67-17)
Explorer XXXII (Atmosphere Explorer B) aeronomy satellite, launched
NATO was considering establishing a $45-million comsat system which would permit simultaneous consultation of its leaders during crisis, William Beecher reported in New York Times. U.S. would supply and launch two satellites; costs would be shared by NATO members. Proposal was expected to be formally approved during May. (Beecher, NYT, 4/21/67, 11)
NASA’s Oso III (oso e) Orbiting Solar Observatory was successfully launched from etr with three-stage Thor-Delta booster to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 354 mi (570 km); perigee, 336 mi (540 km); period, 96 min; and inclination, 33°. Third of eight spacecraft in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of the sun, Oso III weighed 627 lbs, carried nine experiments, and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry-command equipment, batteries, electronic controls, gas spin-control arms, and seven experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and two solar pointing experiments. Primary purpose of Oso III was to obtain high-resolution spectral data in the range 8A-1300A from pointed solar experiments during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Spacecraft’s experiments were designed to continue and extend work of Oso I (launched March 7, 1963) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) spacecraft by collecting data on solar x-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet radiation, and other solar activity. Project management officials at gsfc tested or turned on all nine experiments and reported that satellite spin rate, power level, charge rate, and temperatures were normal. Both tape recorders were operating. Last experiment, the high-voltage portion of gsfc’s x-ray spectrometer, was successfully turned on March 14. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 67-32,67—52)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb Using a Thor-Agena D booster. (Aero Tech, 12/18/67,10)
Spectrometer aboard NASA’s Oso IV, launched Oct. 18, had obtained spectral data providing complete picture of corona over whole face of solar disc, Harvard College Observatory Director Professor Leo Goldberg said. Primary purpose of satellite, to obtain high-resolution spectral data, had been achieved. Goldberg said that 4,000 uv photos of the sun, made above earth’s atmosphere, would provide three-dimensional information on sun’s structure, temperature, and density, and on how they vary with height. Previously, scientists could study solar flares only by observing them at the sun’s rim during eclipse. Goldberg said interpretation of uv photos, still being "transmited to earth, should also be related to unsolved problems about sun’s chemical composition and in turn to theories of sun’s origin and evolution. (Weil, W Post, 11/26/67, A6; AP, W Star, 11/26/67, A17)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from WTR using Titan III—B booster; satellite reentered Mar. 6. (Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 3/ 15/67)
NASA Argo D^4 (Javelin) sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 120-lb payload containing an ionosphere experiment prepared by gsfc and Southwest Center for Advanced Studies to 493-mi (793-km) altitude. Flight was coordinated with the overpasses of Alouette II, the Canadian satellite, and Explorer XXXI, the U.S. satellite, launched pickaback by nasa Nov. 28, 1965. Primary purpose of mission was to measure properties of the ionosphere and to correlate results with simultaneous measurements made by the two Isis satellites. (WS Release 67—24)
Two scientists, speaking before American Physical Society meeting in New York City, discussed earth’s magnetosphere and plasma properties of solar wind. Iowa Univ.’s Director of Physics and Astronomy Depts. Dr. James A. Van Allen believed that particles—protons and electrons— penetrated magnetosphere to populate the outer radiation belt, indicating existence of a peculiar dynamo effect. Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientist Dr. A. J. Hundhausen reported Vela bomb-detection satellites observed peculiar solar wind properties—a motion reflecting fluid and electrical characteristics. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/67,21)
American Astronautical Society’s (aas) 13th Annual Convention, “Commercial Utilization of Space,” was held in Dallas. msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun stressed the importance of space exploration to man’s general welfare: “The space program is providing us with new and valuable scientific information about our environment in this universe. The space budget cannot be justified, however, solely on the basis of expanding scientific knowledge, even though the discoveries may be regarded priceless by one segment of society. Space technology must continue and expand its contributions to the satisfaction of the needs and desires of society in general if it is to become a permanent outlet for man’s creativity and energies.” Dr. von Braun later suggested to the press that the lunar module (lm) might not be ready for the Apollo lunar mission as soon as the other launch vehicle and spacecraft elements. In that event, he said, NASA might decide to “fly the lunar mission [as a manned circumlunar flight], but just not activate one phase of it.” (Text; Av Wk, 5/8/67, 17) Future potentials of navigation satellites were outlined by Eugene Ehrlich, Navigation and Traffic Control Program Chief, OSSA. Navigation satellites could provide: (1) high-accuracy position determination service to craft, people, and shore stations; (2) communications service to pilots, traffic controllers, and passengers; (3) air traffic control and maritime coordination; (4) sst radiation warning; (5) search and rescue aid during emergencies; (6) weather routing for aircraft and ships; (7) iceberg warning; and (8) data on migratory habits of marine, land, and sea life. (Text) George S. Trimble, Director of Advanced Planning, omsf, called for increased industry responsibility in space exploration. NASA builds “the roads into space. It is beholden on . . . industry to make certain that we build the proper ones for . . . future use. ... As we look forward to missions of ever-increasing complexity, it is important that we continue to insure the most effective accomplishment of the most worthwhile experiments that this country can devise.” (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), describing industry’s attempts to capitalize on non-Govemment space business opportunities as “substantially insufficient,” urged industry to submit imaginative proposals for commercial development of space and to solicit Congress’ support for the effort. (AvWk, 5/15/67,67) A more realistic basis for determining space transportation costs should be devised to reflect actual use of the object in space, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus suggested. Although cost reductions were being studied, prospective commercial users of space should expect to spend about 10% of their overall program costs for launch operations, he said. He emphasized that more substantial savings could be realized in other areas such as reusable boosters and payload; increased life cycle of payload; reserviceable payload; and booster and spacecraft propulsion. (Text; Av Wk, 5/15/67,69) NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin noted that space program had to defend itself continuously to enlist international support: “In ten years of space development, no nation has been harmed in any way. We must point to this record constantly in order to improve the atmosphere and wisdom of international consideration . . . [and] emphasize the expansion of benefits rather than restrictions upon progress. The record makes clear that we can address the more complicated questions of international organization on an evolutionary basis with the advantage of growing experience. The needs of the developing world and the magnificent record of space applications so far combine to show that the issues of international organization are secondary to the task of accelerating benefits for the world.” (Text) mit Head of Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics Dr, Raymond L. Bisplinghoff and NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop discussed selection of technology and optimum conditions for its development. They pointed out how such development “. . . triggered vast areas of accomplishment in [its] wake [and] produced a sustained and long-term stimulus to education [and provided] influence [that is] one of spirit rather than power. . . .” Turning to discussion of impact of space program on engineering practices, they cited a major stimulus which was produced by “. . . the extreme environment of outer space combined with the requirements for low weight, small size, and exceptional reliability.” They pointed to the new stimulus to “imagination and creativity” among engineers. Among important reasons for having a space program they listed satisfaction of society’s needs; developing technology should serve as “. . . a solution to an existing or foreseeable social problem.” Calling attention to the international arena of technological development, the speakers urged “a balance of technologies in our favor [which] will . . . require wisdom in the selection of new tech324-801 0—69 nologies ... so vital to our national well-being and survival that [we] must, to the greatest extent of our ability, use imagination, good judgment, and energy in their planning and execution.” (Text) TRW Systems Group President Dr. Ruben F. Mettler suggested that space environmental characteristics could be useful and, in some ways, unique for certain manufacturing operations. He stated: “An environment so widely different from that to which we are accustomed suggests we [determine] whether the new features can be used for making conventional products of improved quality or performance or at lower cost, whether they can support new processes previously considered impractical, or if they can lead to new products of such characteristics that they create new and currently unidentified markets.” Mettler suggested these environmental characteristics for space operations which would be of interest to “possible specialized manufacturing operations”: low temperatures, approaching absolute zero with use of space cryostat; high temperatures with use of solar concentrator; near-perfect vacuum of infinite extent; weightlessness in orbit; low gravitational forces on moon; and radiation environment. (Text) Awards for achievement in 1966 presented at convention included: (1) aas Space Flight Award to msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth for “distinguished contributions to aeronautical and space research . . . direction of continuing investigation of man’s capabilities in space, and . . . active participation in the scientific community for the public good”; (2) aas Flight Achievement Award to Astronauts Charles Conrad and Richard F. Gordon for “their new space flight altitude record and the world’s first one-orbit rendezvous on Gemini XI”; (3) Melbourne Boynton Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, afsc, for exceptional accomplishments as the first flight surgeon in charge of astronaut medical operations; (4) W. Randolph Lovelace II Award to Dr. Robert M. Page, former Director of Research, Naval Research Laboratory, for pioneering work in rocket astronomy and contributions to radar development; and (5) aas Fellowships to msc Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry “for providing exceptional medical support for the NASA manned spacecraft programs,” and to msc Director of Engineering and Development Maxime A. Faget for “contributions to the basic conceptual design of the Mercury spacecraft and . . . subsequent engineering efforts” on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo Projects, (msc Release 67-15)
Report by nrc Space Science Board on the concept of orbiting large reflecting mirrors concluded that there was no overwhelming evidence that scientific damage would result from the deployment of a single reflector system. It recommended, however, that such a satellite not he considered in the future unless the ability to destroy it by ground signals were an inherent part of the design and unless detailed studies of its effects on ecology, biology, and astronomy were previously conducted and made public. It said it could see no scientific merit for such a satellite system commensurate with its cost to the public and its nuisance to science. Report was prepared by Board’s Committee on Potential Contamination and Interference from Satellites as a result of NASA’s 1966 announcement that it had asked five aerospace companies to study feasibility of orbiting large reflecting mirrors that could illuminate land masses at night. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, confirmed in a letter to nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz that the Government no longer had plans for such a project. (NAS—NRC—NAE News Report, 5/67, 2) 0 National Academy of Sciences Panel on Applied Science and Technological Progress had concluded that the “most important invention in the pursuit of modem . . . applied science is the big mission-oriented industrial or Government laboratory,” and had underlined importance of a symbiosis between mission-oriented institution and university. Panel’s report, forwarded to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also recognized Government’s special responsibility for integrity and sufficiency of man’s environment and for dealing with national and regional social questions. It urged adaptability of large, interdisciplinary Government laboratories to new national problem areas. (Text)
Informed sources said U.S.S.R. had resumed sending meteorological data to U.S. from an orbiting satellite following a four-month pause, AP reported. Sent over a special teletype “cold line” established in 1964 between Moscow and Washington, D.C., for exchange of weather information, data were apparently transmitted from Cosmos CXLIV, launched Feb. 28. National Environmental Satellite Center later confirmed that it was receiving data from Cosmos CXLIV. (AP, NYT, 3/5/67, 31; AP, B Sun, 3/9/67)
Nearly 100,000 mourners filed past the bier of Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov in Moscow. Premier Aleksey Kosygin and President Nikolay V. Podgomy briefly joined an honor guard of soldiers near the bier. (Anderson, NYT, 4/26/67, 3; upi, W Post, 4/26/67, A16) April 26: Italy’s San Marco II (San Marco B) scientific satellite was successfully launched from Mobile Launcher in the Indian Ocean off coast of Kenya, Africa. Four-stage NASA Scout launch vehicle boosted satellite
NASA turned on the last of 11 experiments onboard Explorer XXXIV satellite, launched from wtr May 24. Data from experiments, designed to measure solar and galactic rays, were being transmitted, and equipment continued to operate satisfactorily, (nasa Release 67-144)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB employing a Thor-Burner II booster, (upi, P EB, 10/11/67, 2; Pres Rep 1967)
Responsibilities of the Defense Communications Agency were described by its director, l/g Alfred Starbird (usa) . General Starbird said that dod’s Communications Satellite Program had been divided into three phases: . (1) use of existing syncom satellites, (2) installation of Initial Defense Communications Satellite System, and (3) investigation of Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project for later implementation. General Starbird outlined progress in implementing these steps and in meeting the “special operational requirements” for communication support of NASA’s Apollo program and for increased circuits to Southeast Asia. (Data, 1/67, 5-9)
ats Hydrolic Communications Experiment system, designed to report river height and rainfall measurements automatically via satellite was the object of a cooperative program by the Weather Bureau’s Office of Hydrology and NASA, ESSA announced. The synchronous satellite, Ats I, would be the communications link between automatic measurement devices at three locations in the U.S. and the Office of Hydrology in Washington, D.C. Purpose was the development of a fast, reliable, operational system by which potential flood conditions would be relayed instantly so public warnings could be issued. Sites chosen were Benton, Ark., which started transmitting data to the satellite on Aug. 1; Salem, Ore., which began operating Aug. 4; and Sacramento, Calif, (essa Release 67-68)
Cosmos CLXVII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 286-km (178-mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite reentered June 25. (SBD, 6/20/ 67, 280; gsfc SSR, 6/30/67)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried 180-lb Univ. of Maryland payload to 158-mi (254-km) altitude in mission that was coordinated with the overpass of Canadian satellite Alouette II. Payload impacted 143 mi downrange in the Atlantic. Primary objective of flight was to evaluate techniques for studying the ionosphere. (WS Release 67-14)
gsfc announced award of $3.4-million contract to American Science and Engineering, Inc., for development of x-ray experiment package for first spacecraft in Small Astronomy Satellite (sas), GSFC-managed program. Spacecraft sas—A would map sources emitting x-rays outside solar system in collecting information on position, strength, and time variation of emissions, sas program would also have satellites search for sources radiating in the gamma ray, uv, visible, and ir regions; its data should enable selection of the most interesting stellar sources for detailed study by more sophisticated spacecraft. Contract provided for three 140-lb experiment structures: structural and thermal test unit, prototype unit to serve also as flight backup, and flight unit. Johns Hopkins Univ.’s Applied Physics Laboratory would build spacecraft structure and systems, integrate and test total spacecraft before flight. Launch of 330-lb sas-a was planned for 1970; four-stage Scout would place sas-a in circular, equatorial orbit at 330-mi altitude, (gsfc Release G—54-67)
Advanced Defense Satellite Communications Project (adscp) currently being revised by dod was expected to reach capacity of 100-200 voice grade circuits, according to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Aviation Week reported. In letter to Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) McNamara said that capacity expansion was being made in accordance with recommendations by House Government Operations Committee’s Subcommittee on Military Operations. (Committee Off.; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 12)
In its fourth year of full operation ESRO was entering a more expensive and ambitious phase and consequently was encountering financial, political, and organizational difficulties, John Walsh reported in Science. esro was currently appraising its eight-year program and seeking ways to coordinate its activities with ELDO, European Conference on Communications Satellites (gets), and new European Space Conference. According to 1962 convention which became effective in 1964, esro was to have launched 300 sounding rockets and 10-12 satellites within eight years under $300-million budget. Although esro council was empowered to adjust budget authorization in response to major scientific and technical developments, it lacked unanimity necessary for change. As a result, Walsh noted, scheduled number of satellites—including $170-million Large Astronomical Satellite (las)—would probably not be launched. Expenditures for buildings and equipment for esro’s new four-station satellite tracking, telemetry, and telecommand network, and its five main research installations had been particularly heavy. European Space Technology Center (estec), for example, responsible for applied research and payload development, had a 456-man staff—nearly half of total esro staff—which was expected to reach 1,000 by the end of 1967.	In addition to financial problems caused by expansion, Walsh said, esro had to overcome a sensitivity to what national aerospace industries would get back in relation to national contributions, differences over selection of projects, and lack of unity and coordinated effort. Differences of opinion between larger countries such as U.K., Germany, and France, which contributed 23.13%, 24.31%, and 20.17%, respectively, to esro budget, and smaller countries such as Denmark, which contributed 2.15%, had to be resolved before a real sense of purpose could be acquired, Walsh said, “esro until now has been primarily an agency providing technical services and support for university scientists who prepare actual experiments. As experiments grow more complex, more work will be done in esro labs and by industry,” and new dimensions would be added to its tasks. (Walsh, Science, 10/13/67, 242-4)
NASA selected RCA to negotiate $38-million contract to maintain and operate portions of the Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (ST ad an) at Rosman, N.C., and Fairbanks, Alaska, stadan sites, and at gsfc control centers for individual spacecraft. Effective Oct. 1 for three-year period with NASA options for two one-year extensions, contract covered actual cost-plus-incentive award based on performance, (nasa Release 67—142)
U.S. and Australia were engaged in a joint program to build a highly technical installation in the Australian desert to intercept information transmitted by Soviet reconnaissance satellites, UPl reported. On Aug. 11, DOD statement said only that U.S. was “cooperating with the Australian government in a space defense research project.” U.S. officials admitted privately, however, that project was a “ferret” installation to detect radar, electromagnetic radiation, and other electronic impulses emanating from Soviet satellites, (upi, W Star, 8/12/67)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Titan III—B booster; satellite reentered Aug. 28. (Pres Rep 1967)
Orbiting satellites could survive Van Allen radiation belts 10 to 100 times longer than originally estimated if their outer shells were shaped like spheres, Dr. Charles Mack, mit Lincoln Lab, suggested .at aiaa’s Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York. Basing his prediction on results from new MIT-developed technique to simulate Van Allen belts', Dr. Mack said that radiation would always strike the surface of a sphere at wide angles, improving the chances of scattering and thereby decreasing the amount of absorption. Ideal spacecraft would be 10-ft-dia sphere with instrumentation in the core, Dr. Mack said. Most current satellites were smaller and carried instruments near surface. New York Times writer John Wilford reported that gsfc planned to have MIT-type simulator in operation by 1969. (Wilford, NYT, 1/26/67, 10)
LaRC would negotiate with Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc. (ltv), for 24-mo, $ 10-million, firm-fixed-price contract to provide 15 Scout launch vehicles, NASA announced. Deliveries would begin about the 10th month at a rate of one vehicle a month. Scout was a multistage booster which could launch a 320-lb satellite into 300-mi orbit or a 50-lb satellite into an 11,000-mi orbit, (nasa Release 67-201)
Electronics Research Center was studying a navigation satellite system capable of providing location information to ships and aircraft accurate to within 0.1 mi, Aerospace Technology reported. System would be competitive with recently declassified Navy Navigation Satellite System [see July 29], but would be aimed primarily at small users such as private aircraft and pleasure craft. User cost for receiving equipment would range from $1,000 to $5,000. Current phase of program involved three contractors: (1) Philco-Ford Corp., which had completed study on fan beam navigation satellites; (2) RCA, which was studying a hyperbolic L-band ranging system providing continuous radiation of the signal; and (3) trw Systems which was designing a synchronous-orbit satellite system, also operating in the L-band. The next phase, pending NASA Hq. approval, was laboratory testing followed, possibly, by flight experiments in Applications Technology Satellite (ats) or Apollo Applications (aa) program. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67, 10)
Growing confidence that U.S. would accomplish a manned lunar landing by 1970 had plunged space planners into an urgent debate over post-Apollo plans, John Wilford wrote in the New York Times. Should the U.S. concentrate on unmanned and manned exploration of Mars or Venus? An expanded lunar-oriented program? Giant manned laboratories in earth orbit for research and surveillance? Networks of communications and meteorological satellites? Or a series of instrument probes to comets, asteroids, and outer planets? Such questions had opened a searching reexamination into the value of space exploration, and some critics were urging a less ambitious and costly program, with more emphasis “on the problems that confront us here on earth.” While the debate continued, nasa was said to favor concentrating on manned orbiting laboratories that would exploit present technology. Although a broad range of space goals was considered attainable in the next two decades, NASA officials said failure to define post-Apollo objectives soon could cause U.S. to find itself unprepared to achieve any major space goal before the mid-1970s. (Wilford, NYT, 1/22/67, 1)
Japan’s third attempt to orbit a satellite was unsuccessful when 3rd stage of Lambda 4S—3 failed to ignite at Uchinoura Range. In first attempt, Sept. 26, 1966, rocket went off course and missed orbital trajectory. Second attempt, Dec. 21, 1966, was unsuccessful because of 4th-stage ignition failure. (W Post, 4/13/67, A17; SBD, 4/14/67, 264)
nasa’s Eighth Annual Honor Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, Dr. Roger W. Heyns, Chancellor of Univ. of California, discussed impact of space program on university curricula and research efforts in his keynote address. “Through the stimulation of nasa programs, new fields of study have been created ... and NASA ... [has become] one of the world’s most ambitious attempts to pool the talents and learning of thousands. ... “. . . nasa has been doing pioneering work of immense significance to modern society that has nothing to do with the exploration of space per se. Objectives have been defined, scientific and technical knowledge and talent have been collected, trained and aimed at research objectives and results produced. That is a massive accomplishment of human engineering . . . [and] an inspiration to all of us. . . . Just how much ... is transferable to other situations remains to be seen, but ... it certainly is not inconceivable that what we have learned, and what we will learn, about public administration from NASA may, in the long pull, mean every bit as much as the scientific and technological developments from the exploration of space itself.” Recipients of Distinguished Service Medal: nAsa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell; Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Edgar M. Cortright; LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson; and former Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff. NASA’s second Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to Dr. Charles S. Draper, director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory. Special Group Achievement Award was presented to Canadian government for outstanding success of Alouette I satellite (launched Sept. 28, 1962). Exceptional Service Medal: Astronaut Roger B. Chaffee (posthumously); Charles F. Hall, arc ; Donald R. Bellman and Robert D, Reed, frc ; William J. Boyer, Laurence K. Loftin, Jr., James S. Martin, Jr., and Clifford H. Nelson, LaRC; James S. Kramer and H. Warren Plohr, LeRC; Robert H. Gray, ksc; Howard H. Haglund and Robert J. Parks, jpl; Paul G. Marcotte, gsfc; William Cohen, George C. Deutsch, Arthur F. Hood, Joseph B. Mahon, Benjamin Milwitzky, Lee R. Scherer, and William M. Shea, nasa Hq. Recipients of Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: Michel Bader, Donald E. Gault, and Maurice D. White, arc ; Walter B. Horne, William H. Phillips, and Israel Taback, LaRC; Samuel S. Manson, LeRc; and Eugene M. Shoemaker, USGS. Group Achievement Award: Apollo 204 Review Board; nasa sst Evaluation Team; Lunar Orbiter Spacecraft and Operations Team; and 260-in Solid Motor Project Team. Public Service Award: William Feldman, Eastman Kodak Co.; Robert J.	Heiberg, Boeing Co.; Mark Sasso, RCA; Robert L. Roderick, Hughes Aircraft Co.; and Richard Cottrell and Paul B. Datner, Aerojet-General Corp. Exceptional Bravery Medal was presented for “courageous and heroic action” in attempting to rescue the Apollo 204 crew to Donald 0. Babbitt, Stephen B. Clemmons, James D. Gleaves, Jerry W. Hawkins, and L. D. Reece, naa; and Henry H. Rogers, ksc. (Text; nasa Release 67—272; Program)
The possibility of using communications satellites to help expedite bordercrossing formalities on international flights was considered by Air Transport Assn.’s Facilitation Committee meeting in Ponce, Puerto Rico. It was suggested that computers, working with numerical codes and aided by comsats, could file necessary papers on an aircraft’s cargo and passengers from point of departure, thereby facilitating clearances on arrival in the U.S. (NYT, 3/15/67,78M)
U.S.S.R. and North Vietnam signed agreement to establish a satellite tracking station in North Vietnam and cooperate in synchronic photography of earth satellites. (Reuters, NYT, 10/19/67,9) Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke on role of Congress in r&d in 1970s. Citing increasing “Government concern for the involvement of science and technology in the welfare and security of the American people,” he said it was increasingly obvious that science and technology, a prime source of many environmental problems, must be means by which they are solved. He also called for realism in minimizing influence of competition between political philosophies on implementation of scientific knowledge for human problems. “We must direct more and more attention ... to the effects of urbanization, such as the pollution of air, water and the land, the practical control of population, to offsetting the constantly decreasing supply of natural resources such as fresh water, arable land, and fuels.” (Text) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), speaking on techniques for forecasting technological advances, emphasized need for enlightened and comprehensive planning and bold, imaginative management. He described technological forecasting as one of most valuable new tools for planners and managers. Indicating that forecasting must go beyond advanced planning, he called for its use in determining long-range implications of technological progress. If a manager, keeping a program open to possible advances in technology, chose improved performance, then he could be assured that when his truly advanced item entered the market or the military inventory, it would be effective for the maximum number of years. (Av Wk, 12/4/67,21) All scientific instruments and spacecraft subsystems performed properly during encounter sequence, as they had throughout flight. Sequence of 15 significant events during encounter, occultation, closest approach, exit occultation, and return to cruise mode, had begun at 10:49 pm edt Oct. 18 and had ended at 3:55 am edt Oct. 23. Full recorded account of experiments performed by Mariner V—first and second playbacks— exhibited clear and steady signals, jpl scientists obtained meaningful scientific data from all of spacecraft’s experiments. Results of experiments included: solar plasma probe and magnetometer showed existence of solar wind/Venus interaction; trapped radiation found no energetic particles or radiation belts, and found magnetic moment less than 1% of earth’s; S-band occultation estimated carbon dioxide and found ionospheric observations on daytime side indicated electron density; dual-frequency radio propagation provided data on Venus mass as 81.50% of earth’s mass, and astronomical unit determination agreed with radar computations; and ultraviolet photometer found hydrogen corona comparable with that of earth, detected no oxygen, and found night airglow to be very faint ultraviolet emission detected at dark limb of planet—probably result of chemical reactions, particle bombardment of electrical discharge. Spacecraft’s mission also was to accumulate data on interplanetary environment during period of increased solar activity. After return to cruise mode, Mariner V would resume report on interplanetary space weather. By end of November 1967, when earth was no longer in direction of high-gain antenna pattern, communications would be terminated; however, three-month-duration communications would be possible during next five years. (NASA Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, 10/20/67, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 10/22/67, 12)
nasa selected Bendix Field Engineering Co. for negotiations on 121million contract to provide maintenance and operations services at two U.S. and four foreign Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan) sites, and at nasa Communications Center and Network Test and Training Facility, both at GSFC. Effective Oct. 1 for three-year period with nasa options for two one-year extensions, contract covered actual cost-plus-incentive award based on performance. It completed maintenance and operations arrangements for stadan. (nasa Release 67-148)
Cosmos CLX111 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 593-km (368-mi) apogee, 255-km (158-mi) perigee, 93.1-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Instruments performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Oct. 11.	(upi, NYT, 6/6/67,3; gsfc SSR, 10/15/67)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, said the scientific community saw a need to develop a spacecraft to make measurements at low altitudes—about 80 mi—to investigate transition between the meteorology of the lower atmosphere and the aeronomy of the upper. In the lower atmosphere the constituents are thoroughly mixed; in the upper, they tend to separate by gravity with the heaviest below and the lightest above. “The importance of this transition region has been revealed by the [sounding] rocket program, but only satellites can provide the global measurements needed to establish the lower boundary conditions for the upper atmosphere as a whole,” Newell said. “Such a mission would require the development of a spacecraft with a restartable engine in order to achieve an adequate lifetime.” (Testimony)
Seven communications companies signed agreement for joint ownership of three existing ComSatCorp-owned earth stations and three new high-capacity stations for expanded international commercial satellite communications. The companies: ComSatCorp; at&t; Hawaiian Telephone Co., itt World Communications, Inc.; ITT Cable and Radio, Inc.-Puerto Rico; rca Communications, Inc.; and Western Union International, Inc. Agreement established a policy-making committee composed of company representatives, provided for sharing of operating costs and capital, and described ComSatCorp’s role as manager. It was filed with FCC in accordance with Dec. 7, 1966, order for joint ownership. (ComSatCorp Release)
Jonathan Spivak in Wall Street Journal commented on congressional cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Plans to launch unmanned satellites to Mars or Venus in 1971 and 1973 and conduct extended exploration of the moon by astronauts face probable abandonment because of a lack of funds. There will also be sharp curtailment of proposals for long-duration manned flights in orbit about the earth to enhance the nation’s space technology and exploit practical and scientific applications of space. Thus, say space officials, the present outlook is that only a limited national space program will continue in the 1970s after the lunar landing.” (Spivak, WSJ, 10/11/67, 24)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXLVII into orbit with 317-km (197-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 21 (upi, NYT, 3/14/67,3; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
President Johnson transmitted his annual Report to the Congress on United States Aeronautics and Space Activities. He wrote in covering letter: “America’s space and aeronautics programs made brilliant progress in 1966. We developed our equipment and refined our knowledge to bring travel and exploration beyond earth’s atmosphere measurably closer. And we played a major part in preparing for the peaceful use of outer space. . . .” The President cited accomplishments of nasa’s Gemini, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor programs and noted that during 1966 U.S. had put into earth orbit or escape missions 100 spacecraft—“a record number of successful launches for the period. We launched weather satellites, communications satellites and orbiting observatories. . . . “These accomplishments—and the promise of more to come—are the fruits of the greatest concerted effort ever undertaken by any nation to advance human knowledge and activity. Space, so recently a mystery, now affects and benefits the lives of all Americans. . . In separate chapter, National Aeronautics and Space Council (nasc) said that although U.S. continued to lead space technology competition in number and variety of successful missions, “USSR maintains its lead in weight of payloads orbited. . . . Certainly the hiatus in Soviet manned space activity during 1966 is no basis for complacency on our part as their preparations for future flights appear to be ambitious and the resources being devoted to space competence and performance are absolutely and relatively impressive.” Dept, of State said it was pleased to be able to forward Surveyor I and Lunar Orbiter I photos to missions abroad for appraisal by foreign scientists. It also said foreign reaction to receiving cloud-cover photos from U.S. satellites in Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) system had been “encouraging.” (Text)
nasa announced that Ogo IV Orbiting Geophysical Observatory, launched from WTR July 28, had passed its primary test objective of collecting scientific data while remaining stable in all three axes for more than 50 days and was continuing to radio data from 18 of its 20 experiments. Unexpected oscillation in 60-ft-long experiment boom, apparently caused by heat from the sun, had been controlled by manually operating satellite’s control system and thus expending less control-jet fuel than with automatic control, (nasa Release 67-252)
afsc Director of Communication Satellite Programs Col. M. B. Gibson (usaf), speaking to annual convention of Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn, in Washington, D.C., explained management of Initial Defense Communication Satellite Program (idcsp) : “. . . [we] recognized need for the innovation of special management techniques [and] a rigorous, streamlined procedure for Government acceptance of satellites under a high production rate . . . [and] satellites which have a requirement for long-life operation in space. . . .” Gibson concluded: “The thoroughness of satellite acceptance procedures is evident from the performance of the 15 communication satellites in orbit today.” (Text; AP, W Post, 6/7/67,10)
Italian scientific satellite San Marco U lifts off from platform at sea off coast of Kenya, Africa, on four-stage Scout booster supplied by mas A. into equatorial orbit with 748-km (465-mi) apogee; 219-km (136-mi) perigee; 94-min period; and 2.9° inclination. The 285-lb satellite— first to be launched from a platform at sea—would measure air density by monitoring spacecraft’s drag forces and investigate ionospheric characteristics which interfered with long-range radio transmissions. San Marco II was second Italian satellite to be launched under May 31, 1962, cooperative agreement between NASA and Italian Space Commission (isc). First satellite, San Marco I, was successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station Dec. 15, 1964. San Marco was a mutual program of NASA and isc with no exchange of funds. NASA supplied launch vehicle and provided personnel training and tracking and data acquisition services, isc was responsible for design, fabrication, and testing of payloads and for launching of satellite built by Centro Ricerche Aerospaziali (cra) of the Univ. of Rome, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-93; WS Release 67—17)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from NASA Wallops Station to 134-mi (216-km) altitude, in afcrl experiment to measure incident solar radiation in upper atmosphere from 1,206 to 284 A with monochromator while similar instrument was in operation in Oso III satellite. Monochromator operated successfully; data were somewhat degraded by partial instrument failure, (nasa Rpt srl)
Prototype of West Germany’s research satellite Azur had been tested in space simulator at Porz-Wahn, near Cologne. Satellite would explore nature of earth’s inner radiation belt, observe polar light zone, and measure spectrum change in solar particles during periods of intense sun-spot activity. Two-phase program would see scientific payloads proved on Nike-Apache and Javelin sounding rockets and satellite launched by Scout booster in NASA-West German cooperative satellite program. (Interavia, 11/17/67, 5)
Milwaukee Journal editorial on space law treaty signed Jan. 27: “What’s left unsaid in the new space treaty may be as important to world peace as what the treaty says. The treaty . . . prohibits stationing nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction in space ... [but] -makes no reference to use of spacecraft for military reconnaissance. “Spy satellites already in orbit can detect activity on earth in unbelieving detail. Even more sophisticated satellites are 'being developed. . . . Ground inspection, a barrier to nuclear control agreements, is therefore less important and airplane reconnaissance, which has strained Soviet-American relations, is unnecessary__ “Reconnaissance satellites orbiting above may thus reduce the chance of war below.” (MI, 3/6/67,10)
ComSatCorp’s annual report to its shareholders summarized accomplishments of 1966: “Satellite service brought a new era of communications to the Pacific area. Live transpacific television and other traffic was transmitted by the first of the intelsat n series of satellites even though the satellite did not achieve synchronous orbit as intended. A second intelsat ii satellite was successfully emplaced in synchronous orbit and began regular, 24-hour commercial service over the Pacific, handling telephone, teletype, data, facsimile and television. . . .” Report also revealed that Intelsat’s Interim Committee had selected synchronous orbit configuration for basic global system, substantially reducing the number of satellites necessary for global coverage and the complexity of earth stations. Selection was made “after high-quality capability of synchronous satellites was established by the performance of Early Bird.” (Text)
France announced plans to launch her fourth satellite from Hammaguir Range Feb. 3 to test tracking device based on the use of laser beams. (upi, WJT, 1/23/67,10; upi, P EB, 1/23/67)
Editorial comment on domestic satellite system controversy [see April 1,3]. New York Times: “The Ford Foundation and Communications Satellite Corporation are at odds about how best to set up a domestic satellite system that would carry educational television. Neither side, it appears, has all the answers. Ford is right to question Comsat’s demand to run a domestic satellite system . . . [but] Ford’s own plan for creating a new educational network is also unsatisfactory. It wants to give the job on a trial basis to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which has enough problems with its present over-ambitious objectives and should not have its energies diverted or its resources increased for anything new. Ford’s suggestion that savings in communications charges made by the commercial networks should be used to finance educational TV has an inherent disadvantage in that the amount of savings would be inadequate to do a worthwhile job. . . . These differences in approach should not be allowed to hold up development of noncommercial network. The thing to do is to choose what is best from both plans.” {NYT, 4/6/67, 36) Washington Post: “The issue is more than just a squabble over Comsat’s request. The Ford Foundation has proposed that the Nation establish more than one domestic satellite system, with one system reserved exclusively for television, both commercial and public. Comsat maintains that one system can do the entire job of communications adequately and will save large sums of money. . . . Given the complexities of the problem, and the need that it be solved, hand-in-hand with the general question of how public television is to be financed, we think Ford’s alternative is advisable. . . . nasa has the capabilities to do the job and would be involved, anyway, in putting Comsat’s satellite into orbit. This solution would leave all avenues open, for nasa is highly unlikely to become the permanent operator and could recoup its expenditures by selling the equipment and stations to the eventual operator.” (W Post, 4/6/67)
A U—2 photographic aircraft was flown at Edwards afb to test missile system that would intercept and then incapacitate enemy satellites, George Wilson reported in Washington Post. “The idea is to equip the United States with a missile or spacecraft that could blind reconnaissance satellites in time of war or national emergency. “There is no intention now of ending the gentlemen’s agreement under which both the U.S. and the Soviet Union spy on each other by satellite. “But there may come a day, Air Force leaders say, when the U.S. will want to hide the movements of its bombers and missiles. . . .” (Wilson, W Post, 7/27/67,17)
Hughes Aircraft Co. had completed negotiations with the government of Brazil on a $3.8-million contract for construction of a comsat earth station at Itaborai, near Rio de Janeiro. Brazilian Telecommunications Co. (embratel) would spend an additional $1 million or more for site preparation and buildings. Station, which would initially handle TV and 120 two-way telephone conversations via Intelsat satellites over the Atlantic, would be completed within one year. (Hughes Release; Montgomery, NYT, 12/22/67,63)
Reduced television and telephone rates between U.S. and Europe became effective when Intelsat II-C comsat entered commercial service. New rates, which covered only the leasing of channels to authorized communications common carriers operating in the Atlantic, applied to both Early Bird I and Intelsat II-C. Monthly charge for one leased voice channel was reduced from $4,200 for 16-hr daily service to $3,800 for 24-hr service. Rates for one-way black-and-white television in the Atlantic area were $1,100 for first 10 min and $30 for each additional minute per half channel. New rates for color TV reduced existing 150% of black-and-white charge to 125% of black-and-white rate. All rates were based on providing voice-grade or TV half-channel service from a U.S. earth station to an appropriate satellite and did not cover charges for communication links from satellite to an overseas earth station. (Com-SatCorp Release)
Report that Communist China would launch a “space vessel” in 1967 appeared in Red Flag, newspaper of the Red Guard of the Peking Aeronautical Institute. U.S. experts had been crediting Communist China with capability to launch a satellite since her successful guided missile nuclear weapon test Oct. 27,1966. (NYT, 1/22/67, A4)
President Johnson submitted his FY 1968 Budget Request to Congress. Total space budget recommended was $7,242 billion. Of this sum, nasa would receive $5,050 billion; dod, $1,998 billion; AEC, $151.6 million; essa, $34.8 million; U.S. Geological Survey, $4.8 million; Agricultural Research Service, $.4 million; and nsf, $2.8 million. NASA FY 1968 budget would keep Project Apollo on schedule and provide major hardware funding for several new programs: (1) $454.7 million for Apollo Applications (aa) ; (2) $71.5 million for Voyager; (3)	$68.9 million for Mariner to provide for Mariner/Mars 1971 program; (4) $2 million for five Sunblazer missions to study solar corona; (5)	$35.5 million for Applications Technology Satellite (ats) to provide new configuration with large directable antenna; and (6) $2.3 million for Voice Broadcast Satellite. Funding for aeronautics research almost doubled from $35.9 million in FY 1967 to $66.8 million with most of increase attributable to increased study of X-15 and XB-70 aircraft, hypersonic ramjet, aircraft noise reduction, delta X-15 aircraft, and sst. Programs terminated or deferred by FY 1968 budget included Jupiter probe, Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter (no follow-on funds), large solid motor project, Atlas-Agena combination, and new launch vehicle development. $b0-$100 million were placed in President’s Contingency Fund pending decision on development of Nerva nuclear propulsion system. Major portions of dod’s space budget would be spent on: (1) Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol)—$430 million; (2) Titan III—C launch vehicle; and (3) military comsats. Most of essa’s funds would support increased activity on satellite sensors'and systems in support of World Weather Watch and improved techniques for weather forecasts, river and flood prediction, and other warning services. (Text, NYT, 1/25/67, 20-23; Tech Wk, 1/30/67, 14-33; Av Wk, 1/30/67, 23-38)
Christian Science Monitor, commenting on space law treaty which went into effect Oct. 10, noted that space exploration had evolved this treaty which banned military installations and nuclear weapons from moon and planets and which could evolve into space cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R. Treaty did not halt use of reconnaissance satellites but it provided for international inspection of vehicles and installations on moon and other bodies. Although there would be no right of inspection to see whether satellites were carrying nuclear weapons, and vigilance would always be vital in this regard, treaty was one more visible proof that Moscow and Washington could make useful progress. Space law treaty was agreement, following Antarctic Treaty, which could remove installations of war from one more section of mankind’s expanding environment. (CSM, 10/14/67)
RCA announced it had received $38-million NASA contract [see June 2] to maintain and operate portions of the Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan). {WSJ, 1/11/61, 3)
NASA and Italian Space Commission (isc) agreed to launch jointly Italy’s third San Marco satellite (San Marco C) from mobile launcher in Indian Ocean off the coast of Kenya, Africa. Spacecraft would measure air density by continuously monitoring spacecraft’s drag forces, investigate ionospheric characteristics which interfered with long-range radio transmission, and conduct other upper-atmosphere experiments in 1969 and 1970. San Marco project, provided for under May 31, 1962, cooperative agreement, was a mutual program of NASA and ISC with no exchange of funds. NASA supplied launch vehicle and provided personnel training and tracking and data acquisition services. ISC was responsible for design, fabrication, and testing of payload and for launching of satellite built by Centro Ricerche Aerospaziali (cra) of the Univ. of Rome. San Marco I was launched December 14, 1964, and San Marco II, April 26, 1967. (nasa Release 67-303; A&A, 67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at colloquium on “Urban Government in the Decade Ahead,” at Fels Institute of Local and State Government, Pennsylvania Univ., discussed urban American goals and the urban society: “What can one say about the use of new scientific approaches for governing such a complex [society] ?” Referring to earth-orbiting spacecraft achieving dynamic equilibrium in their mastery of space, he asked if the “ability of the human mind” could translate this concept of dynamic equilibrium into an entirely new way of thinking. Webb stated: “Here I believe we do have something to learn from the perspective the earth satellite gives us [and] if we continue to expose this kind of overview to the largest possible number of able minds, there can be little doubt that new knowledge, new capability, new perception of worthwhile and quite specific goals will emerge.” He added: “. . . I believe that what the space frontier opened up in 1957 is the kind of frontier on which pioneers can experiment and learn to use many facets of modern technology here on earth—here in America’s cities. In urban America, as elsewhere, men need the constant development of new concepts of reality and the inspiration that comes from a chance to better know this city and this universe in which we live.” (Text)
ComSatCorp announcement summarized commercial satellite communications in operation around the world: Early Bird I (intelsat i series) launched April 6, 1965, and Atlantic II (intelsat ii series) launched March 22, 1967, linking North America and Europe; and Lani Bird II (intelsat ii series) launched Jan. 11, 1967, linking U.S. and Hawaii, Japan, and Australia. Fabrication had been started in 1966 on advanced satellites in intelsat m series that would have five times the communications capability of Early Bird I. ComSatCorp reported that these latest satellites would be launched beginning in 1968 to expand communications system to global capability. As to ground facilities, 14 earth stations were now operating in countries with more than 40 planned for by the end of 1969. (ComSatCorp Release)
“We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation,” President Johnson pledges during tour of Michoud Assembly Facility. On the platform in front row from left are Astronaut Walter Cunningham, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., the President, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Mrs. Webb, Gov. John J. McKeithen, and NASA Associate Administrator for Administration Harold B. Finger. In the back row, behind and to the right of Webb, are Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Industrial Operations, msfc; Dr. George N. Constan, manager of Michoud; H. D. Lowrey, president of Chrysler Corp. Space Division; and J. K. Swearingen, project manager for Ling-Temco-Vougbt Range Systems Division. “In the 9 years since I first introduced in the . . , Senate the Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, we have seen the power of our rocket engines increase 50 times—from 150,000 to 7,500,000 pounds of thrust in the engines that you build here. “Not long ago-we had to stand by and watch other countries accomplish what we could not accomplish. I will never forget the days of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2, and the real concern. . . . “We were the most scientifically advanced nation on the face of the earth but we did not launch man’s first earth satellite. “We were backward because we did not choose to adventure. We did not choose to have vision. We did not choose to look forward. Now let us remember that our future achievements—or our future failures— will depend on how far ahead we choose to look and how far ahead we choose to think. “If we think second, and if we look third, then we are going to wind up not being first. . . we will advance in space to the extent that our people and their representatives are prepared for us to advance and are prepared to pay the cost of that advance. We may not always proceed at the pace we desire. I regret . . . that there have been reductions and there will be more. There have been interruptions, and I hope that we have had all we can take. But I do have faith and confidence in the American people. “We will not surrender our station. We will not abandon our dream. We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation.” (SBD, 12/13/67,218; PD, 12/18/67,1696-7)
President Johnson signed Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 (P.L. 90-129) which would provide new funds for broadcast facilities to give “a wider and . . . stronger voice to educational radio and TV; launch major study of TV’s use in Nation’s classrooms and potential use throughout the world; and create Corporation of Public Broadcasting to assist stations and producers who airn for the best in broadcasting good music, . . . exciting plays, and . . . reports on the whole fascinating range of human activity.” He indicated that he had asked Dr. Milton Eisenhower, Johns Hopkins Univ., and Dr. James Killian, mit, to serve as members of Corporation’s board of directors. He explained that the Corporation would get partial support from Government but “it will be carefully guarded from . . . control.” The President said: “I believe the time has come to stake another claim in the name of all the people, stake a claim based upon the combined resources of communications. I believe the time has come to enlist the computer and the satellite, as well as television and radio and to enlist them in the cause of education. So I think we must consider new ways to build a great network for knowledge—not just a broadcast system, but one that employs every means of sending and of storing information that the individual can use.” {PD, 11/13/67,1530-2)
NASA had modified TRW Systems’ $34.7-million contract for Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo) satellites to a $53.7-million fixed-price incentive contract. Revised agreement provided for assembly, test, and launch of ogo-d, ogo-E, and OGO-F, in addition to incorporating previously authorized work. (NASA Release 67-213)
Soviet satellites were studying solar x-ray sources in an effort to protect cosmonauts from deadly radiation storms, according to Pravda. Cosmos CLXVI (launched July 17) and Electron II (launched Jan. 30, 1964) had gathered “extensive information” about x-ray sources and had discovered that “in principle, by recording an x-ray flare, it is possible to warn cosmonauts of die approach of radiation danger . . . [and] enable spaceship crews to' take necessary protective measures.” (upi, NYT, 10/3/67, 2)
Explorer XXVII and Vanguard II had been among the 30-40 artificial satellites to be photographed on a typical night by the three-ton light-gatherer camera at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Debre Zeit tracking station in Ethiopia. Robert Citron, station manager, described the operation as an “extremely accurate way of measuring distances with the use of geodetic satellites,” in a planned program extending into 1972. Debre Zeit, functioning as hub of 12 similar stations in India, Japan, Patagonia, Sj>ain, Brazil, and South Africa, measured earth’s size and shape, gravitational pull variations, and atmospheric density changes. Planned progress would include measuring shape of world “down to 33 feet,” according to Citron. He explained: “There is a widely accepted theory that the earth’s land masses are drifting. In particular, the African continent is said to be drifting away from the Asian land masses.” By using planned measuring methods with geodetic satellites, Citron hoped to explore the truth of the theory and measure the drift should the theory be true. (Reuters, NYT, 11/7/67, 36)
Report released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Military Operations said that DOD’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) had many inadequacies and urged that steps be taken “forthwith” to reinforce it by adding synchronous satellites. Report argued that undue reliance on present system would stretch it “skintight,” impairing its capabilities if unexpected failures developed. The subcommittee expressed concern over DOD’s apparent intent to use IDCSP “for a longer period than originally planned” and its tendency to lean “rather heavily on the future promise of technological breakthroughs and improvements in the state-of-the-art.” It conceded it would be wrong to settle for a limited system when new technological advances could be made, but also felt it would be an error to inflate the possibilities of present system as an excuse to defer needed improvements. (Jones, M/S Daily, 8/29/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXXIII into orbit with 212-km (132-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 49° inclination. Equipment and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered same day. (upi, NYT, 10/20/67,40; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science would receive $11 million of Japan’s $17.5-million space budget for FY 1967 (April 1967—March 1968), Technology Week reported. The Institute would launch 88 vehicles, including a 150-lb scientific satellite; a Mu 4S rocket; and three Lambda 4S vehicles. Remaining funds would go to the Transport Ministry, Meteorological Agency, and Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications. (Tech Wk, 3/20/67, 13)
Cosmos CLXXV I was launched into orbit with 1,581-km (982-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.9° inclination. Soviet Union had successfully launched its second unmanned satellite in three days, according to Tass. (NYT, 9/14/67; gsfc SSR, 9/15/67) to get the plane in the air before the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution on Nov. 7. A visiting British aviation delegation saw the incomplete Tu-144 prototype on Sept. 12 and was told by its builders that it would fly in the first quarter of next year at the earliest. Soviet Deputy Minister of Civil Aviation, Leonid Zheludev, said “we need to test it very well, and we cannot say when it will be put into operation on civilian passenger flights.” The British-French supersonic Concorde, similar in delta-wing shape and in projected performance to the Tu-144, was scheduled to make its first flight by February 28,1968, and go into passenger service in 1971. (AP, W Star, 9/13/67; AP, W Post, 9/16/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLIII into orbit with 291-km (181-mi) apogee; 202-km (126-mi) perigee; 89.3-min period; and 64.6° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Apr. 12. {Tech Wk, 4/10/67; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
U.S. public and communications users would be deprived of “early attainable benefits” if ComSatCorp’s proposed pilot program for domestic satellite services were delayed, ComSatCorp stated. “In the end, a pilot-scale demonstration is essential, and nothing is gained by postponing for over a year the planning and building of the demonstration model,” James McCormack, ComSatCorp’s chairman said. Comments had been filed before the fcc in the pending domestic satellite case, in reply to the Ford Foundation, which had asked fcc on Sept. 18 to withhold approval of ComSatCorp’s pilot program. ComSatCorp argued that valuable experience could be gained by implementation of the pilot program, that this would supplement, not hinder, the work of the Task Force appointed recently by President Johnson to develop national telecommunications policy. Mr. McCormack had said the pilot program would provide vital experience for voice, broadcast, data, and the press in the economical utilization of high-capacity satellite and earth station facilities. (ComSatCorp Release 67-47)
Second phase of nato’s proposed comsat project (NATo/Satcom) [see July 9] was being delayed by dispute over which countries would develop satellite systems, Aviation Week reported. Several member countries reportedly opposed use of U.S.-supplied, Philco-Ford Co. Skynet satellites because it would eliminate participation by European avionics industry and give U.S. dominant role. Satcom officials were considering alternate plans in the event that agreement on original Phase II proposal could not be reached: (1) delaying satellite development until Phase III to allow sufficient time to reach agreement on the work-sharing formula; or (2) dropping satellite development from Phase II and constructing a ground station network compatible with dod’s idcsp satellites which were being used temporarily during initial . test phase. (Av Wk, 8/7/67,28)
Robert Walker, writing in the New York Times, reviewed new applications for industrial use of gold. In telephone industry, gold was used for coating electromechanical switchgear and for transmitter domes; in computers, for coating metal tapes and electroplating printed circuits; and in automotive industry, for connecting alternator-regulator systems. To aerospace industry, one of gold’s most important characteristics was that it reflected heat and light. Gold was used to coat the “umbilical cord” which connected Astronaut Edward H. White II to Gemini IV spacecraft (June 3, 1965); to cover shrouds that contracted very hot jet aircraft engine parts; and to coat satellites so that they reflected more than 90% of sun’s heat. By adding oxides to gold coatings space scientists used the gold to absorb infrared energy which could be converted to electrical energy. (Walker, Ayr, 12/24/67, IF)
nasa’s decision to launch Ats I satellite Dec. 6, 1966, with one of its important experiments purposely rendered inoperative, was praised by G. W. Swenson, Jr., National Radio Astronomy Observatory, and R. N. Bracewell, Stanford Univ. Radio Astronomy Institute, in Science. “The NASA people made a courageous and farsighted decision . . . [when] they disconnected the beacon transmitter” in Ats I which would have operated on the same frequency band as many of the world’s most important telescopes. (Science, 2/3/67,518-21)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXVIII into orbit with 310-km (193-mi) apogee, 137-km (85-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 50° inclination. Satellite, announced as part of a program of space research, reentered on same day it was launched, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67)
Cosmos CXLIII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 302km (188-mi) apogee, 204-km (127-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65° inclination. All equipment was functioning normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 7. (Tech Wk, 3/6/67, 15; gsfc SSR, 3/15/67)
Orbit of second Vela nuclear detection satellite, launched April 28 by usaf Titan III—C booster, was circularized at 69,000-mi altitude. First Vela’s orbit had been circularized April 29. Satellites were part of DOD’s Vela program to monitor space for violations of nuclear test ban treaty. (AP,NYT, 5/2/67,16)
France’s Sahara Missile Proving Grounds at Hammaguir Range closed after 20 yrs, signaling end of operational use of Daimant 1 booster which had launched four French- satellites from Hammaguir since Nov. 26, 1965. Next French satellite, 200-lb D-2, would be launched from French Guiana in 1969 with Super Diamant booster. (NYT, 2/11/67; Av Wk, 3/27/67,50)
First contract for purchase from NASA of launch services for a foreign satellite was signed by nasa and esro in accordance with Dec. 30, 1966, Memorandum of Understanding on reimbursable launchings. Under contract, esro would purchase a Delta launch vehicle from NASA to launch its Heos-A interplanetary physics satellite from etr in late 1968. The
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Thor-Burner II booster. {Pres Rep 1967)
usaf launched 8 satellites by Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. This solar-cell-powered, 85-lb, satellite experiment, designed for developing satellite navigation technique as easy to use as celestial navigation and more accurate, would assist pilot or navigator of ship or aircraft who could make direct, simultaneous measurements. Signal measurement from two or more satellites with known positions to determine location of ship or aircraft would make use of signal transmission times and standard navigation techniques. Experiment had been built by Naval Research Laboratory as one to be compatible with Doppler equipment for low-altitude satellites. Naval Air Systems Command had been project sponsor, (upi, W Post, 6/1/67, C4; nrl News 5/31/67)
France and Quebec would launch a joint communications satellite for relaying French television programs to Canada, upi reported. The satellite would permit programs to be relayed without depending on existing American Early Bird satellites, informed sources said, (upi, C Trib, 9/21/67)
Satellites should be used to enable land-based air traffic control centers to track constantly commercial airliners flying over oceans, urged Pan American World Airways’ chief electronic engineer Ben F. McLeod at nato’s Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development (agard) meeting at New York City. McLeod said that within five to 10 years traffic increases and new aircraft would demand improved air traffic control system with positions of hundreds of aircraft being sent automatically by satellites to ground stations for plotting. (NYT, 10/12/67, 50)
AT&T’s letter respondipg to Fee inquiry on need for future communication facilities in Atlantic basin area urged construction of $70.4-million underwater communication cable to southern Europe by 1970’s end. It said completion of cable would accommodate rapid growth in transatlantic calls and provide balance between satellite and cable links [see Oct. 4]. ComSatCorp and international telegraph carriers also had received Oct. 4 fcc inquiry, (upi, NYT, 10/31/67,65)
Dr. James I. Vette, staff scientist at Aerospace Corp.’s Space Science Lab., was named Director of the National Space Science Data Center (nssdc) — a $1,491,600 central facility for collection, organization, storage, retrieval, and dissemination of space science data obtained from satellites, sounding rockets, balloons, and high-altitude aircraft—nearing completion at gsfc. (nasa Release 67-6)
GSFC engineers had successfully used an electric “screwdriver” to restore power to Explorer XXXIII satellite, in orbit 252,900 mi from earth, saving the spacecraft from an almost certain power blackout. Emergency repair—believed to be the most distant satellite “fix” ever accomplished—was conducted via Rosman, N.C., tracking station. Engineers turned off the spacecraft transmitter so that an increased power surge through the other electronic systems eliminated the suspected short circuit, (nasa Release 67-5)
Japanese defense specialists had expected the first Red Chinese test of an intercontinental missile by the end of this year, reported Washington Star. Before they would test a full-scale missile, Chinese would test-fire the first stage of missile. This could come at any time. However, Prof. Tetsushi Okamoto of Tokyo Institute of Technology believed that Peking regime would first launch a satellite, probably on Oct. 1. Fear of China’s progress toward a system that could deliver a nuclear bomb lay behind Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s Sept. 18 announcement that U.S. would begin production of a limited antiballistic missile system designed to guard against a Chinese attack. China’s icbm was expected to be fired from a site at Shwangchengtse, north of Chiuchuan in Lan-chow, central China. (Axelbank, W Star, 9/20/67)
Cosmos CLXXX was launched into orbit with 350-km (218-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 72.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 4. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 9/28/67, 3; gsfc SSR, 10/15/67)
First color photos of the full earth (full disc) had been taken by DOD satellite Dodge, launched July 1 and designed to use 10 extendable booms for stabilizing satellite by earth’s gravitational force. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, under contract to Navy’s Air Systems Command, used a gravity gradient stabilization method and nearsynchronous orbit to point Dodge always in right direction and to keep it within line of sight of northeastern U.S. 5 days out of every 12. Slow-scan TV systems aboard Dodge obtained TV images which were transmitted to earth station; color images were obtained by successive exposure of vidicon tube through blue, green, and red filters. The two TV cameras also observed fluctuations of satellite from vertical and studied solar pressure effect on satellite’s booms, (dod Fact Sheet)
U.S.S.R.’s intensified study of near-earth environment indicated their scientists planned long-duration manned orbital flights, reported Aviation Week. Two investigations were cited: Cosmos CLXVI, launched June 16, in near-earth radiation study for protection of future cosmonauts in orbit during high sunspot activity; and “vertical cosmic probe,” reaching altitude of 2,734 mi on study of upper atmospheric layers, ionosphere, and near-earth space. The “vertical cosmic probe,” launched Oct. 12, provided Soviets with information on electron and positive ion concentrations, general intensity of cosmic rays, and radiation doses through various types of protection during flight within radiation belts. Cosmos CLXVI satellite provided solar flare data for continuous three months. Similar to these Soviet studies were those conducted using NASA’s Oso IV (launched Oct. 18), which would monitor sun so scientists could better determine how phenomena such as radio “blackout” and weather on earth were affected by solar activity. (Av Wk, 10/23/67, 27-8; NASA Release 67-273)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXVI into orbit with 578-km (359-mi) apogee; 283-km (175-mi) perigee; 92.9-min period; and 48.4° inclination. Instruments performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Oct. 25. (upi, W News, 6/16/67; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Thor-Agena D booster. {Pres Rep 1967)
MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun was presented the Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Medal by Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Dr. von Braun was cited in “recognition of his creative vision of the practical application of rocket power to space flight leading to the first U.S. satellite, and of his technical leadership in development of the Saturn class of large launch vehicles upon which the Apollo moon flight is based.” He was the 13th recipient of the award, which was established in 1908 to commemorate the aeronautical achievements of Samuel Pierpont Langley, third Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. Other recipients included Orville and Wilbur Wright, Charles A. Lindbergh, Robert H. Goddard (posthumously), Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. In making the presentation, Dr. Whipple said U.S. could have launched the world’s first satellite if it had endorsed the proposal which he and Dr. von Braun developed in 1954 to launch small spacecraft from the equator using existing rockets. Government decision to fund, instead, usn’s Vanguard project, allowed U.S.S.R. to win “the first space race.” (Text; Smithsonian Release; Marshall Star, 6/7/67, 1; AP, NYT, 6/6/67. 3)
nasa’s Mariner IV (launched Nov. 28, 1964) and Mariner V (launched June 14) satellites drew into a unique “solar system lineup” which would enable Jpl scientists to obtain their first three-point measurements of solar plasma and space magnetism. Orbiting about 70 million mi apart on a direct line from the sun, with earth approximately in the middle, satellites were expected to remain in about the same position relative to each other until Oct. 10. Positions would enable JPL to compare the densities and velocities of solar rays simultaneously from three points in space—two satellites and earth, (jpl Release; Wilford, NYT, 8/13/67,54)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from WTR using Long Tank Thrust-Augmented-Thor-Agena D booster as first stage. One satellite reentered July 13. (Pres Rep 1967)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CLXXXI into orbit with 863-km (536-mi) apogee, 668-km (415-mi) perigee, 101.1-min period, and 99.16° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 18. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C comsat successfully relayed test signals over the Atlantic between ground stations at Andover, Me., and the Canary and Ascension Islands. Satellite was scheduled to enter commercial service April 6. (AP, NYT, 3/29/67, 30)
An electric rocket engine capable of operating off low solar cell voltage, which could be used for satellite station-keeping or attitude control, had been successfully tested for more than 400 hrs at lrc. (lrc Release 67-11)
Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island with radiometer payload to obtain spectral observations in high frequency within the near-earth (up to 2,500 km) environment. Some of the hardware would be for eventual use on proposed Pilgrim satellite. Peak altitude was 1,475 mi (2,380 km). Rocket performance was satisfactory. Improper antenna deployment probably caused loss of most scientific data, (nasa Rpt srl)
Recent experiments by usaf scientists had proved that satellites could communicate directly—unaided by relay stations—from opposite sides of earth, AFSC announced. Experiment, in which HF and VHF signals were transmitted between two satellites launched Nov. 3, 1966, confirmed theory that ionosphere resembled a “whispering gallery” in which sound waves traveled along a curved area with only minor volume loss, (afsc Release 116.67)
NASA Areas sounding rocket launched from Point Mugu, Calif., carried Naval Ordnance Test Station experiment to 33-mi (53-km) altitude to flight-test internally modified version of standard Rocoz payload, designed to measure ozone distribution for support data on Ogo IV satellite. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Scientific data were usable. (NASA Rpt SRl)
Fred Friendly, Columbia University professor and consultant to Ford Foundation, delivering Granada Lecture in London, warned that communications satellites’ promise of international “common market” of high-quality TV was threatened by commercial and government avarice. In U.S., he said, TV “can make so much'money doing its worst, it cannot afford to do its best.” Consequence had been that early promise of quality programs had been lost while educational TV, which could fill breach, had been “under-funded, undernourished and under-observed.” But even in nations where TV was nationalized, tendency would be for governments to seek profits from it to offset other communications deficits, he said. Thus, he argued, “a promising world village, linked by satellites,” could be turned into “an electronic slum,” because ambitious corporations and separate governments insisted on going their own ways, concerned more with earnings, national appetites, and images than with what their satellite systems carried. What was required, he suggested, was “an electronic Magna Charta” guaranteeing rights of public to quality TV. (Friendly, W Post, 10/25/67, D14)
Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell, was convinced the Soviet Union would attempt one or more space spectaculars during 1967, possibly during October, reported Richard Lewis of Chicago Sun-Times. October would mark the 10th anniversary of the launching of the first satellite, Sputnik I, and the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. The possibilities included a flight around the moon or a lunar landing with animals as passengers, a manned space station in earth orbit, and the first photographs of the planet Venus, the astronomer said. Sir Bernard Lovell said: “I have always believed that 1967 was the year they would try the circumlunar (around the moon) flight, but I should think they would do it unmanned because of the difficulties of the return at lunar flight velocity.” (Lewis, C S/T, 9/18/67, 16)
U.S. officials were studying possibility of live television coverage via Intelsat II-C comsat of Latin American summit conference in Punta del Este, Uruguay, April 12—14, which President Johnson was scheduled to attend, Benjamin Welles reported in New York Times. Live coverage would require air-lifting a portable itt ground station to conference site because necessary ground stations for picking up satellite signals did not yet exist in Latin America. Use of ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C, launched by NASA March 22, would not only enhance interest in meeting, officials said, but would also dramatize U.S. technological and political support for Latin America. (Welles, AFr, 3/24/67)
Launch of esro’s scientific satellite Esro II from wtr was postponed from
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Titan III—B booster from wtr; satellite reentered Jun. 30. (Tech Wk, 6/26/67. 15; Pres Rep 1967)
Australia launched her first satellite, Wresat I (Weapons Research Establishment Satellite), from Woomera Rocket Range, becoming seventh nation to place a satellite in space. Satellite—107-lb, 5-ft-long cone 2Y2 ft in dia at its base—went into elliptical orbit with 1,249-km (776-mi) apogee, 170-km (106-mi) perigee, 98.9-min period, and 83.3° inclination. U.S. had provided three-stage Redstone launch vehicle. First attempt, on previous day, had aborted because failure of air conditioner to eject had prevented ignition. Wresat I, joint project of Australia’s Adelaide Univ. Physics Dept, and the Dept, of Weapons Research at Salisbury, was sending back data on interaction of solar radiation, particularly x-rays and ultraviolet, with earth’s outer atmosphere, nasa provided satellite acquisition and data reception. (SBD, 11/30/67,149; gsfc SSR, 11/30/67; gsfc Historian; Aero Tech, 12/4/67,17; Interavia, 12/67,1842)
At nasa request, nas would conduct Space Applications Summer Study at Woods Hole, Mass., during summer 1967 and 1968 to determine how orbiting satellites could best be used for practical benefits on earth. Participants would review present U.S. programs and plans for peaceful applications of earth satellites; consider and evaluate probable future uses of satellites in a variety of areas; and provide advice on nature and scope of r&d programs necessary to achieve the possibilities. The 1967 session would “provide first judgment on . . . most immediately useful applications of satellites.” The 1968 session would reach final recommendations on future satellite uses. Lehigh Univ. President W. Deming Lewis was named chairman of the Central Review Committee, which would oversee the study. Work would be conducted within nrc’s Engineering Div. with Laser Inc., vice-president Eugene T. Booth serving as study’s executive director. (nas-NRC Release)
Cosmos CXLI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 345-km (214-mi) apogee; 210-km (130-mi) perigee; 89.8-min period; and 72.9° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Feb. 16. (upi, NYT, 2/9/67; gsfc SSR, 2/28/67)
50-lb. radio backpack that could fix a soldier’s position precisely by signals from a satellite had been developed by Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory under sponsorship of usn Air Systems Command. Backpack would represent first dry land application of usn navigation satellites to military problems. In most cases, packs would be used in pairs: a forward fire controller would receive satellite signal and relay it to another soldier equipped with a backpack at an artillery base who also would have read satellite signal. Two readings would be transmitted to computer which would instantly tell each man his precise position. Navy sources predicted mass production models of backpack, working with existing satellites, could Be in combat use in Vietnam soon. (Clark, AIT, 3/22/67,16)
Examples of air, sea, and space technology “working together as partners for the better understanding of our total environment” were cited by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, in a speech to the 2nd International Buoy Technology Symposium, Marine Technology Society, Washington, D.C. The Interrogation, Recording and Location System (irls) , developed by Goddard Space Flight Center, would demonstrate the use of a satellite to locate and determine the position of sensors, receive data from the sensor, record that data on the spacecraft, and later relay the data to ground stations. Possible terrestrial sensors are meteorological stations or buoys, oceanographic buoys, gauges for measuring the strains in the earth’s crust, drifting balloons, ice islands, or any of a wide variety of data platforms located on the surface of the earth or in its atmosphere. Seamans said, “It is quite easy to conceive how such a system could begin to solve many of the problems hindering world-wide fixed or free buoy systems for the study of currents and ocean-depth profile data.” He also noted that “photographs and images returned by such satellites as Nimbus, Tiros, and Gemini are being analyzed to assess their oceanographic value.” (Text)
Informed sources said U.S.S.R. had launched Cosmos CLXX (July 31) and Cosmos CLXXI (Aug. 8) to test new parachute system designed to avoid the malfunction blamed for the death of Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. U.S.S.R. attributed the April 24 crash-landing of Soyuz I to a tangled parachute that failed to decrease spacecraft’s speed during reentry. Both satellites had gone into orbit but had reentered the same day as launched. (AP, B Sun, 8/10/67; AP, C Sun-Times, 8/11/67)
The New York Times commented on the task force appointed by President Johnson to formulate a national communications policy [see Aug. 19]: “The . . . task force . . . has an unprecedented opportunity to break internal governmental deadlocks that stand in the way of a domestic satellite system and other needed forward steps in communications. It can do much to advance public television and to give all TV, both commercial and noncommercial, a firmer root in public service. Perhaps most important of all, it can point a path for the interconnection of international satellites so that all countries can be encouraged to see and speak to one another across the heavens. ...	' “The major challenge is to clear channels through which revolutionary new developments in communications can be used with maximum effectiveness for total human service and enlightenment. The last thing that should happen is for Congress to postpone action on President Johnson’s proposal for a Corporation of Public Broadcasting. Such a planning body should be in existence to move speedily on any sound recommendations the task force makes.” {NYT, 8/23/61,40M)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from wtr on one Atlas booster. Satellites were later identified as OV 1—12 and OV 1-86. (Pres Rep 1967)
Pan American World Airways cargo jet aircraft approaching Wake Island participated in first public demonstration of a new data-link system for transmitting navigation data from aircraft to ground stations via an orbiting satellite, vhf signals beamed to NASA’s Ats I satellite by first data-link system ever installed on a commercial aircraft and relayed to Mojave Desert antenna, reached Kennedy International Airport 'by telephone to fix aircraft’s exact position. Experiment was part of a series using satellites to develop more reliable long-range communications and tracking contact with commercial aircraft on transoceanic flights. It was first test of aircraft antenna designed specially for transmitting satellite messages. Pan American officials predicted data-link system could be fully operational by late 1969 and could lead to instant automatic and continuous plotting of flights across vast ocean areas. (Wilford, NYT, 3/30/67, 53)
ComSatCorp would issue rfp’s in 1968 to build a 10,000-channel satellite— Intelsat IV, Electronics reported. Procurement of four or more of the satellites would have to be approved by INTELSAT, but “chances of a go-ahead look good.” ComSatCorp’s plan was based on design studies recently completed by Hughes Aircraft Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for a high-capacity, multipurpose satellite [see March 23], (Electronics, 8/21/67)
Japan Air Lines jet aircraft carrying American and Japanese scientists from San Francisco to Tokyo successfully maintained radio contact with Mojave, Calif., ground station via nasa’s Ats I satellite (nasa Proj Off; P EB, 6/8/67)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR on Scout launch vehicle. (Pres Rep 1967)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr achieved 180-mi (289-km) altitude in flight to measure: (1) vertical profiles of neutral and ion composition and electron densities; and (2) dissociation of molecular oxygen and atomic nitrogen density using mass spectrometers designed for the pogo satellite. Preliminary data indicated that the rocket and all experiments had performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Photo of the earth in the near full phase transmitted by Lunar Orbiter V [see Aug. 5-27] was a “fraud, a fake, a piece of trickery or deceit,” Samuel Shenton, Secretary of the International Flat Earth Research Society, told newsmen in London. “Look at the photograph the satellite supposedly took. Notice those lines across the bottom of the picture. They show it’s a composite, a mock-up.” Asked why U.S. should seek to perpetrate such a deception, Shenton replied: “It’s all part of the great global earth conspiracy, and it’s a shame.” Members of the International Flat Earth Research Society believed that the earth is not only flat, but static in space. They also maintained that the theory of gravity was advanced only to support the belief that the earth spins. (AP, B Sun, 8/18/67)
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
NASA launched ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C (nicknamed “Atlantic II”) comsat from etr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into elliptical transfer orbit in preparation for geostationary orbit. Transfer orbit had 22,115-mi (37,200-km) apogee, 183-mi 294-km) perigee, 660.56-min period, and 27° inclination. On March 25, ComSatCorp fired apogee motor transferring satellite into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic. Scheduled to enter commercial service April 6, Intelsat II-C would join Early Bird I, world’s first commercial comsat, in providing service across the Atlantic and in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements. It was third satellite in ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II program to place two comsats in synchronous orbit—one over the Pacific, one over the Atlantic. First satellite—Intelsat II—A—was launched by NASA Oct. 27, 1966, but failed to achieve synchronous orbit because apogee motor malfunctioned; second—Intelsat II—B was launched Jan. 11, achieved synchronous orbit over the Pacific, and entered commercial service Jan. 27. Intelsat II comsats, larger and improved versions of Early Bird I (Intelsat I) satellite, were capable of handling television and data transmissions of up to 240 voice channels. (ComSatCorp pio; ComSatCorp Release)
U.S. bombers were being guided to targets in North Vietnam by daily meteorological photos received from Essa and Nimbus satellites, usaf announced. Detailed photos, monitored by USAf’s weather stations in Saigon and Ugon, Thailand, permitted usaf to divert aircraft to areas that were unexpectedly free from clouds. Since equipment for reception was relatively inexpensive, usaf officials speculated that North Vietnamese might also be receiving the photos and using them for defense planning. (AP, NYT, 4/14/67, 3)
Full size dynamic model of Canadian Defence Research Board’s ISIS—A— third ionosphere satellite for Canada—had successfully completed series of vibration tests at gsfc. Joint Canadian/U.S. program of International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies would include isis-b and isis-c during the 1960s as solar activity would pass through its intensity, causing a variety of changes in ionosphere and outer space. Launch of ISIS—A was planned for early 1968 [see Mar. 23], Like its predecessors (Alouettes I and II), ISIS—A would be spheroid and have 11,000 solar cells on its outer surface to power internal batteries. (S/F, 6/67, 197-8)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from WTR on single Thor-Agena D booster; one of two satellites reentered Dec. 2. (Pres Rep 1967)
Earth-orbiting satellites, according to Soviet cosmonaut Pavel Popovich’s report in Aviation and Cosmonautics, would render practical help to agriculture, assessing crop and forest resources and discovering areas of vegetation affected by disease, fires, locusts, and underground springs. His report specified regularly photographing areas under cultivation from sowing to harvesting and processing data in computers to obtain yield forecasts. (S/F, 9/67,310) Soviet radio astronomer Professor Vsevolod Troitski, in statement to Tass, said new information had provided convincing proof that moon’s surface was sufficiently strong to support spacecraft landings. He stated that substance composing top layer of moon’s surface consisted of loosely connected particles averaging 0.01 in and that contacts between particles were very weak. On an average, porous substance covered moon to a depth of about 13 ft, according to Troitski. (S/F. 9/67, 305)
In its resolution ^2260, U.N. General Assembly urged its Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to elaborate on “agreement on liability for damage caused by the launching of objects into outer space and an agreement on assistance to and return of astronauts and space vehicles.” On July 17, Legal Subcommittee of Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, meeting in Geneva, had reached such provisional agreement. On July 26, 1966, U.S. and U.S.S.R. had agreed ii\ principle that countries Were internationally liable for damage caused to other states by objects they launched into outer space. Other concerns of the resolution were education and training for space exploration, feasibility of communications for direct broadcast from satellites, and applied satellite technology of benefit to man. On Jan. 18, 1966, Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space had proposed a world conference on outer space to be held in New York. This conference should examine the impact of space data on education and communications—issues of major importance even to poor and economically retarded states [see NASA SP-4007, 20], (Text; NASA SP-4007, 20, 250)
NASA had completed post-launch evaluation of Essa V meteorological satellite and adjudged the mission a success. Launched by NASA from WTR April 20, satellite had been turned over to essa for operation May 8. (nasa Proj Off)
Cosmos CXLV1 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 310-km (193-mi) apogee, 190-km (118-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.5° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 18. (Tech Wk, 3/20/67,13; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
NATO had begun to modernize its communications network by using comsats, Clyde H. Farnsworth reported in the New York Times. Initial $900,000 test phase of project had been inaugurated by Supreme Allied ■Commander in Europe Gen. Lyman L. Lemnitzer in a transmission from his headquarters in Casteau, Belgium, to Naples, Italy, via one of dod’s 15 Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (idcsp) satellites. U.S., which had proposed the NATO project, was permitting NATO to use the idcsp satellites temporarily. Following approval of the second phase of the project, $45 million—of which U.S. would pay 25%—would be spent to link 12 alliance countries via two 100-lb comsats owned by NATO and launched by usaf into synchronous orbits over the Atlantic. Two ground stations would be in U.S. and one in each NATO country except France (who had not been invited to participate in the project), Luxembourg, and Iceland. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/9/67, 17)
NASA’s Ats III, launched Nov. 5, now in 22,300-mi-altitude synchronous orbit, transmitted to NASA’s Rosman, N.C., ground station a color photograph of earth which officials described as excellent in quality. The photograph, processed at GSFC, showed entire earth’s disk and details of features as small as two or three miles in size. Ats III, third of a series of five satellites managed by OSSA, carried communication, meteorology, navigation, and spacecraft technology experiments. From its location over the equator at 47° west longitude, the spacecraft had a view of North and South America, part of Africa and Europe, and the southern part of Greenland icecap. Spacecraft’s multicolor spin-scan cloud camera obtained color contrast as well as brightness contrast, according to chief experimenter Wisconsin Univ.’s Dr. Verner E. Suomi. He gave this analysis of Ats Ill’s meteorological operations: “From a time series of pictures such as these the United States has, in effect, given South America a means to track their weather far beyond what they are able to do by conventional means. In one single photograph, the equatorial cloud-free band which was seen from Ats I [launched Dec. 6,1966] pictures in the Pacific is also evident in the Atlantic. These pictures are ideal for continuing studies from the heat budget and convective systems. The additional meteorological information in a color photograph is more subtle, but it is there. Low clouds tend to be bluer than high clouds. This has been possible even though adjustments to color balance on the ground are still underway. There are suggestions that the muddy outflow from the Amazon River in Brazil can be seen. We have not yet been able to determine whether or not the Gulf Stream water will be visible. Also, we do not have an example of the colors in the Terminator Zone (sunrise and sunset) to determine if cloud heights can be accurately positioned.” (nasa Release 67-286)
Variety of ion engines could be used in satellite stationkeeping and attitude control, and solar-powered ion engines for primary propulsion would be feasible for Voyager-class missions of early 1970s, Space/Aeronautics reported. Nuclear-powered ion propulsion was still about a decade off. (S/A, 6/67, 92)
usaf launched OVIII-6 research satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Scout booster into orbit with 275-mi (439-km) apogee, 254-mi (408km) perigee, 93-min period, and 90.6° inclination. The 219-lb satellite, designed for 256-day lifetime, carried two main experiments: mass spectrometers and ion density gauges to measure density, temperature, and composition of the upper atmosphere and its variation with latitude. (Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 12/15/67; SBD, 12/5/67, 176)
Ats I (Advanced Technical Satellite) was used experimentally to relay weather photographs of current storms to the U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Hurricane Center in Miami and other hurricane watchers in the Caribbean. The satellite was launched by NASA into its synchronous orbit on Dec. 7, 1966, and was positioned over Christmas Island in the Pacific at an altitude of 22,000 miles. The satellite had been used as a testbed for advanced meteorological, communications, and satellite control systems, and also had made scientific measurements of its orbital environment. Photographs were recorded and radioed to earth by the Essa V weather satellite while passing over the storm area. The collected photographic data were then compiled as a mosaic and gridded by computers at essa before delivery to the Goddard Space Flight Center ground station at Mojave, Calif., for radio transmission to the Ats 1. The satellite then retransmitted the gridded data to earth by means of its weather fascimile (weafax) experiment. Any ground station equipped with the relatively inexpensive Automatic Picture Transmission receivers could read out the pictures. Mosaics would be transmitted daily on an experimental basis in this manner between 9 and 10 pm, edt. weafax was a joint NASA—essa experiment, (nasa Release 67-243)
First regular data reports of activity on sun’s “invisible hemisphere”— side visible from earth only once every 13.5 days—were being made to essa’s Solar Disturbance Forecast Center in Boulder, Colo., by nasa’s Pioneer VI and VII satellites, in orbit around sun. Satellites’ observations on physical characteristics of solar storms would allow continuous scientific study of solar surface and provide Apollo astronauts with additional warning time to avoid solar radiation hazards. (nasa Release 67-174)
President Johnson, in a message to Congress on communications policy, announced that he was appointing a 15-man task force headed by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Eugene V. Rostow to formulate “a national communications policy.” Among questions the group would examine were: (1) how soon would a domestic satellite system be economically feasible? (2) should a domestic system be general purpose or specialized? and (3) should there be more than one system? Task force’s report was due in one year. The President also: (1) reaffirmed U.S. commitments made in 1962 and 1964 in support of the development of a global system of comsats “to make modern communications available to all nations”; (2) pledged U.S. support to the continuation of the intelsat consortium, saying, “We seek no domination of satellite communications to the exclusion of any other nation—or group of nations”; (3) stated that U.S. “should take no action in the establishment of a domestic [comsat] system which is incompatible with our support for a global system”; and (4) urged U.S.S.R. and the nations of Eastern Europe to join intelsat. “Here is a rare opportunity to join in an activity to bring benefits to all nations and loss to none.” He suggested there might be an eventual linkage between Soviet Molniya system and intelsat system. The President concluded: “Historians may write that the human race survived or faltered because of how well it mastered the technology of this age. “Communications satellites now permit man’s greatest gifts—sight, expression, human thoughts and ideas—to travel unfettered to any portion of our globe. The opportunity is within our grasp. We must be prepared to act.” {PD, 8/21/67, 1146-54; WSJ, 8/15/67)
Shortage of U.S.-manufactured high-reliability components because of the demands of the Vietnam war was one of the reasons Canada was postponing the launch of her Isis-A satellite from fall 1967 to 1968, Dr. John H. Chapman, Deputy Superintendent of the Defence Research Telecommunications Establishment, told Toronto Globe & Mail. Isis-A would measure characteristics of the ionosphere. (Toronto Globe & Mail, 3/24/67,29)
Sensors aboard two Vela nuclear detection satellites, launched April 28 by usaf Titan III-C booster, were turned on, and large amounts of data were being received. Satellites were part of dod’s Vela program to monitor space for violations of nuclear test ban treaty. (AP, NYT, 5/U/67)
Delegates from U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc countries, who met in Moscow April 3-15, had drafted a “joint satellite and rocket launching program” and had agreed to set up a satellite communications program “open to all countries willing to join,” Tass announced. No further details were released, (upi, NYT, 4/17/67, 10)
Soviet northern cosmodrome, whose existence was first publicly announced at British Interplanetary Society’s November 1966 meeting following radio-tracking activities at Kettering Grammar School [see Dec. 12, 1966], had maintained steady rate of satellite launches since beginning with Cosmos satellite in March 1966. New launch site, about 100 mi south of Archangel and between towns of Yarnema and Tarasova, still had not been acknowledged by Soviet authorities. (Perry, S/F, 8/67, 274)
European aerospace industry assn., Eurospace, was urging formation -of an optional regional communications satellite system to provide TV and telephone coverage for Europe, Donald E. Fink reported in Aviation Week. An expanded version was also being studied to link the continent with the entire Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, and major portions of Africa. Designated Eurosat, system would consist of one 375-lb comsat launched into stationary orbit by an eldo Europa II booster and at least 18 ground stations in Europe and North Africa. Fabrication of satellite and ground stations would be restricted to European aerospace companies. Initial cost estimate for satellite system was $100 million. (Fink, Av Wk, 8/28/67,29)
U.S.S.R . successfully launched two Cosmos satellites: Cosmos CLIX entered orbit with 60,600-km (37,655-mi) apogee, 380-km (236-mi) perigee, 19-hr 33-min period, and 51° inclination; Cosmos CLX entered orbit with 205-km (127-mi) apogee, 142-km (88-mi) perigee, and 49.6° inclination. Equipment on both satellites functioned normally. Cosmos CLX reentered May 18. (upi, W Star, 5/18/67, C18; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Calculation of effective radiated power by measurement of signal strength from eleven orbiting military communications satellites was accomplished by AFCRL; two satellites exhibited below standard response. Measurements, made at 401 megacycles, were carried out at the 84-ft parabolic antenna facility, Sagamore Hill Radio Observatory, Mass. {OAR Res Rev, 12/67,4)
Esro II, first satellite designed, developed, and constructed by ESro under July 8, 1964, nasa—esro agreement, was launched from wtr by four-stage Scout booster but did not achieve planned polar orbit. NASA officials were studying telemetry in an attempt to determine cause of Scout’s failure. Primary NASA mission objectives were to place Esro II in planned orbit and to provide tracking and telemetry support. 153-lb satellite carried seven experiments for solar astronomy and cosmic ray studies representing six different organizations from U.K., France, and the Netherlands. ESRO was responsible for delivery of satellite to launch site, for equipment and personnel necessary to mate spacecraft to launch vehicle, and for testing spacecraft, (nasa Proj Off; UPi, NYT, 5/31/67, 1)
Weather photos taken by NASA’s Ats I satellite in near-synchronous orbit over the Pacific would be relayed to World Meteorological Organization (wmo) conference in Geneva April 3-28 to demonstrate new meteorological capabilities. Transmitted by satellite to Mojave, Calif., photos were traveling by land line to National Environmental Satellite Center in Suitand, Md., where they were being recorded for later transmission by ESSA surface facilities to Geneva, (nasa Release 67-77)
Cosmos CLXI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 343-km (213-mi) apogee, 205-km (127-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered May 30. (AP, W Post, 5/23/67, A9; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Patent for a method of determining whether life exists on other planets had been granted to aeronautical engineer Albin M. Nowitzky, Stacy V. Jones reported in the New York Times. Unlike previous proposals involving distant observations, Nowitzky’s concept called for an automated spacecraft landing on a planet’s surface to make tests free from earthly contamination and influence. A soil sample would be taken, mixed with distilled water, and sterilized. Part of the resulting “nutrient” would be transferred to a test chamber, exposed to the planet’s atmosphere, and sealed, while the remaining part would be used as a “control.” Sensors in the test chamber would register any metabolic reaction, and these data would be telemetered to earth or to an orbiting satellite. (Jones, NYT, 1/1/61, 34)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites by Atlas-Agena D boosters from wtr. One satellite reentered on May 27; other reentered May 30. (upi, W Post, 5/23/67, A9; Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXX into orbit with 208-km (129-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, and 50° inclination. All equipment functioned normally, but satellite reentered later in the day. (SBD, 8/10/67, 202)
Operation of Wilhelm Forster Observatory’s tracking station in West Berlin was described by its director, Harro Zimmer, in an AP interview. The station, built on a 250-ft mound of rubble, was in a geographic position enabling it to detect Soviet signals from launching pads in the U.S.S.R. Zimmer said he wired tracking data to Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory, Cambridge, Mass., on various assignments involving both U.S. and U.S.S.R. satellite launches, but received no pay from either the U.S. or the Observatory. (AP, NYT, 1/31/67) During January: British government awarded Manchester Univ. a $126,000 grant to design a successor to radio telescope at Jodrell Bank Experimental Station. New radiotelescope would have an aerial dish 400 ft in dia, and would cost about $11.2 million to build. (AP, W Star, 2/1/67, A3 ;AP, AIT, 2/2/67,2)
Ninth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, Explorer I. In defiance of the original predicted lifespan that should have ended six years ago, the satellite was circling the earth 14 times daily and had completed 43,000 orbits, (msfc Release 67-17)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from wtr with Thor-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Feb. 2. (upi, NYT, 1/16/67, 18; Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 2/15/67)
A satellite capable of broadcasting directly to the home, bypassing local stations and national networks, might be technically feasible within five years, ComSatCorp President Dr. Joseph V. Charyk testified before Fee. Economic feasibility, however, might require more than five years, he said. Dr. Charyk appeared as a witness for the Justice Dept., which was challenging the proposed acquisition of abc by ITT. (Mintz, W Post, 4/18/67, A2)
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully inserted six satellites—three Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) comsats, one Lincoln Experimental Satellite Les V, one DOD Gravity Experiment (dodge) satellite, and one Despun Antenna Test Satellite (dats)—into circular, near-synchronous orbits. Powered flight of Titan III—C was close to planned parameters. Tran-stage and payload were inserted into parking orbit with 103-mi (166-km) apogee and 89-mi (143-km) perigee. First transtage burn made necessary course corrections; second transtage bum moved stage and payload into transfer orbit with 20,920-mi (33,666-km) apogee and 111-mi (179-km) perigee. Third burn put satellite dispenser frame and six satellites into final orbit with 20,809-mi (33,488-km) apogee and 20,453-mi (32,915-km) perigee. Between 3:21 and 3.23 pm est satellites were ejected separately into slightly different orbital paths. Three idcsp comsats, combined with 15 others launched June 16,1966, and Jan. 18, 1967, completed Pacific link of dod’s idcsp system designed to provide reliable, full-time radio communications between Washington, D.C., and U.S. troops in Vietnam and other distant outposts. Les V, first all solid-state uhf band comsat, would transmit radio signals and test communications to front-line troops, dodge satellite would extend 10 metal booms to test satellite’s stability, determine whether it could keep one side always facing earth, and transmit first color TV pictures of earth taken'from orbit with a 22° camera, dats, advanced version of idcsp comsats, carried new antenna designed to transmit 75% of radio signal strength—rather than current 15%—back to earth, usaf officials reported all satellites were functioning properly. (dod Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/2/67, 20; W Post, 7/2/67, A4; Av Wk, 7/10/67,39; Aero Tech, 1/11/67,20)
In response to fcc inquiry on future communications in Atlantic area— currently served by two comsats and four cables—ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk and at&t Vice President Richard R. Hough presented their proposals in separate letters to fcc Chairman Rosel H. Hyde. Hough, advocating a fifth underwater cable, said that although AT&T supported the idea of a global comsat system, all of the international carriers believed the cable project was “the right way to add to our capabilities at this time.” The best service, he said, could be provided by “a balanced, integrated network of both cables and satellites.” Charyk charged that the cable would not be economically feasible: “. . . when a new cable is laid to carry traffic that could otherwise be carried at no extra cost by satellite facilities which must be established in any case, the ultimate customer must bear the cable cost as an addition to the already committed costs of service.” As traffic was diverted from comsats to a cable, a greater share of satellite revenue requirement would have to be carried by routes not served by the cable, primarily less developed countries with smaller traffic streams. U.S., he said, was committed to develop the Intelsat system. To ensure that U.S. met this commitment, “the advanced [comsat] system must be in operation in the time frame we have proposed for INTELSAT iv. It is essential that a vigorous advanced satellite development progam be under way during 1968.” (Texts; Smith, NYT, 12/29/67, 43) December 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXCVIII into orbit with 281-km (175-mi) apogee, 265-km (165-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.1° inclination. Equipment and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc SSR, 12/30/67)
usaf announced it was sending teletype messages between two aircraft flying 10,000 mi apart via a satellite in 20,000-mi-altitude earth orbit. Scheduled over six-month period, communications tests were being conducted over Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, North and South America, the polar regions, and Europe, (afsc Release 144.67)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Scout booster. (Pres Rep 1967)
Cosmos CLXXIX was launched into orbit with 157-km (98-mi) apogee, 141-km (88-mi) perigee, 87.3-min period, and 49° inclination. The satellite was announced as part of a program of space research; like CLXXVIII, it reentered on the same day it was orbited, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67; Pravda, 9/23/67)
Satellite reconnaissance alone justified spending 10 times what U.S. had already spent on its space program, President Johnson told a group of Southern educators and Government officials in Nashville. Because of this reconnaissance “I know how many missiles the enemy has.” Before making his remarks on space, Mr. Johnson said he did not wish to be quoted on that section of his talk, but more them 100 persons not bound by press rules heard the statements. (Clark, NYT, 3/17/67, 13; Loory, WPost, 3/18/67)
NASA’s Pioneer VIII (Pioneer C), third in series of five spacecraft designed to provide continuing measurements over the solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space, was successfully launched from etr by Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta booster into orbit around the sun. Orbital parameters: aphelion, 1.0080 astronomical units (au) or 101.2 million mi (162.8 million km); perihelion, 0.9892 au or 91.5 million mi (147.2 million km) ; period, 386.6 days; and inclination, 0.057°. Primary mission objective of the 145-lb, drum-shaped satellite was to collect scientific data on interplanetary phenomena, including magnetic field, plasma, and cosmic ray measurements for two or more passages of solar activity. As secondary mission Pioneer VIII would: (1) investigate continuously characteristics of the magnetosheath, investigate the geomagnetospheric tail, and acquire data when a highly significant solar event occurred; (2) refine primary determinations of earth and moon masses, the astronomical unit, and osculating elements of earth’s orbit; (3) provide synoptic study of solar-interplanetary relations; and (4) provide target for checkout and training of msfn equipment and operations personnel by launching a Test and Training Satellite (tts) as secondary payload. The 40-lb Tts I, carried pickaback on 2nd stage, was successfully ejected after 3rd-stage burnout, and entered orbit with 303-mi (488-km) apogee, 187-mi (301-km) perigee, 92-min period, and 33° inclination. Pioneer VIII separation, boom deployment, and initial solar orientation occurred as planned; all seven experiments— including an interplanetary dust detector and a radio propagation experiment—functioned satisfactorily; and on Dec. 15 spacecraft successfully completed maneuver which orientated the spin axis perpendicular to ecliptic plane. Pioneer VI (launched Dec. 16,1965) and Pioneer VII (launched Aug. 17,1966) were currently 144 million mi and 68 million mi, respectively, from earth and were still returning excellent data. Pioneer program was managed by ARC under ossa direction. (NASA Releases 67—293, 67—310; nasa Proj Off; W Post, 12/14/67, A17; AP, B Sun, 12/14/67,1)
Feb. 15 launch of third satellite in ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II series was postponed by NASA until mid-March to study recent failure in a Scout launch vehicle’s FW-4S motor, intelsat-ii comsats were launched by Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta boosters which used motors similar to FW-4S. (nasaRelease 67-24)
nasa’s Nimbus II meteorological satellite successfully completed one year of operation and was still transmitting useful data. Spacecraft had taken more than one million weather photos since its launch from WTR May 15, 1966. (AP, B Sun, 5/15/67)
nasa Areas sounding rocket launched from Point Mugu, Calif., carried Naval Ordnance Test Station experiment to 33-mi (52-km) altitude to flight-test internally modified version of standard ROCOZ payload, designed to measure ozone distribution for support data on Ogo IV satellite. No experimental results were obtained because of loss of telemetry. There was evidence of payload malfunction near time of experiment ejection. (NASARptSRL)
France launched Diademe 11 (D-1D) geodetic satellite from Hammaguir Range with three-stage Diamant booster into orbit of 1,897km (1,179-mi) apogee, 592-km (368-mi) perigee, 110.4-min period, and 39.9° inclination. Planned apogee was 1,500 km (932 mi), with 635-km (395-mi) perigee. Companion to Diademe I (D—1C), launched Feb. 8, satellite was last to be orbited from Hammaguir Range, which would be shut down March 31. All future launches would be from new bases near Bordeaux and in French Guiana. Scientific mission of Diademe series was geodesy by three different means for cross-checks: Doppler effect experiment, laser experiment measuring distance to satellite from three ground stations, and photography of satellites against star background for direction-finding. (W News, 2/16/67; Av Wk, 2/20/67,25; Wetmore, Av Wk, 3/27/67,50-58)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXII into orbit with 280-km (174mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered June 9. (AP, W Star, 6/1/67,1; gsfc SSR, 6/15/67)
nasa’s Oso IV (oso-d) Orbiting Solar Observatory was successfully launched from etr with three-stage Thor-Delta booster to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 358.8 mi (577 km); perigee, 336.7 mi (542km); period, 95.8 min; and inclination, 32.9°. Fourth of eight spacecraft in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of the sun during most of an 11-yr solar cycle, Oso IV weighed 599 lbs, carried nine experiments, was designed for a six-month lifetime, and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry-command equipment, batteries, electronic controls, gas spin-control arms, and six experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and three solar pointing experiments. Primary purpose of Oso IV was to obtain high-resolution spectral data within the range lA-1350A from pointed solar experiments in the spacecraft during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems including raster scan of solar disk to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Secondary objective was to obtain useful data from nonpointed experiments and from pointed experiments during more than one solar rotation. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of Oso I (launched March 7, 1962), Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965), and Oso III (launched March 8,1967) by collecting data on solar x-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet radiation, and other solar activity, were provided by two American and two British universities, one U.S. Government agency, and one private company. Oso IV was first in series to carry foreign experiments and second (Oso II was the first) capable of scanning entire solar surface by means of a Solar Ultraviolet Scanning Spectrometer which could record a “picture” (digital number) of the sun and transmit it to receiving stations. Spacecraft also had an improved ground-control system whichjpermitted it to receive up to 140 different commands—compared to 10 for Oso /, 70 for Oso II, and 94 for Oso III. Project officials at GSFC reported that satellite spin rate, power level, charge rate, and temperatures were normal and that both tape recorders were operating; all experiments were fully operational by Oct. 25. oso program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—262)
Informed sources speculated that U.S.S.R. had been conducting heat-shield reentry tests with Cosmos satellites since November 1966 in preparation for manned flights to moon, the New York Times reported. Spacecraft on missions from moon would reenter earth’s atmosphere at about 25,000 mph and heat to 5,000-6,000° F—too hot for heat shields currently used on earth-orbiting missions. (NYT, 4/15/67, 13)
The House Committee on Government Operations in H.R. 613 urged dod to proceed with plans for an advanced communications satellite system that would eventually replace the present Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp). The Committee said it “would be a mistake” to lean too heavily on the idcsp because its limited channel capacity was already strained. Several possible system configurations were under study by dod. (Av Wk, 9/4/67, 18)
Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo) satellites, Ogo I, II, III, and IV,	transmitted data simultaneously for the first time. Launching dates for four satellites had been: Ogo I, Sept. 4, 1964; Ogo II, Oct. 14, 1965; Ogo III, June 6, 1966; and Ogo IV. July 28, 1967. (nasa Release 67-252)
Wilbur L. Pritchard, Group Director, Communications Satellite Systems, Aerospace Corp., was appointed director of ComSatCorp’s new laboratories, scheduled for completion in Montgomery County, Md., by 1969. (ComSatCorp Release 67-35)
Luna- XII, first Soviet satellite to successfully transmit photos to earth from lunar orbit, had completed its mission and broken radio contact with ground stations, Tass announced. Satellite had been launched Oct. 22,1966. {W Post, 1/22/67, A23; upi, NYT, 1/23/67, 7)
President Johnson submitted to Congress nasa’s 15th Semiannual Report, covering January to June 1966, and praised the continued progress of U.S. space program: “The achievements reported here reflect not only our progress in space flight, but also new steps taken toward the real objective of all our efforts in space—the application of new knowledge to bettering the lives of all people. Already, we see dramatic examples of success in the satellites which have improved our weather forecasts and navigation, and which are extending radio and television communication to the farthermost regions of the earth. . . . “The United States space program, as reflected in this report, continues to exemplify our Nation’s conviction that the road to peace, progress, and abundance is through continued cooperation among all nations.” (PD, 5/15/67,729-30)	_
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXII into orbit with 301-km (187mi) apogee, 202-km (125-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Aug. 17. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67, 13; gsfc SSR, 8/31/67)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched two Cosmos satellites with two boosters: Cosmos CLXXXV entered orbit with 888-km (552-mi) apogee, 522-km (324-mi) perigee, 98.7-min period, and 64.1° inclination. Cosmos CLXXXV I, launched into orbit with 235-km (146-mi) apogee, 209-km (130-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.7° inclination, later docked with Cosmos CLXXXVIII. Both spacecraft performed satisfactorily. (W Post, 10/29/67, A16; SBD, 10/30/67, 320; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
ERC awarded MIT a three-year, $7.9-million contract for R&D of highperformance gyroscopes and accelerometers “to guide and control the vehicles planned for the complex aeronautical and space missions of the 1970s and 1980s.” It was anticipated that instruments would make possible systems which would navigate advanced supersonic aircraft to intercept runway landing beams without present runway aids; provide highly precise pointing references for satellites; and guide interplanetary vehicles on missions lasting one year or more, (nasa Release 67—155) 324-801 0—69-----13
NASA’s Ats II mission had been adjudged a failure “based upon review of the [spacecraft’s] assessed performance ... in its unplanned elliptical orbit,” NASA announced. Satellite, launched from etr April 5 on mission to evaluate gravity-gradient system for spacecraft stabilization, had remained in transfer orbit, tumbling uncontrollably, after Agena engines failed to ignite for second bum. All experiments were functioning, but possibility of obtaining useful data was poor, (nasa Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CXCIII. Orbital parameters: apogee, 354 km (220 mi); perigee, 203 km (127 mi); period, 89.9 min; inclination, 65.7°. Satellite reentered Dec. 3. (AP, NYT, 11/26/67, 46; gsfc SSR, 12/15/67)
ComSatCorp informed fcc that it was prepared to finance, build, and operate a pilot program for domestic satellite services. Explaining program ComSatCorp proposed March 31, ComSatCorp Chairman James McCormack said pilot system would include two synchronous satellites serving 34 domestic ground stations. Estimated total cost was $104.7 million: $35.7 million for two satellites, $22 million for 34 earth stations, and $47 million for operating costs during two years. Charges for each type of service could not yet be established accurately, but ComSatCorp would provide, without fee, the capacity equivalent to two television channels for noncommercial TV service. McCormack concluded: “We believe that the pilot program offers the American people
In spite of unleased capacity in two commercial communications satellites now in orbit, optimism prevailed, and ComSatCorp’s entry into “global marketplace has led carriers to slash transoceanic rates,” Space/Aeronautics reported. As technical manager of intelsat, ComSatCorp had been establishing operational position in “aeronautical and domestic communications market.” (S/A, 1/67, 80)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed importance of rocketsonde in speech at aiaa Sounding Rocket Vehicle Technology Specialist Conference in Williamsburg, Va. “There is still a lot of important research to be done between the maximum heights of balloons and the minimum heights of satellites. The sounding rocket gives us the means for carrying out such investigations. [It] is valuable for checking out equipment, testing the design 324-801 O—69----5 of an experiment, conducting an exploratory survey, probing for early discoveries, and in general providing an inexpensive means to lay the groundwork for more expensive satellite and space probe experiments to follow.” Important uses for sounding rockets included: detection of x-ray sources; generation of artificial plasma clouds in space; solar observations; investigation of eclipses; study of atmospheric and ionospheric phenomena; and collection of micrometeoroids. Dr. Newell concluded: “We at NASA regard the sounding rocket program as a vital part of our total national space effort. It will continue to receive our strong support.” (Text)
In the year 2000, space satellites would be identifying soil, assessing crop yield, and determining the extent of disease, drought, or insects, Secretary of Agriculture Orville L. Freeman predicted at National Assn, of Science Teachers’ convention in Detroit. “While the farmers of tomorrow study reports in their air-conditioned offices, relieved at last of the physical drudgery and occupational anxiety so traditionally theirs . . . these shining space satellites, equipped with the most sophisticated remote sensing instruments will be supplying the information needed to make key decisions. “Through information gathered by the satellites, the Government will be able to make accurate predictions to guide marketing and distribution of farm products to avoid waste and local shortages and surpluses.” (Text; AP, NYT, 3/21/67,34)
House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Defense Appropriations released testimony on U.S. missile strategy by dod officials at closed hearing March 20. Dr. Charles M. Herzfeld, who resigned as Director of Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) May 26, testified that advanced missile systems based in space rather than on land were being studied. He recalled that dod had studied, until 1964, the “Bambi” system designed to use satellites to locate and destroy enemy missiles shortly after they had been launched. Work had been stopped because it was “much too costly,” but “we think the time is getting ripe again to look at the whole question because the costs of putting things in orbit have gone down dramatically, the reliability of space engineering has gone up dramatically so that the overall cost of the system ought to come down significantly.” Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, revealed that repairs had had to be made on all Minuteman icbms because of missile’s failure to fire in three tests during October 1966. He emphasized, however, that all missiles were operational at the time of his testimony and said overall readiness of the Minuteman and Polaris missile forces was “excellent.” (Beecher, NYT, 5/31/67, 1, 28; W Star, 5/31/67, A6)
The earth from 22,300 miles in space—color photography transmitted by NASA’s Ats III satellite to Rosman, N.C., ground station beginning Nov. 8. This photo, transmitted Nov. 10, shows portions of North and South America, Africa, end Europe and the Greenland ice cap. The Antarctic continent is under cloud cover. A cold front is moving eastward over the central United States and a tropical storm can he seen at bottom center, with a cold front extending into Argentina. adjustments of funding under r&d operations for the remainder of FY 1968.	Fund reallocation {congressional appropriation figures in parentheses) showed: Apollo Applications, $253.2 (315.5) million; ossa, $568.1 (528.0) million; oart, $318.7 (301.5) million; otda, $275.0 (270.0)	million. In more detail, on ossa, physics and astronomy $141.5 (130.0)	million; lunar and planetary, $143.4 (125.0) million; launch vehicle procurement, $141,9 (145.0) million; bioscience, $41.8 (40.0) - million; space applications, $99.5 (88.0) million. On oart, electronics systems, $39.2 (35.0) million; space vehicle systems, $35.0 (no change) million; human factors systems, $21.0 (no change) million; basic research, $21.5 (20.0) million; space power and electric propulsion systems, $44.0 (no change) million; nuclear rockets, $54.0 (46.5) million; chemical propulsion, $37.2 (35.0) million; and aeronautics, $66.8 (65.0) million. Sustaining university was $10.0 (no change) million, and technology utilization, $4.0 (no change) million. Webb presented rather brief outline on present long-range planning for lunar and planetary mission hardware. Limited funds could continue development of flight-qualified engine for nerva i and would support plans for first Apollo Applications flights in 1970. Two Mars-Mariner flights for 1969 would be the “last in present program.” Five Mariner flights in 1970s, two or more Titan III launches in Voyager series in 1973, and Saturn V flight in 1975 could be considered in FY 1969 budget. Webb reasoned that NASA could “use the Atlas-Centaur . . . and the Titan III with transtage, to move out into further planetary operations but with very limited expenditures in 1968 and 1969.” Responding to questions by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Webb referred to recent CSC decision on NASA personnel contracts and said he would join with CSC chairman and the Comptroller General in working out pattern for support contracts, the KSC contract providing his guidelines. (Testimony; transcript)
Contract to develop esro’s TD-1 and TD-2, largest satellites to be designed in Europe, had been awarded to MESH consortium. European members of mesh-—Engins Matra of France, E.R.N.O. of West Germany, S.A.A.B. of Sweden, Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Limited of Great Britain—would get £8-million contract to develop the two satellites; Engins Matra would be prime contractor. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Limited and Engins Matra had jointly designed, developed, and manufactured Esro II satellite. TD-1 and TD—2 would be launched in 1970 and 1971 and would perform astrophysics missions. (S/F, 6/67, 198)
U.S.S.R. launched the meteorological satellite Cosmos CLVI into orbit with 640-km (398-mi) apogee, 586-km (364-mi) perigee, 96.9min period, and 81.19° inclination. Initial plane of orbit was shifted relative to plane of meteorological satellite Cosmos CXLIV (launched Feb. 28) by 95°. These two satellites would form experimental system called “Meteor.” Mutual positions of orbits for satellites had been chosen to permit meteorological observations at intervals of about six hours; system would obtain data on half of the earth’s surface during 24-hr period, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/67; Ten Years of Space Research in the U.S.S.R., uss-t Trans, vol. 5, no. 5, 1967)
NASA turned over Essa V meteorological satellite to ESSA for operation in accordance with NASA—Dept, of Commerce agreement. Essa V was launched from wtr by NASA April 20. (NASA Release 67-114)
Navy contract award had been made to Radio Corporation of America in letter contract for $2.0 million, for six navigation satellites. The Special Projects Office, usn would be contracting activity, (dod Release . 846-67) Performance of the spacecraft was satisfactory except for some difficulty with completely reliable response to command transmission from the ground stations and out-of-spec accelerations during the first few orbits. The spacecraft’s temperature, attitude control, and atmospheric pressure readings were normal, and few additional anomalies were experienced. Mid-air recovery of NASA’s Biosatellite II experiment capsule, by aircraft at 3:15 pm edt Sept. 9, within 15 mi of predicted impact location of 7°15'N and 162°1'W, marked a new first. Biosatellite /, which had remained in orbit for two months after the retrorocket failed, landed in the ocean near Australia following reentry Feb. 15, but was not recovered. The most important single question for Biosatellite II was whether the changes produced in organisms by radiation are slowed or hastened under weightless conditions. Biosatellite scientists had noted that early recovery had resulted in less risk to the experiments than if recovery had been delayed beyond the planned three days. Despite the delayed launch and early recovery, scientists reported only a small decrease in the expected data return from the experiments. Indications were that all programmed events in orbit, such as fixation of frog eggs, fixation and 324-801 0—60-----18	263 Before launch. 4 hours and 40 minutes of weightlessness. 12 hours and 29 minutes of weightlessness. '.4& 4*4&i<5.17 hours and 40 minutes of weightlessness. feeding of amoeba, fixation of wheat seeds, and pepper plant camera shutter opening, had worked as planned. Successful recovery of plant and animal life carried on a 45-hr journey through space by Biosatellite II was expected to provide important clues to how life forms would develop in a weightless environment or how radiation might affect future generations. Biosatellite II was under management of arc and under direction of ossa. The Delta launch vehicle was managed by gsfc. Communications and tracking were handled by NASA’s Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network, operated by gsfc. BiosateUite II was huilt by the General Electric Reentry Systems Dept. The Delta launch vehicle was built by Douglas Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-239; Av Wk, 9/18/67; AP, W Post, 9/11/67; Myler, upi, W Post, 9/15/67, 9/18/67; B Sun, 9/8/67; Yuenger, C Trib, 9/15/67)
President Johnson, in his State of the Union address before joint session of Congress, deferred decision on deploying a Nike-X antimissile missile system despite evidence that U.S.S.R. was building a defensive system near Moscow. “We have a solemn duty to slow down the arms race . . . if that is at all possible, in both conventional and nuclear weapons and defenses. ... I realize any additional race would impose on our peoples and on all mankind for that matter, an additional waste of resources with no gain in security to either side.” The President said he intended to seek international agreements “bearing directly on this problem.” He did not mention the U.S. space program in his address. {PD, 1/16/67, 26-39) January 10—11: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed achievements and objectives of U.S. space program in a series of lectures at the Univ. of Sydney Summer School, Australia. After emphasizing intimate interrelationship between nasa’s unmanned and manned programs, Dr. Mueller assessed Mercury and Gemini flights: “In the Mercury program, we established man’s capabilities in short space flights and we laid the foundation for manned space flight technology. In the Gemini program, we gained operational proficiency, learned about man’s capabilities in flights lasting up to two weeks, and developed new techniques.” The Apollo program, he said, was proceeding on schedule, and several alternative post-Apollo programs were under consideration: “(1) Direct economic benefits, with emphasis on extensive earth-orbital activities; (2) Lunar exploration and science; (3) Planetary exploration and science; (4) Maximum effort aimed at pre-eminence in earth-orbital, lunar, and planetary activities; (5) Balanced combination of economic benefits, lunar and planetary exploration, and science.” (Text) Scheduled to enter commercial service Jan. 27, Intelsat II—B would provide 24-hr communications service between U.S. and earth stations in Hawaii, Japan, and Australia; assist in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements; and provide military communications between Hawaii and Japan, and Thailand and the Philippines for National Communications System (ncs) . It was second satellite in ComSatCorp’s intelsat II program to place two comsats in synchronous orbit—one over the Pacific, one over the Atlantic; first satellite— Intelsat II-A—was launched by NASA Oct. 27,1966, but failed to achieve synchronous orbit because apogee motor malfunctioned. Subsequent “systems tests” of the apogee motor at Arnold Engineering Development Center indicated malfunction had been thermal in nature, intelsat ii comsats, larger and improved versions of Early Bird (intelsat i) satellite, were capable of handling television and data transmissions of 324-801 0—69up to 240 voice channels, (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Release; UPI, NYT, 1/8/67,18; 1/12/67, 8; 1/15/67, 57; AP, W Star, 1/8/67, A18; Reddig, W Star, 1/11/67, A5; W Post, 1/12/67, Cl)
erc awarded $99,151 to TRW Systems, Inc., and $99,370 to RCA for research on a satellite system to provide more efficient navigation and air traffic control for aircraft and ships in North Atlantic area in 1975. Both companies would conduct eight-month studies to determine best technical approach, identifying related problems and requirements. (frc Release 67-47)
Third French satellite, Diademe I (D-1C), was launched from Hammaguir Range with three-stage Diamant booster. Orbital parameters were 1,341-km (833-mi) apogee, 418 km (260-mi) lower than nominal; 584-km (363-mi) perigee; 104-min period; and 40° inclination. Reason for low apogee had not yet been determined. Designed to reflect laser beams fired simultaneously from ground stations in France, Greece, and Algeria, 50-lb satellite would make geodetic measurements. It also carried ultrastable oscillator for Doppler effect experiment. First French satellite, A—1, was launched from Hammaguir Range Nov. 26,1965; second, Diapason! (D-lA), was launched Feb. 17,1966. Fourth and last satellite in Diamant series was scheduled for launch Feb. 19. (Hess, NYT, 2/9/67, 15; SBD, 2/9/67, 218; Av Wk, 2/13/67, 41)
Early Bird I communications satellite passed its test as a device for expediting clearance of passengers and cargo through airports when jet aircraft would be put in service in 1970. Moments after an airline flight took off from Frankfurt, Germany, for Dulles International Airport, data on passengers and cargo were sent via satellite to Government officials at Dulles so they could process the data in advance of the plane’s arrival. Officials in Frankfurt relayed facsimiles of the cargo manifest, health certificates, and Customs declaration forms of the 120 passengers. (NYT, 9/7/67)
Tiros VII, oldest U.S. meteorological satellite in operation, completed its fourth year in orbit. Designed with a three- to six-month operational lifetime, satellite had traveled 594,000,000 mi, completed 21,600 earth orbits, and taken over 124,500 photos of 50,000,000,000 sq mi of earth and its cloud cover, nasa said Tiros VII, which had tracked the major hurricanes of 1963, 1964, and 1965, was now commanded to transmit photos only occasionally. (AP, NYT, 6/18/67)
All-weather landing capability would be a requirement for sst operations because long-range sst used fuel too quickly to permit prolonged holding in airport traffic patterns, Dr. Richard M. Head, erc, told nasa Hq. press briefing on aeronautics research. He predicted that landings under zero visibility could be practical within a decade. Dr. Head also noted that, because of sun’s influence on the ionosphere, ssts with vhf radios might be subject to communications blackouts during the 1,200	mi of a transatlantic flight when they were too far from land for line-of-sight vhf reception. Use of satellites to relay communications might be a possible solution to the problem, he suggested. (Schmeck, NYT, 6/22/67, 6)
NASA successfully launched Essa V (tos-c), fifth meteorological satellite in ESSA’s Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, from WTR using Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite achieved nearly-polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 883-mi (1,421-km) apogee; 840-mi (1,352-km) perigee; 113.5-min period; and 101.9° inclination. Wheel orientation maneuver would be completed during 18th orbit [see April 24], at which time first photos would be programmed and NASA would check out spacecraft before turning its operation over to essa. An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 325-lb Essa V carried two Advanced Vidicon Camera System (avcs) cameras which would provide 24-hr global weather coverage. Photos would be stored on magnetic tape until readout by essa’s Command and Data Acquisition (cda) stations at Fairbanks, Alaska, and Wallops Island, Va., to supplement Essa III—expected to become almost completely inoperable by early June. essa financed, managed, and operated tos system; GSFC was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. Essa I was launched Feb. 3, 1966; Essa II, Feb. 28, 1966; Essa III, Oct. 2, 1966; and Essa IV, Jan. 26, 1967. (nasa Proj Off; essa Release 67-39)
Dr. Edward U. Condon, Director, University of Colorado’s study of Unidentified Flying Objects (ufos) , said that “such studies ought to be discontinued unless someone comes up with a new idea on how to approach the problem.” Condon said “it’s been extremely difficult to gather information on this subject” and asked anyone with any “hard information to speak now—or forever hold your peace.” He stated: “We have approached the problem in an unprejudiced way, seeking to find whatever there is to find by objective scientific means with no scientific results so far. Some of the difficulties associated with belief in visitors from outer space are well set forth in an article by Prof. William Markowitz in Science for Sept. 15 and should be studied by all who wish to be informed on the subject,” he added. (Harkins, Boulder Camera, 9/27/67; AP, LA Times, 9/28/67) September 27-October 2: nasa launched for ComSatCorp the fourth of Intelsat ii series of commercial communications satellites (Intelsat II—D)-— designated Pacific II—and second of them in the Pacific. Launch was from etr by Thrust-Augmented Delta (DSV-3E) launch vehicle. Satellite went into transfer orbit over Pacific at approximately 176° east with 29,056-mi (37,105-km) apogee, 186-mi (299-km) perigee, 658.8-min period, and 26.4° inclination. Satellite would supplement services of and replace current Pacific satellite, Intelsat II-B (174°E), in event of its failure, nasa support nominally would terminate after about three days, subsequent to providing backup transfer orbit data and calculations. Final orbit and spin axis orientation would be made by ComSatCorp with onboard hydrogen peroxide system. Approximately 15 days after launch, satellite would be available for commercial use. Satellites could handle TV data transmissions, or up to 240 voice channels (480 circuits) between “first class” ground stations such as Andover. Part of satellite capacity would support ncs/nascom for Apollo program. It would serve as backup against interruption of satellite communications service and would add communications capability across the Pacific. On Sept. 30, apogee motor was ignited at 7:45 pm edt, on command from ComSatCorp-operated earth station at Paumalu, Hawaii, and kicked new satellite from its elliptical transfer orbit into a planned, near-synchronous orbit over Pacific. Reorientation and velocity correction maneuvers were carried out Oct. 1 and 2 to place spin axis in orbit plane and to improve circularity with predicted orbit (resulting from these maneuvers) of apogee, 22,531 mi (36,260 km), perigee, 21,805 mi (35,091 km), period, 1,430.5 min. drift rate, 1° east per day. As Intelsat II—D approached Intelsat II—B, launched Jan. 11, now located between 174° and 175°, drift rate would be reduced and intersatellite interference tests would be conducted to determine minimum angular separation which could be employed without mutual interference (nasa cooperating with ComSatCorp in planning tests). The Intelsat satellite system, in addition to this new Pacific II satellite, included the Pacific I satellite and two satellites serving the Atlantic area, Early Bird I, launched Apr. 6, 1965, and Atlantic II, launched Mar. 22, 1967. (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Releases 67-45 and 67-48)
National Aeronautics and Space Council was accumulating data on various approaches to earth resources satellites with the goal of forcing competing agencies to agree on a single coordinated program for FY 1969, Aerospace Technology reported. A decision was expected by mid-September. The Depts. of Interior and Agriculture favored an operational program, but NASA believed current technology justified only an R&D approach at this time. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67,3)
U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc countries—including Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia—had agreed to conduct “a program of joint launchings of sputniks and rockets,” Evert Clark reported in the New York Times. Yugoslavia had declined admission to the group, choosing instead to join intelsat. U.S.S.R. reportedly had constructed or would construct tracking stations in Cuba, U.A.R., Mali, and “some other countries of Asia and Africa.” Since U.S.S.R.’s land mass stretched over % of earth’s circumference, U.S.S.R. had less need for tracking stations in other countries than U.S., and assigned little or no responsibility to nation where station was located. NASA, however, had bilateral agreements with more than 70 nations covering joint activities from student exchanges to satellite launches. (Clark, NYT, 12/14/67,26C)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr using Titan III—B booster; satellite reentered Sept. 30. (Pres Rep 1967)
Cosmos CLXXXVII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 210-km (131-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, 87.8 min period, and 50° inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily and reentered same day. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb employing a Thor-Agena D booster, (upi, W Post, 3/31/67, A3)
U.K.’s Ariel III (uk—e) scientific satellite was successfully launched from WTR by nasa four-stage Scout booster into orbit with 373-mi (600-km) apogee, 306-mi (492-km) perigee, 95.6-min period, and 80° inclination. The 198-lb satellite, which had a one-year design lifetime, carried five experiments for the investigation of earth’s atmosphere; four were operating at liftoff and the fifth was turned on after third orbit. All five were functioning normally. Third in a series of U.S.-U.K. cooperative space projects, Ariel III was designed to supplement and extend atmospheric and ionospheric investigations conducted by Ariel I (launched April 26, 1962) and Ariel II (launched March 27, 1964). Primary nasa mission objectives were to place satellite into planned orbit and provide tracking and telemetry support. NASA supplied Scout booster, conducted launch, and provided tracking and data acquisition services with stadan facilities, under overall management of GSFC. Mai or portion of the technical effort on Ariel III, including design and fabrication of spacecraft and five experiments, was accomplished in U.K. under management of Science Research Council’s Space Research Management Unit (srmu). (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 67—96, 67—115)
U.S., France, and U.K. had had excellent displays at Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 23-31], but visitors had seemed most impressed by U.S.S.R. exhibit, Time magazine noted. “The greatest Soviet surprise was the launch vehicle that in 1961 sent Pioneer Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin into orbit in Vostok 1. . . . Visitors at the show flocked to a huge mock-up of the 13.6-ton Proton satellite, [to] ... a model of their advanced Molniya communications satellite, [and to] . . . the variety of new Russian jet liners. “. . . the U.S. went all out . . . [and] Britain and France also put their best fleet forward. . . . But it was the Russians who stole the show, simply by taking the wraps off space hardware—some of it a decade old—that they had never before displayed in the West. . . .” (Time, 6/9/61)
Cosmos CLXXXII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Orbital parameters: apogee, 355 km (221 mi); perigee, 210 km (131 mi); period, 89.9 min; and inclination, 65°. Satellite reentered Oct. 24. (NYT, 10/17/67,12; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
Former Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev made at least two offers in the early 1960’s to show to the U.S. photos of U.S. military bases taken by orbiting Soviet satellites “in return for certain favors,” Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, formerly an NASC staff member and currently at the Library of Congress, told an aiaa meeting in Atlanta. He declined to specify what favors Khrushchev wanted. Dr. Sheldon said frequent launchings of satellites into low circular orbits indicated strongly that U.S.S.R. was observing U.S. from space: “I think there’s little doubt they are in the observation business.” It was difficult to ascertain the status of the Soviet manned space program, he said, but U.S.S.R. might feel ready to attempt a manned orbit of the moon within the next year. Concerning reports that several cosmonauts had died during space flights, Dr. Sheldon said U.S.S.R. had definitely not lost any men in orbit and probably had not lost any men in the space program before the April 24 death of Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. He acknowledged the death of a man in a parachute accident and the death of a Soviet test pilot, but said he was not certain these deaths were involved in the space program. (AP, B Sun,
nasa approved Phase II of a Dec. 14, 1966, contract and awarded Goodyear Aerospace Corp. $650,000 to design, fabricate, and test a full-scale model of a 30-ft-dia parabolic antenna. Antenna, planned as part of experimental package on proposed second-generation Applications Technology Satellites (ATS F and G), would be used for advanced communications research, (gsfc Release G—32-67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXVIII into orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 199-km (124-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered July 12. (SBD, 7/6/67,12; gsfc SSR, 7/15/67)
Cosmos CXLVIII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Orbital parameters: apogee, 436 km (271 mi); perigee, 275 km (171 mi); period, 91.3 min; and inclination, 71°. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered May 7. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/28/67; GSFC SSR, 5/15/67)
nasa successfully launched Explorer XXXIV Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp-f) from wtr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into near-perfect polar orbit. Orbital parameters: apogee, 133,131 mi (214,348 km); perigee, 150 mi (241 km); period, 106 hrs; inclination, 67.2°. Preliminary data indicated that all spacecraft systems and the 10 of its 11 experiments which had been turned on were operating normally. Final experiment would be turned on by ground command June 1. Explorer XXXIV would make measurements of solar and galactic cosmic rays within and at the boundary of earth’s atmosphere and interplanetary space during period of maximum solar activity. Primary mission objectives were to: (1) place spacecraft into orbit with an apogee of approximately 92,000 mi, or greater, to investigate the region between the magnetosheath and the shock front; and (2) to obtain scientific data on the cislunar environment from a number of its experiments. Explorer XXXIV was ten times more complex than any of four previous satellites launched in NASA’s Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) series, two of which—Explorer XXVIII (launched May 29, 1965)	and Explorer XXXIII (launched July 1, 1966)—were still operating and providing scientific data, imp series was managed by Gsrc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 67-21; UPl, NYT, 5/26/67,9; WSJ, 5/25/67,1)
Predicting future trends in aeronautics and space, nasa’s Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop told American Society for Metals in Rochester, Pa.: “Current events make it clear that many national needs are increasing the pressure on resources and this is being felt over a wide range of activities. . . . It is times like these, however, that give the opportunity for advanced research and technology to open up the range of possible new missions that can be considered in future national decisions [and] we must visualize future mission possibilities and develop the various technologies needed at an optimum pace. Essential to the soundness of this approach is emphasis on technology that has multiple applications.” Sloop praised “the potential of applications satellites,” and said it was “perhaps best gaged by the number of users, domestic and foreign, that are willing to invest their own money. In communications, there are over a dozen proposals for systems that involve an estimated investment of over a billion dollars.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLII, its eighth Cosmos satellite during March, to achieve record month of space launchings. Orbital parameters: apogee, 512 km (318 mi); perigee, 283 km (176 mi); period, 92.2 min; inclination, 71°. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Aug. 5. (upi, W Post, 3/26J67, A3; GSFC SSR, 8/15/67)
Explorer XXXII (ae-b) aeronomy satellite, launched May 25, 1966, had ground support terminated; satellite had suffered complete depressurization [see Jan. 17]. As direct result of loss of internal pressure, battery failure had caused disablement of one electron temperature probe on March 3; ion mass spectrometer and the other electron temperature probe had remained operational and continued to produce quality data until March 22. Last radiofrequency contact had been made on March 26. Explorer XXXIl mission objectives had been achieved and mission had been declared a success in December 1966. Scientific papers on initial results would be presented at American Geophysical Union meetings April 17—20 in Washington, D.C., and additional results would be reported to cospar meetings in London during July, (nasa SP-4007,192; nasa Proj Off)
Cosmos CXLIV satellite, which began transmitting meteorological data to Washington, D.C., March 2, was equipped with an infrared camera for night photography of clouds and ice fields and two television cameras for daylight photography of weather patterns, Izvestia reported. Launched Feb. 28, satellite was powered by two wing-like solar batteries that turned automatically to trap solar rays. (Reuters, NYT, 3/17/67,
usaf launched unidentified satellite WTR using Thor-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Mar. 11. (Pres Rep 1967; GSFC SSR, 3/15/67)
A manned Apollo spacecraft should be launched to recover Explorer 1, first U.S. satellite, whose orbit was expected to decay in late 1969, G. Snowden of Melbourne, Australia, suggested in a Letter to the Editor of Aviation Week. “When Apollo swings into action, maybe one of the tasks could be a rendezvous and retrieval of man’s first satellite. I say first because Sputnik 1 and 2 have decayed, leaving Explorer 1 at the head of the list. A replica can be built at a fraction of the cost of retrieval, but there is nothing like having the original. Not only would it have value as a historic memento of man’s venture into space, but also to scientists. I am certain after nearly 10 years in space it would be valuable to them. . . .” (Av Wk, 6/5/67, 110)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXXXIX into earth orbit with 210-km (130-mi) apogee; 144-km (89-mi) perigee; 87.5-min period; and 50° inclination. Equipment functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered same day. (W Post, 1/26/67, El; gsfc SSR, 1/31/67)
ComSatCorp announced NASA would launch fourth satellite in the Intelsat ii series Sept. 20. Plans called for satellite to be launched from etr into synchronous orbit over the Pacific to increase communications capability and serve as a backup against interruption of satellite communications service. (ComSatCorp Release)
Cosmos CLXXV was launched into orbit with 386-km (240-mi) apogee, 210-km (130-mi) perigee, 92.0-min period, and 72.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 19. (W Post, 9/12/67; gsfc SSR, 9/30/67)
Cosmos CLXXIII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 528km (328-mi) apogee, 280-km (174-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 71° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Dec. 17. (upi, NYT, 8/25/67, 5; gsfc SSR, 12/31/67)
An all-metal payload shroud which separated in three sections would be used when an Air Force Titan III launch vehicle placed a dod communications satellite into space in the fall of 1968. Developed and produced by Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., under a $2.6-million contract, the shroud would be made up of fairings to protect the sensitive instrumentation of scientific payloads during passage through the earth’s atmosphere, (afsc Release 171.67)
GSFC scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness reported new findings on moon’s nature and environment. Data obtained from Explorer XXXV in lunar orbit indicated that: (1) no supersonic shock front preceded moon to impede flow of solar wind toward the lunar surface; (2) a sizable empty cavity or solar wind void existed behind the moon away from the sun; (3) moon had practically no magnetic field, and therefore no complex magnetosphere, surrounding radiation belts, or lunar ionosphere; and (4) moon’s average electrical conductivity was low (under 1,800° F). Findings did not appear to create any additional hazards to Apollo manned lunar landing program. Explorer XXXV, launched into lunar orbit from etr July 22, to study interaction of solar wind with the moon and investigate the lunar environment, was first satellite to orbit the moon without having a midcourse maneuver capability and the only operating satellite currently in lunar orbit, (nasa Release 67-295)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
NASA and Centre National d’fitudes Spatiales (cnes) were conducting series of laser tests with five orbiting satellites—three U.S. and two French— to make precise geodetic measurements, NASA reported. In experiments, a laser beam was fired at a satellite equipped with a reflector designed to return beam to the transmitting station. Time elapsed from transmission to reception was measure of the distance between station and satellite. If satellite’s position was known by independent means or if several stations fired lasers simultaneously, it was then possible to determine distance between observing ground stations. NASA said initial tests, which began in April from stations in U.S., Europe, and North Africa, had been so successful that it might soon be possible to prove or disprove the theory of continental drift by determining the movements of continents relative to one another, (nasa Release 67-197)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXL1X into orbit with 297-km (185mi) apogee, 248-km (154-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered April 7. {Tech Wk, 3/27/67,28; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
NASA was studying feasibility of launching two navigation satellites to keep SST under constant surveillance and be alert to slightest malfunction, Mohammed Rauf, Jr., reported in the News American. NASA Chief of Navigation and Traffic Control Eugene Ehrlich, who conceived the plan, told Rauf in an interview that the system would provide maximum safety against accidents: “The program calls for the building of two tracking stations on each side of the Atlantic. The wings of the plane and all its other important parts will be fitted with small transponders, which will continually relay information about the plane’s condition to' the satellites . . . [which would] relay the signals to the tracking stations, where giant computers will process them within minutes for appropriate action.” Eventually, Ehrlich predicted, all aircraft and ships would be equipped with transponders “because the [proposed] navigation satellites . . . will be capable of handling the increasing amount of air and sea traffic predicted for this century. “Four satellites can have the whole world under surveillance for air and sea traffic control, and will cut down both the cost of such control as exercised by conventional methods, and also the time required for it.” (Rauf, News American, 7/13/67)
Cosmos CLIV was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 232-km (144-mi) apogee, 186-km (116-mi) perigee, 88.5-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Apr. 10. {Tech Wk, 4/10/67; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
Ford Foundation and AT&T submitted briefs to fcc on domestic comsat system. Ford Foundation brief sharply criticized ComSatCorp’s plan for a domestic comsat system and asked that ComSatCorp’s April 1 request for permission to develop an experimental system be denied. “To add to Comsat’s authority the exclusive francise for a domestic communications satellite system . . . would give the corporation a world monopoly. One entity would provide all communications satellite services. One company would be responsible for developing all satellite technology. One customer would procure all satellite equipment. A monopoly of this sort would be unprecedented. . . .” Ford suggested instead that the system be developed and initially operated by NASA so that technological knowledge could be gleaned without controversy over ultimate management or ownership. NASA could later be reimbursed by the entity finally chosen to operate the system. at&t supported ComSatCorp’s proposal, suggesting the system be linked to and integrated with present ground systems. Rejecting Ford Foundation’s proposal for a separate nonprofit satellite TV broadcast corporation whose income would support noncommercial TV, at&t said that such proposals reflected “a parochial disregard for their effects on other satellite systems and terrestrial (land) microwave systems. . . . Installation of such limited systems would . . . jeopardize the existing public communications systems, both domestic and overseas, and would severely inhibit their necessary continued growth.” (Text; Gould, NYT, 4/3/67, 1; W Star, 4/4/67)
First flight test of Saturn V, designated Apollo 4, was scheduled no earlier than Nov. 7, announced m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director. “This is a target date,” he said. “We are in a very complex learning process and we are going to take all the time we need on this first launch.” Launch vehicle and Apollo spacecraft combination was 363 ft tall and weighed 6 million lbs. Thrust of Saturn V’s first stage was 7.5 million lbs. Key objective of flight planned for Nov. 7 would be evaluation of Apollo command module heat shield under conditions encountered on return from moon mission. Flight would also test thermal seals for use in new quick-release spacecraft hatch which would be installed on all manned Apollo missions. Apollo 4 flight plan would call for Saturn V to place spacecraft and launch yehicle 3rd stage (S-IVB) into 117-mi circular orbit. After completing two orbits, 3rd stage would he re-ignited to place spacecraft into orbit with apogee of 10,800 mi. After separation from 3rd stage, service module propulsion system would be fired to rafee spacecraft apogee to 11,400 mi. During descent the service module motor would fire again, boosting velocity of spacecraft to about 25,000 mph, the reentry speed of a lunar return flight, (nasa Release 67-274; B Sun, 10/26/67, A6) • GSFC officials completed week of checkout of Oso IV and turned on last of nine experiments. All experiments were performing well and spacecraft was transmitting satisfactory data. The 599-lb spacecraft, launched from etr Oct. 18, had received 1,500 commands. It was 3,000th object in orbit since Sputnik I in 1957; 100th satellite orbited in 1967; and 50th satellite orbited by Delta launch vehicle in 53 attempts. (NASA Release 67-273)
British government would launch an all-British satellite within 2% yrs, Reuters reported. According to a Daily Mail article, a 200-lb satellite would be launched from Woomera Rocket Range with new Black Arrow rocket. (Reuters, NYT, 1/4/67,40)
Earth resource evaluation satellites could give “. . . greatest immediate return of all space expenditures,” Space/Aeronautics reported. Applications were listed: spotting indications of petroleum and mineral deposits; providing land use maps for urban renewal, agricultural and industrial development; monitoring underground streams; checking crop and forest vigor; and monitoring pollution dynamics. (S/A, 1/67, 85)
Chairman James McCormack of ComSatCorp, speaking at annual meeting of National Assn, of Broadcasters, in Chicago, made these predictions: “With new satellites, having flexibility to permit working with several earth stations simultaneously and having increased transmission capabilities, and with improved earth stations, we are coming on better days. For a year or so, we will continue to be handicapped by a lack of ground facilities to enable the United States to work efficiently and simultaneously with more than one satellite in either the Atlantic or the Pacific [and] we will continue for a while to be embarrassed by lack of system capacity there, primarily in the earth stations, to handle occasional TV transmissions without buying back other circuits then under annual or monthly lease.” He continued: “. . . in a very few years, you will have the potential of continuous, live, world-wide TV transmission at well under one percent of your total costs.” He went on to explain: “Given the geographic coverage of the satellite, capable of being used directly from a number of points' simultaneously, and the rapid growth of all kinds of requirements for service, a single world-wide communications organization was deemed essential from the beginning. The same set of considerations would seem to indicate at least a broadly based international forum for broadcasting, an important and rather unique use of those communications.” Turning to potential world-wide benefits, he said: “The establishment of a world-wide broadcast capability, in being and operating continuously, will enable the almost casual accomplishment of some of the greatest purposes of the United States and many other nations seeking better understanding as one basis for a reasonable peaceful world. I refer in particular of course to cultural exchanges, information and education.” (Text)
ComSatCorp’s plans to launch a satellite by 1970 for relaying vhf communications from transoceanic airliners might be delayed by high costs, Electronics reported. “As far as the faa is concerned, the only issue is cost. The agency is still reeling from a Comsat proposal earlier this year pricing such communications services at $5 million per channel per year; the FAA told Comsat it was not interested at that price. To make matters worse, one faa official says current estimates from hardware makers are even higher.” (Electronics, 8/7/67)
Australia might agree to operate first joint tracking station with U.S.S.R. in Western Australia if U.S. approved, Newsweek speculated. U.S. currently operated three stations in Australia, and two more were under construction; U.S.S.R. had to maintain contact with its satellites via picket ships in the Pacific. (Newsweek, 3/6/67,18)
gsfc selected Radiation, Inc., for negotiations on a $l-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to develop Versatile Information Processor (vip) , an advanced telemetry system for the Nimbus D meteorological satellite. System would process, format, and store in the spacecraft scientific data obtained from experiments and monitor temperatures, pressures, power supply, and control system, (nasa Release 67-34)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXLII into orbit with 1,362-km (846-mi) apogee, 214-km (113-mi) perigee, 100.3-min period, and 48.4° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Jul. 6. (Tech Wk, 2/20/67,13; gsfc SSR, 7/15/67)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr using Thor-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Sept. 1. (Pres Rep 1967)
Soviet launch rate for recoverable Cosmos reconnaissance satellites had leveled after six-year increase, Aviation Week reported. Number launched as of mid-July 1967 was same as number launched during same period in 1966, and annual 1967 total was expected to be similar to annual 1966 total of 21. “The Russians now are launching recoverable reconnaissance satellites on the average of one every 16-17 days, each of which remains in orbit for approximately eight days. When the program began in 1962, the launch rate averaged one every 73 days and the following year the pace accelerated to an average of one every 46 days. In 1964 the figure was every 28 days, in 1965 the frequency had increased to an average of one every 19 days and last year it began to taper to one every 17 days.. . .” (Av Wk, 7/24/67, 26)
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully orbited five unmanned satellites: two Vela nuclear detection satellites and three scientific satellites, Ers—XVIII, Ers—XX, and Ers—XXVII. The 508-lb Velas—improved versions of six Vela payloads previously launched— entered initial elliptical orbits with 69,000-mi (96,642-km) apogee and 5,400-mi (8,690-km) perigee. On April 29, orbit of one Vela was circularized at 69,000-mi (96,642-km) altitude; orbit of second would be circularized May 1. Designed to operate at least 18 mo in orbit, Vela satellites were part of dod’s Vela program to monitor space for violations of nuclear test ban treaty. The 14- and 20-lb scientific satellites contained scientific and engineering experiments to (1) investigate effects of vacuum on characteristics of 16 metals, (2) monitor radiation of Van Allen belts, and (3) measure solar radiation. (NYT, 4/29/67, 17; W Post, 4/29/67, A4; Pres Rpt 1967)
Cosmos CLXXVII was launched into orbit with 267-km (166-mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite, announced as part of a program of space research, reentered Sept. 24. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67; Krasnaya Zvezda, 9/19/67, 1)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with a Thor-Agena D booster from WTR; one satellite reentered July 20. (AP, KC Times, 6/17/67; Pres Rep 1967)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXL into orbit with 241-km (150-mi) apogee, 170-km (106-mi) perigee, 88.48-min period, and 51.7° inclination. All equipment functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Feb. 9. {Tech Wk, 2/13/67,10; gsfc SSR, 2/15/67)
Lifting-body vehicles, with their ability to maneuver and land on conventional runways, might become the spacecraft of the future, J. V. Reistrup suggested in the Washington Post. Because a naval recovery fleet would not be required, space missions could become a day-to-day operation; crews might use the vehicles to inspect foreign spacecraft, repair U.S. satellites, make reconnaissance flights, fly in search and rescue operations, or take replacement crews and supplies up to manned space stations. NASA and USAF had been testing various types of lifting-body vehicles: M2-F2 and HL-10 in piloted glide tests, and a small automated model of SV-5 as part of Prime—Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry—program. (Reistrup, W Post, 1/22/67)
nasa turned Essa IV meteorological satellite over to essa for operation in accordance with NASA—Dept, of Commerce agreement. Essa IV was launched by NASA Jan. 26 from wtr. (nasa Release 67-10)
First experimental tactical communications by satellite among USN, usaf, and USA units had been successful, dod announced. Messages had been exchanged among airborne aircraft, a submarine, a ship, and fixed and mobile terminals via Lincoln Experimental Satellite (Les V), one of six satellites launched by usaf July 1. (dod Release 661-67; AP, NYT, 7/21/67,6)	#
NASA, in cooperation with West Germany’s Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) and Brazilian Space Activities Commission (cnae), successfully launched an Argo D-4 (Javelin) sounding rocket from Barreira do Inferno range near Natal, Brazil, on ballistic trajectory through Van Allen radiation belts to 650-mi (1,000-km) altitude. Purpose of mission was to flight-test instruments being developed for West German research satellite, scheduled for launch in 1969 to investigate earth’s radiation belts. Several German organizations provided scientific experiments; CNAE provided range and launching services; NASA provided sounding rocket, downrange telemetry, and radar. (WS Release 67-23)
A 180-man crew working a 10-hr day six days a week had completed 14week construction job of 15-building installation in the Australian desert, which would be used to intercept information transmitted by Soviet reconnaissance satellites [see Aug. 12]. (AP, NYT, 8/29/67, 24)
Dr. Herbert Friedman, Superintendent of Naval Research Laboratory’s Atmospheric and Astrophysics Div., announced at news conference in Washington, D.C. Rocket experiment, he said: (1) provided first evidence that x rays were produced as far away as the “rim” of the universe; (2) detected quasars, previously detectable only by their radio waves or by visible light seen through high-power telescopes; (3) lent support to theory that universe is saturated with background radiation from explosion of universe 10 billion yrs ago; and (4) detected three new x-ray sources, apparently outside our galaxy and not traceable to any known object. These findings, Dr. Friedman said, indicated that x-ray astronomy had “come of age” as a tool to explore the universe. To explore x-ray sources further, he suggested installing x-ray detection equipment on proposed satellites such as NASA’s orbital workshop and launching larger equipment for longer periods of time to map the whole sky for x-ray sources. (Text; Reistrup, W Post, 7/7/67)
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully inserted eight Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) comsats into random equatorial orbits. Powered flight of Titan III-C was close to planned parameters. Tran-stage and payload were inserted into parking orbit with 113-mi (182km) apogee and 106-mi (171-km) perigee where first transtage burn made necessary course corrections. Second transtage burn 66 min later moved stage and load into transfer orbit with 21,000-mi (33,810-km) apogee and 120-mi (193-km) perigee. Third burn put satellite dispenser frame and eight satellites into near-synchronous, 21,000-mi-altitude orbit. At 6 hours 11 min GET, the 100-lb satellites were ejected separately into slightly different orbital paths, usaf officials reported all satellites were functioning properly. Eight new satellites, combined with seven others launched by usaf June 16, 1966, would reinforce DOD’s worldwide communications system and provide reliable, full-time radio link between Washington, D.C., and U.S. troops in Vietnam and other distant outposts, (upi, NYT, 1/19/67, 7; AP, B Sun, 1/19/67, 1; Av Wk, 1/23/67, 32)
ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk, speaking at ComSatCorp’s fourth annual meeting in Washington, D.C., said a shortage of ground stations was delaying development of a complete international comsat network. “A fourth satellite of the Intelsat-II series exists and could be launched this fall. . . . Unfortunately, appropriate earth station facilities do not exist and even after approval of the necessary applications . . . [by Fee], operational availability will still be 14 to 18 months away.” Because of this lag in number of earth stations and because a satellite failure could cause severe service interruption, ComSatCorp was seriously considering “the desirability of placing the fourth satellite of the Intelsat-II series as a spare in orbit this fall and . . . [seeking] a limited solution to the high-traffic demands by interim utilization of this satellite through a transportable earth station in Hawaii.” (Text; Smith, NYT, 5/10/67, 63)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, during debate on NASA appropriations bill on floor of House, said: “China is now proceeding with the development of a rocket with nuclear propulsion. The Chinese nuclear rocket program is based upon a nuclear reactor through which passes liquid hydrogen that is stored in the rocket. This same fuel . •. . is also used as a coolant for the nozzle of the rocket.” He also said Communist Chinese “are proceeding with the development of a sounding rocket called Caditi . . . [and] telecommunications satellites.” He explained that Communist Chinese believe, “to operate successfully in space, big booster power, high energy fuels, and nuclear propulsion are necessary. The University of Nanking ... is conducting training courses in various applications of rocket programs. The Chinese space research center of Sinkiang now has programs in the study of materials necessary for space experiments. In addition, it should be seriously considered that the Chinese rocket institute— Balon Roditi—is interested in the development of rockets ‘for all purposes.’ This, of course, includes military as well as peaceful uses. Peking is not a signatory to the recent peace treaty for the peaceful uses of outer space. . . . “The nations of the West, including Russia, should not underestimate Chinese competence in these matters and the pace of their research and development programs. The U.S. Government and the American people must be alerted to the swift progress of the Red Chinese nation in space research and development, high energy propulsion, and large boosters . . . [and they] must realize the tremendous advances being made in the Red Chinese nuclear research field. ... It is my belief and prediction that the [Communist] Chinese will orbit . . . [their] first . . . satellite by January 1968. . . .” {CR, 10/23/67, H13785-93)
NASA’s 815-lb Ats II (ats-a) (Applications Technology Satellite) was launched from ETR by Atlas-Agena D booster on mission to evaluate gravity-gradient system for spacecraft stabilization in 6,900-mi-altitude orbit and to obtain useful data from experiments during first 30 days in orbit. Spacecraft successfully entered elliptical transfer orbit with 6,878-mi (11,069-km) apogee; 120-mi (192.7-km) perigee; 218.3-min period; and 28.4° inclination. Agena engines, which were to have reignited to inject spacecraft into 6,900-mi (11,103-km) -altitude circular orbit, failed to ignite for the second burn; spacecraft separated and, tumbling uncontrollably, remained in transfer orbit. By April 7, all but one of the scientific experiments had been turned on and operated successfully, but usefulness of data could not be determined because spacecraft’s sensors were not compatible with its orbit. Last experiment was turned on April 15. Although it was apparent that mission could not be successfully completed, scientists continued to operate experiments to obtain as much data as possible on spacecraft performance, and ground stations received occasional TV pictures and meteorological photos. Gravity-gradient configuration functions would not be exercised until spacecraft’s attitude behavior could be better defined. Ats II was second in series of five satellites designed to improve spacecraft technology; develop long-life control systems; advance spacecraft communications; and improve long-range weather predictions. Record size—252 ft long with 123-ft booms extended from opposite sides— Ats II was first U.S. gravity-gradient satellite to carry meteorological cameras and first with sufficient instrumentation to verify three-axis gravity control system in conjunction with detailed computer program. In addition to gravity-gradient experiment, satellite also carried communications equipment, two Advanced Vidicon Camera System (avcs) cameras, and eight scientific experiments to measure orbital environment. Ats I was successfully launched Dec. 6, 1966, into a 22,300-mi-altitude near-synchronous orbit over the Pacific and was still operating flawlessly, ats program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-71; AP, NYT, 3/31/67, 12)
U.S.S.R. marked Cosmonautics Day—anniversary of first manned space flight by Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, in 1961—by launching Cosmos CLV. Orbital parameters: apogee, 286 km (178 mi); perigee, 203 km (126 mi); period, 89.2 min; and inclination, 51.8°. Satellite reentered April 20. (upi, W Star, 4/12/67, 1; gsfc SSR, 4/30/67)
NASA announced establishment of an Astronomy Missions Board, to be chaired by Harvard College Observatory Director Dr. Leo Goldberg. Twelve astronomers and physicists would make up the Board, which would advise NASA through Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. John E. Naugle. Executive Director for the Board would be ossa’s Deputy Director of Physics and Astronomy Dr. Henry Smith. The Board would develop and review scientific objectives and general strategy for space astronomy missions of sounding rockets, balloons, and satellites and would recommend designs for missions, telescopes, and other equipment. Excluded from the Board’s responsibility would be studies of moon and planets from close range and earth orbital observations of the earth, (nasa Release 67-284)
Lunar Orbiter II, Lunar Orbiter III, and Lunar Orbiter IV, all circling the moon, were being used by NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network personnel and stations for practice tracking exercises. Satellites served as “stand-ins” for the manned Apollo spacecraft which would eventually orbit the moon, (nasa Release 67-183)
Press briefing on Esro II satellite and NASA International Cooperative Programs was held at NASA Hq. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, discussed the areas of cooperation between NASA and ESRO, emphasizing the “unprecedented data exchange agreement. ... I don’t think there is anything quite as sophisticated or as extensive in the international field. Under this agreement... ESRO assumes responsibility to collect all of the European technical report literature relevant to space activities, indexes and abstracts it, reduces it to a standard microfiche or microcard format which is compatible with our own system, and provides that material to us. We incorporate it in a single combined publication every two weeks, listing all of the U.S. and European literature in the field so that it is available to both sides. . ..” Brian M. Walker, ESRO Project Coordinator for Esro II, announced that next ESRO satellite—Esro I—would be launched in late 1967 to study the ionosphere. Esro II was scheduled for launch from WTR May 29. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. launched the meteorological satellite Cosmos CXLIV into orbit with 635-km (395-mi) apogee, 585-km (364-mi) perigee, 96.9min period, and 81.20° inclination. All equipment was functioning normally. (Tech Wk, 3/6/67, 15; Ten Years of Space Research in the U.S.S.R., uss—T Trans, vol. 5, No. 5,1967)
usaf launched two satellites: EGRS—9 and Aurora /. Thor-Burner II boosters were used in wtr launchings. EGRS-9, a Secor satellite, would provide an aid to geodetic survey of the earth sphere. Aurora I would study charged particles that precipitate in the upper atmosphere. (Pres Rep 1967)
Harold W. Yates, former chief engineer of Barnes Engineering Co.’s Field Research and Systems Dept., became Director of the National Environmental Satellite Center’s Satellite Experiment Laboratory, (essa Release 67-17)
OGO “handlers” were hoping that Ogo IV (launched July 28) might be economical enough with its gas supply to permit it to continue for one year at the peak of its investigative capabilities. Achievement of one-year performance would enable satellite to gather data on earth, its upper atmosphere, and its near-space environment during period of peak solar activity, which occurs every 11 yrs. Ogo IV’s gas system, used to supply thrust to series of small attitude-stabilized jets, had been improved by installation of gas bottle filled with krypton instead of argon. This increased gas pressure from 3,000 psi to 4,000 psi and doubled available impulse from 900 to 1,800 pound-seconds, nasa reported that if present gas expenditure rate were maintained they were assured the minimum 50 days of three-axis stabilized operation that would permit mission success, (nasa Release 67-210)
