Lewis Research Center scientists and the U.S. Coast Guard were developing an ice information system to reduce multimillion-dollar annual losses from ice that blocked commercial shipping on the Great Lakes, NASA announced. The system would use aircraft, or eventually satellites, with sensors to gather information on ice thickness, type, and distribution. The information would be relayed in map form to ice breakers and cargo vessels, (nasa Release 73-66)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 609 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 330-km (205.1-mi) apogee, 173-km (107.5-mi) perigee, 89.5min period, and 69.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Dec. 4. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; 12/31/73; SBD, 11/26/73, 123)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 583 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 298-km (185.2-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-min) perigee, 89.5min period, and 64.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Sept. 12. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; 9/30/73; SBD, 9/6/73, 10)
The election of Dr. John V. Harrington, Director of the Center for Space Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as Vice President, Research and Engineering, with Communications Satellite Corp. was announced. He would join the corporation in October. (ComSatCorp Release 73-49)
The American Photographic Interpretation Award of the American Society of Photogrammetry was presented in Washington, D.C., to NASA’s Earth Resources Technology Satellite Team for important contributions to asp’s interests. (NASA Activities, 4/15/73, 72) March 15:	nasa announced selection of Lockheed California Co. and Boeing Co. for negotiations leading to contracts for structural technology studies of an arrow-wing, supersonic, cruise aircraft configuration. Each contractor would apply a Langley Research Center concept for a four-engine SST with sharply swept-back wings to the structure of a hypothetical aircraft. The aircraft would have a 340 000-kg (750 000-lb) takeoff weight, 7800-km (4800-mi) design range, 22 000kg (49 000-lb) payload, and 15-yr economic service life. Structural concepts would be developed under two 121/^-mo, $700 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts, (nasa Release 73-43)
Success of an Ames Research Center project to provide the California Div. of Forestry a daily fire index measurement via Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972)—from an unmanned remote station in a Sunol, Calif., fire area—announced by NASA. The project had enabled foresters to pinpoint probably sources of fires and had eliminated the necessity of using scarce fire-fighting personnel for monitoring. The system was being considered for monitoring air pollution. (nasa Release 73—104)
June 10-20:	NASA launched Explorer 49 (rae-b; RAE 2) Radio Astronomy Explorer by a long-tank, thrust-augmented, Thor-Delta launch vehicle from Eastern Test Range at 10:14 am edt into a transfer trajectory for the moon. The second of two approved RAE missions and the last scheduled U.S. mission to the moon, Explorer 49 was to measure galactic and solar radio noise at frequencies below ionospheric cutoffs and outside terrestrial background interference, using the moon for occul-tation, focusing, or aperture-blocking for increased resolution and discrimination. At 17 min after launch, the spacecraft separated from the launch vehicle’s 3rd stage. One midcourse correction was made at 11:28 am edt June 11; the planned second correction was not required. During the transfer trajectory, data acquisition from telemetry systems was excellent. The lunar orbit insertion motor was fired at 3:21 am edt June 15, putting the spacecraft into lunar orbit with 1334-km (828.9-mi) apolune, 1123-km (697.8-mi) perilune, 241-min period, and 61.3° inclination. On June 18 the lunar insertion motor was jettisoned and the hydrazine-fueled velocity-control propulsion system placed Explorer 49 in a lower, near-circular orbit with a 1063-km (660.5-mi) apolune, 1052-km (653.7mi) perilune, 221.2-min period, and 38.7° inclination. On June 20 a 37-m (l20-ft) dipole antenna was extended by ground control and the, dipole experiment turned on. After a two-week calibration, the dipole would be retracted and the orbit adjusted as needed. The two main V antennas, joined in an X shape, would then be deployed to 183 m (600 ft). After another week, the V antennas would be deployed to their full 229-m (750-ft) length to achieve the mission’s gravity-gradient, three-axis-stabilization mode. The 200-kg (442-lb) spacecraft was the first known to use boron filament for the inertial booms that helped stabilize it during the lunar trajectory. Explorer 38 (RAE 1)—the first successful radio astronomy satellite, launched July 4, 1968—had measured galactic radio sources and traced the movement of sporadic radio outbursts from the sun beyond the orbit of Mercury for four years. Explorer 38’s receivers, however, had been saturated 25%-40% of the observing time by interference from the earth’s radio noise. Explorer 49, in lunar orbit, would be shielded from terrestrial noise as it orbited the moon’s far side. The rae project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. GSFC designed, constructed, and tested the spacecraft and provided the scientific instrumentation. GSFC was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle and the operation of the worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn). Launch services were provided by ksc. (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73-105; gsfc SSR, 6/30/73)
In its program of international cooperation, NASA launched Anik 2 domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada and Intelsat-IV F—7 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. A significant milestone was the Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation on Spacelab, signed by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. To be funded and developed by nine members of the European Space Research Organization, the Spacelab would be carried into orbit by NASA’s space shuttle orbiter and would accommodate experiments and personnel on missions of 7 to 30 days. Notable progress was made in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, with the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission on schedule for July 1975 launch. Working groups met in both countries and a November Moscow meeting familiarized eight U.S. astronauts with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. Docking system designs were essentially completed and all hardware construction was on schedule. Joint dynamic testing of test units began at Johnson Space Center. Flight crews were selected in both countries. Eighty-three nations entered into Definitive Agreements for intelsat, permanently establishing the global communications satellite system envisioned in the U.S. Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Scientists from other nations cooperated in nasa studies ranging from investigations of the solar system to practical applications of space technology. Erts 1 and Skylab environment and resources data were used throughout the world. Scientists from 37 countries and the United Nations participated in Erts 1 experiments and Brazil and Canada established their own erts data-acquisition facilities. Four foreign experiments were carried on Skylab missions and foreign scientists participated in the Apollo solar telescope program and in correlated astronomy sounding rocket programs. Scientists in 19 countries and the U.N. participated in 40 Skylab data-analysis investigations. German and Australian scientists were coinvestigators for Pioneer 11 experiments and French and U.K. scientists for Mariner 10. Investigators from 40 nations and esro were selected to participate in the Apollo 17 lunar sample program. A joint working group of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and nasa held the third and fourth meetings on space biology and medicine, exchanging information on manned space flight. Parallel communications channels using Intelsat and Molniya comsat systems were planned for 1974 to support the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Direct Communications Link, with construction of earth stations in both countries for access to each other’s satellites. Work went forward for future cooperative satellite projects. Agreement was reached with Italy to fly San Marco C-2 in 1974. Negotiations were underway with West Germany for 1974 launch of the aeros-b aeronomy satellite and work continued on the experimental cts comsat to be launched with Canada, the helios solar probe with Germany, the intasat ionospheric beacon with Spain, the UK—5 stellar x-ray satellite, Canada’s Anik C, and U.K.’s X4 technology spacecraft. Negotiations were also underway on nasa launch services for the French-German Symphonic comsat in 1974 and two ESRO test comsats in 1976 and 1977. The U.S. and esro were about to enter agreement for an air traffic control and navigation satellite system. During the year nasa launched 30 sounding rockets from ranges in other countries, including rockets carrying foreign payloads or cooperative experiments. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, Brazil, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. (Pres Rpt 1974; nasa Release 73-281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74, 2-3) • A burgeoning worldwide energy shortage led President Nixon to propose in June the establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept, of Natural Resources, an Energy Research and Development Administration, and a Nuclear Energy Commission. The shortage reached crisis proportion with the embargo by Arab nations on oil shipments to the U.S. in retaliation for U.S. support to Israel during the October Arab-Israeli war. In a November speech President Nixon noted the U.S. was on the verge of “the most acute shortage of energy since World War II.” He called for reduced use of heat, electricity, and gasoline; announced Federal Government steps to lower energy consumption; asked the Atomic Energy Commission to accelerate licensing and constructing nuclear power plants; and asked for an emergency energy act. Nine energy bills, passed in rapid succession by the first session of the 93rd Congress, included authorizations for mandatory fuel allocation programs, construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, a return to year-round daylight saving time, a speed limit on interstate highways, and the National Emergency Act. Soaring prices of all kinds of fuel, long lines of cars and banned Sunday sales at gas stations, and airline fare increases and schedule cutbacks marked closing months of the year. Economists forecast a possible depression as energy shortages aggravated an already recessed economy. Scientists sought additional sources of fossil fuels and, for the future, new sources of energy to make the U.S. energy-autonomous. The focus turned to NASA and its pioneering expertise in the technologies of solar energy and development of hydrogen as a substitute for gasoline in automobiles and aircraft. At the year’s end pending legislation endorsed NASA cooperation with other appropriate agencies in solving the worldwide energy shortage and in providing the U.S. with future sources of non-fossil-fuel energy. (A&A 1973; Library of Congress, Congr Research Service, Major Legislation of the 93rd Congress; Newsweek, 12/3/73)
A Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial commented on the first anniversary of the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite: “For Ohio alone, erts is telling truer tales about strip mining and pollution. For others it is doing such diverse things as charting safe routes for ocean shipping and forecasting water requirements of inland areas. The list of what already has been done and is yet to be done is almost endless.” (Cl PD, 8/14/73)	_ August 15:	NASA held an earth resources experiment package briefing at Johnson Space Center. Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, erep project scientist at jsc, said that Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma, launched July 28 to crew the Orbital Workshop, had completed 10 erep passes and had exceeded four hours of data collection. They had photographed 125 test sites over the U.S., South America, Thailand, East Malaysia, and Australia under the conditions required by the individual primary investigators. Wilmarth said the equipment was “working great” with “essentially no problem at all with any of the camera systems.” (Transcript)
Cosmos 550 was launched by the U.S.S.R. into orbit from Plesetsk with a 313-km (194.5-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered March 11. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/73)
The European Space Research Organization had selected two new scientific satellite programs while rejecting participation in NASA’s Venus orbiter program, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. A joint International Sun-Earth Physics Satellite (iseps) program—to study solar winds and observe the discontinuities such as the magnetopause, bow shock, neutral sheet in the tail, and wave shocks—would place two satellites in orbit by a single booster in 1977. esro would develop one satellite at a cost of $28 million; nasa, the other. The second esro program, the Highly Eccentric Lunar Occultation Satellite (helos), would be launched in 1979 to define the position, map the spatial and spectral features, and monitor the time variabilities of x-ray sources. It would cost an estimated $75 million. (Av Wk, 4/23/73, 28)
NASA launched an Aerobee 200A sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. solar physics experiment to a 220.6-km (137.1-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) June 11-13:	A Workshop on Wind Energy Conversion Systems, sponsored by the National Science Foundation and organized by Lewis Research Center, was held in Washington, D.C. The meetings, attended by scientists and industry and Government representatives from the U.S. and foreign countries, discussed past developments, wind characteristics and siting problems, rotor characteristics, energy conversion systems, small wind-power systems for remote and individual applications, wind-power systems for large-scale applications, and tower structures. The object of NSf’s wind energy conversion program was to provide a reliable energy supply, in usable form, at a cost competitive with alternative systems. (nasa Release 73-114) June 12:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Eastern Test Range by a Titan IIIC booster into orbit with a 35 787.0-km (22 237-mi) apogee, 35 778.9-km (22 232-mi) perigee, 1436.0-min (23-hr 56-min) period, and 0.3° inclination. The press quoted sources as saying the spacecraft was an early warning satellite expected to be stationed over the Indian Ocean to give split-second notice of missile launchings in the U.S.S.R. (Pres Rpt 74; AP, B Sun, 6/\2>/12>, A16; Av Wk, 6/18/73, 17)
The U.S.S.R. had canceled the launch of two cosmonauts because an unmanned Salyut spacecraft with which they would have docked had failed in orbit, Western observers believed. The Salyut, identified as Cosmos 557, was launched May 11 into an orbit similar to that of the crippled Salyut 2 space station, launched April 3. Observers believed the satellite would be a docking target for a manned Soyuz but its maneuvering engine apparently failed; it made an early reentry May 22. The tracking ships that had steamed to stations off Newfoundland and the Gulf of Guinea were returning to their home port in the Black Sea. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/19/73, A12; SF, 1/74, 39-40; Lyons, NYT, 9/26/73, 33)
French oceanographer Jacques-Yves Cousteau spoke via Ats 3 satellite (launched Nov. 6, 1967) from his research vessel Calypso in the Antarctic to reporters in the U.S. and Europe, to describe his research. In experiments with Ames Research Center, Cousteau had made constant measurements of chlorophyll, temperatures, and water transparency, sending data to arc for comparison with satellite data. The experiment sought to learn how to monitor biological productivity of oceans from outer space. His expedition had been in Antarctic waters for two months. It would head up the South American coast and terminate in Los Angeles in the summer. (Blakeslee, NYT, 2/9/73, 57; Transcript Cousteau Press Conf, 3/1/73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—26 communications satellite into orbit with a 40 830-km (25 370.6-mi) apogee, 618-km (384-mi) perigee, 740.0-min period, and 62.9° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12/5/73, Ul)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 553 from Plesetsk into orbit with a486-km (302.0-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 70.9° inclination—on the 12th anniversary of Vostok 1, the first manned orbital space flight. The satellite reentered Nov. 11. National Cosmonaut Day honored the April 12, 1961, mission flown by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin, the first man in space. Some observers had expected the announcement of a new manned Soviet mission, but in an interview published by Pravda Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov indicated there was sufficient time left for a crew to be placed aboard the Salyut 2 space station, launched April 3. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73, 11/30/73; SBD, 4/16/73, 253; LA Times, 4/13/73; A&A 1972)
NASA and the Dept, of Defense were in disagreement over use of a highfrequency radio link between the earth and space, Thomas O’Toole said in the Washington Post. NASA wanted to use the frequency to transmit voice, data, and televised instructions to the ats-f Applications Technology Satellite, to be launched in April 1974. The Air Force and the Army feared interference with their own radio signals. A move to lower the frequency for satellite communications would cost NASA as much as $4 million to install a new transponder and could delay the launch four months. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/6/73, 5)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the statement given out at the nasa FY 1974 budget briefing held Jan. 27: “The budget the President has approved for NASA for FY 1974, like those of other agencies, has been reduced substantially below previous plans and expectations to hold total government spending to the targets set by the President. At the same time, the budget will permit NASA to carry forward a substantial and significant program in space and aeronautics.” The budget provided for continuing the major projects in the schedule announced Jan. 5 and for starting two new projects: Nimbus-G, “another in NASA’s series of experimental earth oriented satellites, which will be directed at environmental pollution and oceanographic measurements, and LAGEOS, a new geodetic satellite for extremely accurate measurements of movements of the earth’s surface.” In addition to reductions in programs announced Jan. 5, the budget required “that we stretch out schedules in a number of ongoing projects. The second Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-b) will be delayed two years, until 1976. This will allow it to carry an additional sensor. Tiros-N, the prototype of a new series of operational meteorological satellites for the National Weather Service, will be delayed by about one year to 1977. “We will also undergo another belt-tightening in NASA. By the end of FY 1974 our civil service complement will be reduced 1880 positions below the FY 1973 end strength approved in the FY 1973 budget. This reduction includes the previously announced reductions related to the termination of our nuclear programs.” Despite a “sharp decrease from the level budget anticipated last year,” Dr. Fletcher was “very pleased with the program content we were able to retain. Clearly from what has been said today and on January 5, we will have to curtail several activities that are of major importance to the nation.” But “we have been able to keep NASA’s main line program essentially intact and each of the programs curtailed will still be done, either at a later date than anticipated or in an alternate way to that planned last year. Although I, personally, would like to see a higher NASA budget, I believe we can capitalize on the belt-tightening required to produce even greater yield for the tax dollar in future years.” NASA was “making substantial efforts to reduce future costs . . . while still giving the nation a strong program in space and aeronautics.” Additionally, a prime object of the space shuttle program was to reduce costs of operating in space. NASA intended to “develop and introduce new design concepts and management approaches which, together with the relaxed weight and size constraints of the Space Shuttle, will result in substantially lower development and operating costs.” NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly discussed personnel cutbacks necessitated by the new budgetary limitations. The total NASA Civil Service reduction of 1880 positions would include a Marshall Space Flight Center cut of 650; Goddard Space Flight Center, 158; Kennedy Space Center, 100; Manned Spacecraft Center, 75; Wallops Station, 17; Lewis Research Center, 660; nasa Hq., 150; and Ames, Langley, and Flight Research Centers, a total of 70. From a peak Civil Service complement of more than 34 000 in 1967, nasa would be reduced to under 25 000 employees by June 1974—a drop of 30%. Total employees from all sources—contract and in-house—would drop from the 1966 peak of 420 000 to about 100 000. (Text; Transcript)
The Senate confirmed the nominations of William P. Clements to be Deputy Secretary of Defense and of Dr. James R. Schlesinger, former Atomic Energy Commission Administrator, to be Director of Central Intelligence. (CR, 1/23/73, D60) January 24:	Cosmos 545 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 492-km (305.7-mi) apogee, 268-km (166.5-mi) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 71.0° inclination. The satellite reentered July 31. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; 7/31/73; SBD, 1/26/73, 124)
Rep. John W. McFall (D-Calif.) introduced H.Res. 158, providing for 30 members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman, succeeding Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), who had been defeated in a 1972 primary; Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.); Rep. John W. Davis (D-Ga.) ; Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) ; Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) ; Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.) ; Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Walter Flowers (D-Ala.); Rep. Robert A. Roe (D-N.J.) ; Rep. William R. Cotter (D—Conn.) ; Rep. Mike McCormack (D-Wash.) ; Rep. Bob S. Berg-land (D-Minn.) ; Rep. J. J. Pickle (D-Tex.) ; Rep. George E. Brown, Jr. (D—Calif.); Rep. Dale Milford (D-Tex.); Rep. Ray Thornton (D—Ark.) ; Rep. Bill Gunter (D-Fla.); Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio) ; Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) ; Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) ; Rep. Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.); Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.) ; Rep. Barry M. Goldwater, Jr. (R-Calif.); Rep. Marvin L. Esch (R-Mich.); Rep. Lawrence Coughlin (R-Pa.); Rep. John N. Happy Camp (R-Okla.) ; Rep. John B. Conlan (R-Ariz.) ; Rep. Stanford E. Parris (R—Va.) ; Rep. Paul W. Cronin (R-Mass.) ; and Rep. James G. Martin (R-N.C.). {CR, 1/24/73, H442-H443; A&A 1972) January 24—25:	Symposium on recycling used glass containers was held in Albuquerque, N. Mex., by Univ. of New Mexico Technical Application Center (tac), Albuquerque Environmental Health Dept., and Glass Containers Manufacturers Institute. Representatives of NASA’s public technology program, glass researchers, and city and county officials discussed recycling glass into glassphalt road surfacing material, foams for building insulation, and other new products, tac operated one of NASA’s six Regional Dissemination Centers for space agency-developed technology. (nasa Release 73-7; nasa pao) January 25:	The Global Atmospheric Research Program (carp) Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate), largest and most complex international scientific experiment, would observe one third of the earth’s tropical belt from June 15 to Sept. 30, 1974, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced. A network of satellites, ships, aircraft including NASA’s instrumented Convair 990, instrumented buoys, and land stations would collect meteorological data from the tropical Atlantic and adjacent land areas to improve forecast techniques for the equatorial belt. Brazil, Canada, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Mexico, Netherlands, Portugal, U.S.S.R., United Kingdom, and Venezuela, in addition to the U.S., would process data for compatibility. Data would be integrated by the gate data center and distributed in 1976. U.S. participation would be coordinated by NOAA. (noaa Release 73-5)
The Federal Communications Commission approved Communications Satellite Corp.’s request to provide communications satellite service to Navy and commercial shipping [see March 5]. (B Sun, 4/13/73, Cll)
The S.S. Hope, hospital ship of the People-to-People Health Foundation sailed from Baltimore and arrived in Maceio, Brazil, after having been equipped for communicating via satellite. Under an agreement between Communications Satellite Corp. and the Foundation, the ship had been fitted with a small, parabolic antenna and a transmit-receive comsat terminal to assess the use of reliable long-distance communications with medical teams in remote areas. (ComSatCorp brochure)
Measurements of ice, surface, and atmospheric conditions in the Bering Sea would be made by nasa and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, NASA announced. The experiment would be conducted Feb. 15-Mar. 7 on a Soviet weather ship and 11-18 aircraft and by a U.S. Coast Guard icebreaker and the instrumented NASA Convair 990. The project would be carried out under August 1971 recommendations of the Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Working Group on Satellite Meteorology for better understanding of interaction of sea ice and atmosphere on weather patterns in the Bering Sea area. (NASA Release 73-2)
The Air Force announced the award of a $62 426 400 fixed-price-incentive contract to Boeing Co. for operational and maintenance ground equipment for the Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile force for FY 1973. (dod Release 116-73) March 8:	Communications Satellite Corp. sought authority from the Federal Communications Commission to construct advanced satellites and related ground control facilities for lease to American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to provide domestic satellite services to all 50 states and Puerto Rico. Each satellite would provide 14 400 two-way voice-grade circuits. Ground stations for tracking, telemetry, and command duties would be in Connecticut and California. The ComSatCorp filing was similar to one made in October 1970 and revised in March 1971, and would expand coverage to include Hawaii and Puerto Rico. (ComSatCorp Release 73-12)
The Air Force Space and Missiles Organization (samso) Air Force Satellite Facility (afsf) received a Presidential Management Improvement Certificate for excellence in improving Government operations, from Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson in Washington, D.C., ceremonies. The certificate was presented to Col. John J. Schmitt, Jr. (usaf), afsf Commander, (afsc Newsreview, 6/73, 4)
Cosmos 578 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 251-km (156-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.0-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Aug. 13. (gsfc SSR, 8/3/73; SBD, 8/3/73, 175)
Data from drifting buoys equipped with temperature and pressure sensors and satellite communications antennas that reported to French satellite Eole (launched by NASA Aug. 16, 1971) had shown that currents in the western Atlantic ocean were more erratic and unpredictable than earlier imagined, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced. Although in continuous motion, some buoys had ended up approximately where they had started after two or three months of monitoring; others had “moved in unpredicted directions, changed directions frequently, circled, or doubled back.” The buoys were part of a noaa project to identify large-scale mean surface flows, (noaa Release 73-118)
An era of global scarcity had begun, a Science editorial noted. “The advanced countries are vulnerable in one or more respects.” Japan had been enjoying a boom but needed to import raw materials, fossil fuels, and food. In Mexico people lived under conditions like those of 100 yrs ago, “with a disregard for sanitation,” but with “Coca Cola signs and transistor radios everywhere.” Much of the world was aware of U.S. living standard and gadgets. “They yearn for both, while the population explosion continues. We are soon going to witness dramatic and miserable confrontations of aspirations, expectations, and limitations.” (Abelson, Science, 7/27/73, 303) July 28-September 25:	The Skylab 3 Apollo spacecraft carrying a threeman crew was launched into near-earth orbit, rendezvoused with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), and docked with the space laboratory for the second manned mission in the Skylab program. A series of problems threatened to disrupt the mission, but corrective actions and workarounds permitted it to proceed successfully, setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Sept. 25. The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee at 10 min 2 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the csm separated from the stage as planned. The galactic x-ray mapping experiment mounted in the instrument unit (iu) was deployed. At 5 hrs 19 min 53 sec after launch the S—IVB/iu deorbit maneuver was commanded, and the stage impacted the predicted Pacific Ocean area after planned maneuvers. During CSM maneuvers to rendezvous with the Workshop, a leak was detected in the CSM reaction control system (rcs) quad B thruster, one of four assemblies of rockets used to stabilize the spacecraft or to change its velocity and also used as a backup for bringing the CSM back from orbit. Analysis indicated the oxidizer valve was stuck open or partially open. Quad B was isolated; analysis showed that all deorbit mission rules could be satisfied. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 3:38 pm edt on the fifth orbit. Rendezvous, fly-around, and docking were covered by 23 min of TV. The crew entered the multiple docking adapter (mda) at 4:00 pm edt and began Workshop activation, but activation was curtailed because the crew quickly began to feel motion sickness. Lousma was experiencing nausea and Bean and Garriott were uncomfortable. Bean said he and Garriott tended “to be fairly careful of how we move. And since we are moving rather slowly, then it’s taking a little bit longer than we’d planned.” Motion sickness continued the second day, July 29, and the astronauts were taking scopolamine-dexedrine tablets. Bean communicated, “We feel okay, except in the stomach. . . . And our thinking is that we’re not going to be able to work much faster than we are right now. . . . There’s a desire to maybe take a break for an hour or two and get in the bunk and stay still for a while.” Flight Director Neil B. Hutchinson told the press at JSC that extravehicular activity (eva) to install a new sun shield and retrieve and install Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) film probably would be delayed from July 31 to Aug. 1 at the earliest. Four to five hours of work were carried over from July 28 and 29. Still suffering from motion sickness, the astronauts continued Workshop activation July 30 (Mission Day 3). The first EVA was delayed to Aug. 2 and later rescheduled to Aug. 4 to ensure the astronauts’ complete recovery. Activation was completed July 31 (MD-4) and research began as the crew improved slightly. Bean told ground control: “We’re getting better; it’s just taking a little longer than we thought. . . . Everybody feels pretty good between meals. Then mealtime comes, and we’re caught ... in the squeeze. We’re trying to decide whether we ought to eat all we have to ... to keep our strength up, or eat about what we want to, which isn’t very much.” A TV broadcast from the space station July 31 showed minnows for a biomedical experiment swimming in their plastic aquarium in tight spirals and sometimes apparently trying to swim toward the surface, but with their heads pointed straight down. Garriott said, “Apparently they can’t make up their minds which way is up and down, either.” He also turned a spider named Arabella loose in a plastic cage to observe her web-spinning abilities in zero-g conditions. Later in the mission Garriott reported baby minnows hatched in space performed in water “as if they’d already adapted while they were still in the egg.” They “felt right accustomed to zero-g.” August 1-September 24:	Bean told ground controllers after breakfast Aug. 1 (MD—5) : “This is the first morning we’ve been up here . . . that after a meal everybody felt good. Everybody feels real good right now. Best since we’ve been here.” During live TV the astronauts ate a hearty lunch to music. Bean demonstrated his proficiency in eating while hanging upside down. A medical briefing below at Johnson Space Center suggested that moving quickly from the confined cm to the large Workshop might have contributed to the motion sickness. The milder nausea experienced on the May 25—June 22 Skylab 2 mission could have been caused by a more gradual transition into the Workshop. “I think that it is merely a matter of room in which you can exercise your vestibular mechanisms, and that the workshop simply presents more of that space. . . . perhaps it was too much too soon.” On Aug. 2 a master alarm buzzer awakened the astronauts at 6:45 am EDT. Pressure and temperature were falling rapidly in the CSM reaction control system quad D because of an oxidizer leak. Because of quad B’s July 28 leak, only A and C of the four quads remained fully operational. The quad D leak lasted two hours, losing an estimated 5 kg (12 lbs) of nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer. Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney said at a morning press briefing that the spacecraft was flyable with the loss of the two quads but “it would be flown in a mode which is not entirely standard.” The main concern was “that we have had two problems which are related, at least they seem to be related.” A flaw common to the whole RCS could necessitate the crew’s immediate return to the earth or accelerated preparation of the Skylab 4 spacecraft to make it available as a rescue vehicle should the CSM become unusable. Full activation of Skylab-rescue-vehicle preparation was authorized. Launch and checkout crews began working a 24-hr-day, 7-day-week schedule, preparing two additional couches and other equipment for installation. Earliest possible date for a rescue mission was established as Sept. 5. The EVA rescheduled for Aug. 4 was again postponed, for 24 to 48 hours to free the crew for system checks, to free ground controllers to troubleshoot the problem, and to give time to work out EVA procedures for the new spacecraft configuration. While reentry procedures were being rewritten for the new configuration, the astronauts continued scientific experiments. By the afternoon of Aug. 2 Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, was able to tell the astronauts that troubleshooting the RCS had indicated no apparent generic problem, but two unique quad failures, and there was now confidence that the two remaining quads would ensure attitude control should immediate reentry become necessary. “We’re proceeding ... as if we’re going to have a normal mission.” Astronaut Bean replied: “Fine. You just said the right words. . . . we’re pretty happy with the way things are going, at the moment . . . and we agree 100 percent with what you just announced. . . . everybody’s happy up here.” On Aug. 3 Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said at a JSC press briefing that continuing investigation indicated the two quad failures were unrelated and reexamination of reentry capabilities showed three ways of returning to the earth: using the primary service propulsion system, using the RCS with the two operational quads, and using the hybrid RCS in the cm. “We’re feeling considerably better than . . . yesterday morning.” A slowdown was ordered in the emergency rescue preparations. The Apollo cm would be outfitted in a Skylab 4 configuration, with three astronaut couches rather than the five needed for a rescue mission. The slowdown would delay rescue readiness until Sept. 10. Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma conducted their first full day of experiments and prepared for an earth resources experiment package pass. Garriott held the TV camera at the window to telecast a good view of the U.S. from North Dakota to North Carolina. Later the first of 26 erep passes was made, to gather data for oil exploration, ocean temperatures, mapping, land use surveys, crop inventories, and pollution studies. A master alarm sounded in the CSM Aug. 4, later attributed to a short-circuit in Skylab’s solar telescope system. The short knocked out one of the two TV systems in the atm but did not afFect Skylab’s main power system. Ground crews investigated problems in the primary and secondary coolant systems Aug. 5. One had been slowly leaking since the Skylab 1 launch May 14 and was expected to become inoperative in 16 to 20 days. The secondary loop was thought to have a small leak, begun during the Skylab 2 mission and giving the loop a predicted 60-day lifetime. Possibly additional coolant would have to be carried up by the next manned mission, Skylab 4, but Program Director Schneider said there was “no immediate danger to the crew.” By Aug. 6 evaluations showed that only the primary loop was leaking; the second was sound and could operate for the rest of Skylab 3 as well as for Skylab 4. Flight surgeon Paul Buchanan’s nightly bulletin said Aug. 5 that the crew “continues to report good health and optimistic outlook” and had asked about an increase in their menus “to match their growing appetites.” Fluid intake and output was “optimal.” The first EVA was performed Aug. 6. Garriott and Lousma stepped outside the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm edt to install the 3.6- by 7.3-m (12- by 24-ft), paper-thin, aluminized Mylar awning over the Workshop to reflect the sun’s rays away from the spacecraft skin, damaged when the meteoroid shield was torn ofF during the May launch. Garriott, standing in the Skylab’s open hatch, pieced together the two 16.8-m (55-ft) poles from metal sections and handed them to Lousma. Lousma attached them to a bracket to form a “V” over the Workshop. The sunshade was slowly pulled up by a system of pulleys. One rope kept twisting around the poles and the sunshade folds did not straighten immediately, but after four hours—twice the time expected—the sunshade was successfully deployed. Workshop temperatures were lowered before the EVA ended. Astronaut Bean said Garriott and Lousma worked “at a slow and steady pace” and were not tired. Lousma retrieved and replaced film in four ATM experiments, installed two new cameras, removed a door latch from an atm experiment, and fixed the particle-collection experiment to the rim of the atm. Lousma also inspected the two leaking quads in the CSM RCS and looked for coolant leaks. He noted some evidence of micrometeorite pitting but no clues to causes of the malfunctions. The astronauts completed the eva at 8:01 pm edt, after 6 hrs 31 min, surpassing the 3-hr 30-min record set June 7 by Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin. Garriott, first solar physicist in space, focused the atm cameras on the sun Aug. 7 for the first time during the mission. TV audiences watched him work at the ATM panel. By Aug. 8 Dr. Lawrence F. Dietlein, jsc Deputy Director for Life Sciences, reported the astronauts were “in excellent spirits and have no health problems.” They had completely recovered from motion sickness. Their weights had stabilized after a loss of 1.8 to 2.3 kg (4 to 5 lbs) each. Data obtained on the rotating chair indicated their sensitivity to motion had lifted. Since deployment of the sunshade, temperatures in the Workshop had dropped to 296 K (74°F). The crew photographed a coronal transient with the ATM camera two hours Aug. 10. It was the first time a transient—protons and free electrons expelled violently from the sun’s limb at a speed of about 312 km (194 mi) per sec, a phenomenon that occurred two or three times a year—had been observed at that range and time resolution. Program Director Schneider announced Aug. 14 that Skylab 3 would continue its full 59-day mission. From analyses of the CSM and Workshop, he had “concluded that there is no imminent need for rescue, and ... we have made the decision to proceed with a normal test flow on an accelerated basis at Cape Kennedy.” Skylab 4 was being prepared for a normal mission but would be available for a rescue mission if necessary. The earliest launch date could be Sept. 25. Schneider said, “We’re reasonably confident that [csm] 117 is a good vehicle.” “Looks like they got a renewed burst of confidence down there,” Bean said when told of the decision. “We feel that way up here.” JSC announced Aug. 21 that the astronauts would install a new “six-pack” of gyroscopes during an Aug. 24 EVA, to replace faulty ones. The six-pack had been carried up on the Skylab 3 cm. Meanwhile the crew continued with experiments, requesting more work Aug. 14 because all had spare time and “you just can’t sleep 8 hours up here.” They photographed tropical storm Brenda Aug. 19 as it moved across theYucatan Peninsula toward the Gulf of Mexico. On Aug. 21 Astronaut Bean discovered and photographed through ATM telescopes what Skylab principal investigator Dr. Robert MacQueen called “certainly one of the biggest solar events” seen on the Skylab missions. Bean said the complex series of events on the solar limb looked “like a big bubble” sitting on the edge of the disc. He observed it with the white light coronagraph and x-ray instruments and reported it to be three fourths the size of the sun. NASA scientists alerted other facilities to make observations from ground instruments and other satellites. Dr. MacQueen said the event might have been caused by an explosion on the back side of the sun. “It was a beautiful event.” The crew “did a fine job.” Schneider announced Aug. 23 (MD—27) that the Skylab 3 crew had been given permission to continue the mission for another seven days. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, told the press that he saw nothing in the medical data thus far “that would indicate that we could not press on with the mission, and ... we feel we can go the full 59 days as planned.” EVA—2 began at 12:24 pm edt Aug. 24 with am depressurization by Lousma and Garriott. Lousma completed installation of the six redesigned gyros mounted inside the spacecraft by connecting cables to a computer system outside, and the new gyro system was put into operation. The astronauts installed a sail sample on a hand rail to test durability, replaced ATM film, retrieved and stored cassettes from one experiment, and removed the aperture door ramp latch from two ATM experiments, concluding EVA-2 at 4:31 pm EDT, after 4 hrs 30 min. At 8:01 am edt Aug. 25 (MD—29) the Skylab 3 astronauts surpassed the single-mission endurance mark of 28 days 50 min set in June by Skylab 2. They had completed 404 earth orbits and had traveled 18.5 million km (11.5 million mi). And at 6:11 am edt Sept. 5 (MD-40) Astronaut Bean surpassed the space flight record for one man of 49 days 3 hrs 38 min 36 sec, set in June by Charles Conrad, Jr., on Skylab 2. EVA-3 began at 7:18 am edt Sept. 22. Bean and Garriott moved through space to retrieve and replace atm film and retrieve experiments and parasol samples. EVA operations ended at 9:59 am edt, after 2 hrs 41 min. During the mission, spiders Arabella and Anita first spun webs in corners of their cage, without the normal circular pattern. Each day, however, each improved web formation, adding more radials, adjusting to weightlessness. Garriott said of Arabella Aug. 9 that “she learned very rapidly in zero-g without the benefit of any previous experience.” She “figured out a very nice solution to the problems of zero gravity.” Later ground controllers told Garriott to share his filet mignon with the spiders to keep them alive for the entire mission. Anita, however, was found dead Sept. 16, possibly from inadequate diet. The astronauts righted the cm and remained inside until the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans maneuvered alongside and a crane lifted the cm aboard. Immediate medical examinations found the crew in excellent spirits and surprisingly good condition. Blood pressures and heart rates were within normal range. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for physical checks and would fly to Houston Sept. 26. They would be quarantined for one week. The Skylab 3 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing unmanned Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. Despite mission problems, 150% of scheduled atm observing time was accomplished and erep sensors were operated on 39 Z-axis local vertical data runs and 5 solar inertial data runs, completing 218 of the 386 earth resources task sites. All medical experiments were successfully carried out. All but one of the corollary experiments achieved or exceeded objectives. Of 13 student experiments, 9 were completed. Added unscheduled tests and experiments had significantly increased the data yield above premission planning and Skylab was left in an excellent position to complete the final SL-4 mission. Skylab 3 was officially adjudged a success Oct. 11. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 59 days 11 hrs 9 min; the longest cumulative time in space for one man, 69 days for Bean (who had spent 10 days on the Nov. 14-24, 1969, Apollo 12 mission) ; the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 41 000 000 km (25 500 000 mi) ; the longest EVA, 6 hrs 31 min on Aug. 6; and the longest cumulative orbital EVA time, for one astronaut, 13 hrs 40 min for Garriott. In the first mission to man the Orbital Workshop May 15-June 22, Skylab 2 astronauts had conducted medical, solar, and earth resources experiments for 28 days, as well as repairing the Workshop to salvage the mission. The Workshop would be operated unmanned until the November Skylab 4 launch for a third and final mission. (NASA prog off; jsc pao press briefing transcripts, 7/28/73-9/25/73; NYT, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Post, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Star-News, 7/28/73-9/27/73; B Sun, 8/16/73, A5; 8/20/73, A3) July 28:	NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment to a 120.2-km (74.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed successfully but the experiment data were saturated and not useful, (gsfc proj off) July 29:	Fifteenth anniversary of the signing of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The act provided for the establishment of NASA, which officially came into being Oct. 1, 1958. (nasa Release 73-134) July 30:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, praised NASA’s successful efforts to save the Skylab 1—2 mission during testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Science hearing to review the Skylab Investigation Report [see July 13]: “We were able to save Skylab because of the tremendous depth and breadth of the NASA team and the dedication and skills of thousands of people on that team. There certainly isn’t another country that could have reacted as we did. I doubt whether there is another team within this country that could have reacted in this manner. Our team could do it because of years of training, working hard on highly exacting projects, and working as a team to drive toward a technical objective. The performance of the team on the ground, and of course the magnificent performance, skill and courage of the astronauts, saved Skylab. I would hope that this is remembered as the real story of Skylab, not the failure which caused it to happen.” NASA was “taking all the steps we know how to prevent a future failure due to similar causes in other programs.” Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center testified that, throughout six years of reviews and certifications, “the principal attention devoted to the meteoroid shield was that of achieving a satisfactory deployment. Never did the matter of aerodynamic loads on the shield or aeroelastic interactions between the shield and its external pressure environment during launch receive the attention and understanding during the design and review process which in retrospect it deserved.” The omission had not been surprising. “From the beginning, a basic design concept and requirement was that the shield be tight to the tank.” The question of whether the shield would remain tight against the tank under the dynamics of flight through the atmosphere “was simply not considered in any coordinated manner.” Possibly contributing to the oversight “was the basic view of the meteoroid shield as a piece of structure.” No full-time subsystem engineer had been assigned to the shield. “While it is recognized that one cannot have a full-time engineer on every piece of equipment, it is . . . possible that the complex interactions and integration of aerodynamics, structure, rigging procedures, ordnance, deployment mechanisms, and thermal requirements of the meteoroid shield would have been enhanced by such an arrangement,” (Testimony)
The People’s Republic of China was preparing to launch weather satellites, Deputy Director Chi Sheng-ying of the Central Meteorological Institute in Peking told an international conference on weather satellites in Paris. (Agence France-Presse, NYT, 5/22/73, 21)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 547 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 311-km (193.3-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered Feb. 13. (gsfc SSR, 2/28/73; SBD, 2/2/73, 183)
The Federal Communications Commission authorized American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to lease 396 additional satellite circuits from Communications Satellite Corp. for service to Europe, Africa, and the Middle East. The circuits brought to 1450 the number leased from ComSatCorp by AT&T, at an annual $48.6-million charge. (DJ, W Star & News, 6/19/73; fcc pio)
A satellite station for international communications being built near Belgrade, Yugoslavia, would be completed by Oct. 21, the Belgrade Politika newspaper reported. The station, containing $4-million equipment, would be able to make direct contracts with many countries without the expense of buying cable communications. Japan had designed and built the equipment and would train Yugoslav engineers to operate it. (fbis-Sov, 3/9/73, 119)
A video tape recorder aboard Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) had developed sporadic bursts of noise that degraded recorded photographic images, NASA announced. Investigations were underway to determine the cause and full impact of the problem. Real-time photos were unaffected, (nasa Release 73-62)
The U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 611 entered orbit with a 481-km (298.9-mi) apogee, 269-km (167.2-mi) perigee, 92.0-min period, and 71.0° inclination and reentered June 19, 1974.	, Cosmos 612 entered orbit with a 346-km (215.0-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and 72.8° inclination and reentered Dec. 11. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; 12/31/73; 6/30/74; SBD, 11/30/73, 160)
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 56.3-km (34.97mi) altitude. The primary objective was to measure the ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and to extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The launch would collect data for comparison with data from a flyby of an Air Force RB—57 aircraft and the overpass of the Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970). The payload was ejected near apogee and descended on a parachute. The rocket and the instrumentation performed satisfactorily and the experiment was successful. (nasa Rpt srl)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 561 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 290-km (180.2-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered June 6. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73, 6/30/73; SBD, 5/30/73, 162)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya II-5 communications satellite from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 39 828-km (24 748.0-mi) apogee, 525-km (326.2-mi) perigee, 717.7-min period, and 65.2° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/ 73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/6/73, LI; SBD, 4/6/73, 205)
A NASA Hq. memorandum to employees requested compliance with energy conservation measures set forth for Government buildings by the General Services Administration in accordance with Presidential guidelines. Office temperatures would fall to 292 to 293 K (65° to 68°F). Kilowatt consumption was to he cut by extinguishing office lights during vacancy, (nasa Hq Memo, 11/9/73) November 10:	The Air Force launched three unidentified satellites on a single Titan HID booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The first entered orbit with a 265.5-km (165-mi) apogee, 162.5-km (101-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 96.9° inclination and reentered March 13, 1974. The second entered orbit with a 505.3-km (314-mi) apogee, 487.6-km (303-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 96.3° inclination. Orbital parameters for the third satellite were 1458.1-km (906-mi) apogee, 1417.8-km (881-mi) perigee, 114.6-min period, and 96.9° inclination. (Pres Rpt 74; SBD, 11/20/73, 112; gsfc SSR, 3/31/74)
The United Nations Working Group on Remote Sensing of Earth by Satellite reported the success of U.S. and Soviet programs in identifying soil types, mapping minerals, charting geological features, locating fish schools, and producing “highly accurate” maps in areas incompletely mapped by conventional methods. Data had come largely from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite launched by nasa July 23, 1972. The Group suggested satellites might eventually detect underground water and record snowfalls. Valuable but incomplete information had been obtained about oceans. The Group urged priority research to develop methods of mixing carbon dioxide and ozone in the atmosphere, so satellites could monitor air pollution, and proposed putting a sensing system on the moon to monitor the earth’s atmosphere. {LA Times, 2/10/73; Atlanta JC, 2/22/73)
The mechanical and structural qualifications program for the ats-f Applications Technology Satellite (scheduled for April 1974 launch) was completed at Johnson Space Center with a successful deployment test of the parabolic reflector. The reflector on the thermal-structure-model spacecraft had been deployed under simulated space conditions of vacuum and zero g. (Goddard News, 10/73, 5)
Federal Communications Commission Chairman Dean Burch wrote Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, that FCC hoped NASA would continue satellite communications programs to “discharge its statutory responsibilities in the Communications Satellite Act of 1962” and “be a potent factor in maintaining the position of the United States at the very forefront of this new and vital technology.” The letter was in response to a Feb. 2 notification to FCC that NASA planned to terminate its comsat programs because of FY 1974 budget restrictions [see Jan. 5]. Burch wrote that FCC had “over the years placed heavy reliance on the advice and technical expertise of your agency with respect to communications services via satellite.” NASA also had been “invaluable” to FCC in other fields, including “detailed evaluation of the orbital assignments and space engineering of the various proposals before this Commission in the domestic satellite field.” With the use of comsat technology spreading to aviation, maritime, and educational activities, “it would be particularly unfortunate if this Commission were not to be able to receive the same high level advice and assistance upon which it has relied over the past decade.” (Text)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 608 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 498-km (309.4-mi) apogee, 269-km (167.2-mi) perigee, 92.2-min period, and 70.9° inclination. The satellite reentered July 10, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73, 8/31/74; SBD, 11/21/73, 117)
Tenth anniversary of the formation of Communications Satellite Corp. In 10 yrs, ComSatCorp had grown to its present size from the mandate in the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 stating the corporation should be formed to establish a global commercial communications satellite system in cooperation with other countries. The organization employed 1100 persons at 11 locations to operate satellites in a global system for the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat), 7 U.S. earth stations for international satellite communications, ComSatCorp laboratories, and a wide range of technical activities. (ComSatCorp Release)
The Federal Communications Commission notified U.S. companies bidding on the European Space Research Organization’s aeronautical satellite system that participation was subject to fcc approval. (Av Wk, 2/12/73, 21; fcc pio)
A contract for basic design of a geostationary meteorological satellite to be launched by NASA for Japan by the end of 1976 had been awarded by Japan’s National Space Development Agency to Nippon Electric Co., Electronics reported. Nippon was expected to receive follow-on contracts to complete a detailed design and fabricate and test two satellites —one for mission and one for backup. The mission would include gathering cloud pictures, collecting and distributing meteorological data, and making space measurements. Nippon would use Hughes Aircraft Co. technology, through its technical tie-in with Hughes Aerospace Div., to design the Japanese satellite. (Electronics, 11/8/73) November 9:	Ground crews at Kennedy Space Center replaced one of the eight damaged fins discovered Nov. 6 on the Skylab 4 Saturn IB launch vehicle. At a ksc press briefing Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that work on fin replacement was “running almost a day behind” but he thought a Nov. 15 launch was still possible. Drew F. Evans, aerospace technologist in icsc’s Materials Laboratories Div., said tests confirmed that the cracks were caused hy stress corrosion. (Transcript; Wilford, NYT, 11/10/73, 48)
Publication of Federal Plan for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research, Fiscal Year 1974 was announced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. FY 1974 programs would cost $504 659 000, an increase of $22 032 000 over FY 1973. The increase would be used to employ computers, satellites, ocean buoys, automatic weather stations, remote sensing, and automated data-handling techniques to improve weather services with reduced manpower. NOAA would increase its expenditures for weather radars, satellite operations, new computers, and expanded weather-dissemination systems. The Dept, of Defense would add more weather radars, expand its satellite data-processing programs, and install advanced instrumentation aboard storm reconnaissance aircraft. The dod surface and upper-air weather observing program would be decreased because of curtailed military activities. The Federal Aviation Administration planned 100 more unmanned Flight Service Stations to provide weather information for pilots. The faa’s En Route Flight Advisory Service would be expanded from 4 to 25 stations, nasa launch of two Synchronous Meteorological Satellites, prototypes for the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (goes) , would begin a new phase in the environmental satellite program. Subsequent goes spacecraft would be funded by noaa. Both noaa and DOD were readying ground facilities for the GOES system, noaa’s series of polar-orbiting operational satellites would be maintained with launches scheduled as needed, itos-e was to be launched by nasa in July to become Noaa 3. (noaa Release 73-150)
The Air Force announced award of a $27-million fixed-price-incentive-fee contract to Philco-Ford Corp. to build and test two communications satellites for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The satellites, scheduled for 1975 launch, would be space segments of nato’s Phase III Space Communications Satellite System and would handle long-range communications requirements, (dod Release 102-73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 616 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 326-km (202.6-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Dec. 28. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; SBD, 1/2/74, 2)
A secret Department of Defense study and an independent Air Force study had shown that costs on the F-15 fighter aircraft could run $1.7 billion —21%'—above estimates given to Congress, the Washington Star and Daily News reported. The engine developed for the F—15 had had 52 hitherto undisclosed hardware breakdowns. Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., was convinced the F—15 would not encounter the cost problems plagued by other large aircraft programs but was concerned about the engine problems. Seamans had asked NASA to help solve the problem and find better ways to develop new aircraft engines, the newspaper said. (Kelly, W Star & News, 3/18/73, Al) March 19:	President Nixon submitted Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1972 Activities to Congress. He said in his transmittal message: “The Apollo program was successfully concluded with the flights of Apollo 16 and 17. These missions were designed to obtain maximum scientific return and provided almost half the lunar exploration time in the Apollo program. Though it is far too early to attempt a definitive assessment of the value of this program, it is clear that one result will be a quantum jump in both our scientific knowledge and our technical expertise. Our unmanned satellites include a variety of vehicles ranging from meteorological, navigational and communication satellites to a new experimental spacecraft providing information on our resources and environment. Increasing practical applications for satellite technology confirm the immediate value of our efforts in space, while observatory satellites and others carrying specialized scientific instruments provide accurate and dependable data never before available to scientists on earth. The conclusion of the Apollo programs marks only another step in this Nation’s push into space.” The year 1972 had also seen advances in aeronautical research and development. “It should be emphasized that work in this field is particularly vital if America is to maintain its leadership in the development and production of civil and military aircraft and engines. Our efforts in aeronautics and space will allow us to meet demands in these and other important domestic and foreign areas.” The report said the year had been one “of significant, advanced accomplishments in lunar exploration, exploration of the planets and the universe, and in aeronautical concepts.” A balanced program had been initiated to “continue exploration in space, space science studies, application of space for benefits on earth, and the development of new technology for space and aeronautics” by the 16 Federal agencies reporting. (Text)
The U.S.S.R., with the cooperation of the German Democratic Republic and Czechoslovakia, launched Intercosmos 10 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 1454-km (903.5-mi) apogee, 259-km (160.9-mi) perigee, 102.1-min period, and 74.0° inclination. The satellite would make geophysical investigations in high latitudes and study the electromagnetic connection between the magnetosphere and ionosphere and effects on the neutral atmosphere. Solar panels were of Soviet design and much of the antenna complex was built by Czechoslovak researchers. Meteorological rockets would be launched and simultaneous ground measurements made in support of the mission, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/31/73, Ul; SBD, 11/1/73, 3; Av Wk, 11/26/73, 65)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced it had adopted fuel-saving regulations permitting airlines to use flight simulators more in pilot training and flight checking. The new rules could save 200 000 cu m (50 million gal) of fuel annually and reduce flights by 9300. (faa Release 73-215) December 23:	Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper, astronomer and space pioneer, died of a heart attack at the age of 68, while visiting Mexico City. During his early career, Dutch-born Kuiper had discovered groups of dwarf stars, satellites of Uranus and Neptune, and an atmosphere surrounding Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. In the 1950s he became the first astronomer to measure Pluto’s diameter accurately and charted the equator and position of the poles of Venus. In the 1960s Dr. Kuiper became one of the foremost authorities on the moon, working in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor projects and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. (McFadden, NYT, 12/25/73, 24) December 24:	Fifth anniversary of the Christmas Eve reading of Genesis by the moon-orbiting crew of Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968) to TV and radio audiences that included one of every four persons on earth. The crew of Skylab 4 (launched Nov. 16 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14), second crew to spend Christmas in space, devoted Christmas Eve to searching for and opening gifts hidden for them in the Apollo command module before launch by colleagues in Mission Control. The packages included a 91-cm (36-in) green cloth Christmas tree beneath the gear they would need for their scheduled Christmas Day space walk and a surprise package stored in the CM locker. Mission Control also planned to transmit over a teleprint circuit a Christmas card depicting the sun, Skylab, gifts, and Santa’s sled. (A&A 1968; UPi, W Star-News, 12/24/73, Al)
Johnson Space Center notified 45 Civil Service employees that they would be released because of NASA manpower reductions; an additional 38 were informed they would be reassigned or placed in lower-grade jobs. The action, to be completed by June 1, would reduce the JSC work force to 3727 Civil Service personnel, (jsc Release 73-40) April 20—30:	Canadian domestic communications satellite Telesat-B— named Anik 2, Eskimo for brother—was successfully launched at 6:47 pm EST from Eastern Test Range by a three-stage, long-tank, thrust-augumented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. Anik 2 was placed in a highly elliptical transfer orbit with a 36 480-km (22 667.6-mi) apogee, 212-km (131.7-mi) perigee, and a 26.7° inclination. After checkout and reorientation of the spacecraft, the apogee motor was fired at 5:00 pm EST April 23, bringing the spacecraft into near synchronous circular orbit with a 35 709-km (22 188.5-mi) apogee, 35 604-km (22123.3-mi) perigee, 1430.7-min period, and 0.1° inclination. The spacecraft was drifting 3° per day toward its final operational position off the west coast of South America. Under NASA-Telesat Canada contract, the NASA mission objective was to place Anik 2 into an orbit of sufficient accuracy to allow the spacecraft propulsion systems to place it in a stationary synchronous orbit while retaining sufficient stationkeeping propulsion to meet the mission lifetime requirements. The objective was met and the mission was adjudged a success April 30. Anik 2—second in a series of Canadian domestic communications satellites—was built by Hughes Aircraft Co. under contract with Telesat Canada and designed to provide transmission of TV, voice, and data throughout Canada for seven years. The spacecraft system provided 12 channels of communications to relay 10 color TV channels or up to 9600 telephone circuits. Two channels would be protection channels for the 10 traffic-carrying channels. The spacecraft was 1.8 m in diameter and 3.4 m high (6 by 11 ft). At launch it weighed 540 kg (1200 lbs) and its orbiting weight was 270 kg (600 lbs). The electronics system was powered by 23 000 solar cells with sufficient onboard battery capacity to maintain service during a sun eclipse of the solar cells. Anik 1 had been launched Nov. 9, 1972. The two-satellite system would act as space repeaters to receive transmissions from earth stations and retransmitt them to earth stations in Canada. A third satellite was retained on the ground as protection against space failure of the first two spacecraft and could be launched in 1975 to expand the system if required. NASA would be reimbursed by Telesat Canada for costs of the Thor-Delta launch vehicle and services. The project was managed for NASA’s Office of Space Sciences by Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73-58; GSFC SSR, 4/30/73) April 20:	Checkouts of the first two Skylab launch vehicles and their spacecraft, in position on Pads A and B of Launch Complex 39 at Kennedy Space Center, continued without major problems. Top program officials from NASA Hq. and Centers had completed the final flight readiness review of all aspects of Skylab, including launch and mission operations, spacecraft and experimental hardware, safety, range readiness, recovery, and flight-crew readiness, (nasa Release 73-81)
Discovery by use of nasa’s Oao 3 (Copernicus) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory that the density of the universe was much lower than expected was announced on the first anniversary of the satellite’s launch. Princeton Univ. scientists Dr. John B. Rogerson and Dr. Donald G. York reported they had used Oao 3’s telescope to determine the relative abundance of deuterium (a heavy form of hydrogen) in interstellar gas to be one deuterium atom for every 100 000 atoms of gas. Knowing what fraction of hydrogen became deuterium and accepting the theory that deuterium had been created moments after the “big bang” believed to have started the expansion of the universe, the scientists had calculated the amount of matter created and the average density of the current universe. The extremely low density indicated that there was not a relatively large amount of invisible mass in the universe. (NYT, 8/21/ 73, 13; A&A 1972)
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center experiment to a 49.4-km (30.7-mi) altitude. The objectives were to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The sounding rocket was launched in conjunction with a Nimbus 4 weather satellite (launched April 8, 1970) overpass. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt Srl) September 19—21:	The exhibition “Technology in the Service of Man” was opened at Lewis Research CenteT by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator. Some 1400 representatives of business, industry, labor, professions, and Government viewed exhibits that included a Skylab slide show, Saturn launch vehicle models, a Skylab Student Project exhibit, mockups of future space shuttle payloads, a lunar roving vehicle, and material on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao). (msfc Release 73-129; LeRC Release 73—42; Lewis News, 9/21/73, 1) September 19—28:	Five Soviet radiation specialists toured U.S. industrial process radiation facilities under the Memorandum on Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy between the Atomic Energy Commission and the U.S.S.R. State Committee on the Utilization of Atomic , Energy. The visit reciprocated a Soviet tour by a delegation of U.S. radiation specialists in July 1972. (aec Release R-389) September 20:	President Nixon presented Harmon International Aviation Trophies to chief test pilots Brian Trubshaw and Andre Turcat of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft during White House ceremonies that coincided with the Concorde’s first U.S. visit. Trubshaw of Great Britain and Turcat of France received the 1971 Aviator’s Trophy for their Concorde flights. The 1972 Aviatrix Trophy went to Geraldine Cobb for humanitarian flights in the Amazon River Basin area of South America in 1971. Air Force pilots l/c Thomas B. Estes and l/c Dewain Bick received the 1972 Aviator’s Trophy for their April 26, 1972, SR—71 reconnaissance jet aircraft flight that set a record for sustained speed after a 24 100-km (15 000-mi) flight from Beale Air Force Base, Calif., at mach 3-plus speeds. In the first visit of a supersonic transport aircraft to the U.S., the Concorde arrived at Dallas-Fort Worth Regional Airport at Grapevine, Tex., to participate in Sept. 21 dedication ceremonies for the world’s largest jet airport. The Concorde—carrying 32 aviation officials, press representatives, and a 10-man crew—was flown from Caracas, Venezuela, to Texas by Concorde test pilot Jean Franchi in two and one half hours. The passengers had flown from Texas to Caracas the previous day in a conventional jet aircraft in four and one half hours. {PD, 9/24/73, 1170; NYT, 9/21/73, 1, 43; A&A 1972)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 587 from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 289-km (179.6-mi) apogee, 177-km (110-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 4. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; 10/31/73; SBD, 10/1/73, 152)
NASA announced the award of a $31-million contract to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. for nine high-energy Centaur rockets. Four Centaurs would be used by NASA to launch satellites built under the direction of Communications Satellite Corp. for an American Telephone & Telegraph Co. domestic communications network. Com-SatCorp would reimburse NASA for all costs of the rockets and launch services. Three Centaurs would be used to launch improved Intelsat IV satellites. NASA would use the remaining two Centaurs to launch twin Mariner spacecraft in 1977 for Jupiter and Saturn flybys, (nasa Release 73-189)
Cosmos 551 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 292-km (181.4-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered March 20. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/73; SBD, 3/7/73, 35)
The U.S.S.R. launched a Meteor 15 weather satellite from Plesetsk to obtain “meteorological information for the use of the operational weather service.” Orbital parameters: 896-km (556.7-mi) apogee, 852-km (529.4-mi) perigee, 102.4-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite carried equipment to receive day and night pictures of clouds and snow cover and data on the heat energy reflected and emitted by the earth and the atmosphere, (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; Tass, fbis— Sov, 5/30/73, LI; SBD, 5/30/73, 162)
NASA held a Hq. press conference with French oceanographer Jacques-Yves Cousteau on the joint NASA and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration project in which Cousteau and his oceanographic research ship Calypso had participated [see Feb. 8, 15, and 21]. Cousteau had gathered data on ocean temperature, color, and breeding areas which would be compared with data from satellites in the NASA Applications Satellite program and from noaa’s Environmental Satellite Service. Cousteau said the opportunity to contribute to the project had been “very thrilling, because we believe that one of the most urgent tasks is to monitor the earth’s resources and the ocean resources, and also to control—later on—directly from outer space, the degree of pollution of the surface of the ocean.” During the expedition in Antarctic waters Cousteau had received satellite photos from Nimbus 2 satellite (launched by NASA May 15, 1966), Essa 8 (launched Dec. 15, 1968), and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) to help him navigate the dangerous Drake passage between Antarctica and Ushuaia, Argentina. They were “the most valuable tool we had to plan our trip.” (Transcript)
French President Georges Pompidou had offered the U.S. the possibility of joining France and the United Kingdom in developing a replacement for the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft, French Transport Minister Yves Guena said in Paris. Guena told a symposium of the seven-nation Western European Union that the offer had been made when Nixon and Pompidou met at Reykjavik, Iceland, in June 1973. (Agence France-Presse, P Inq, 9/19/73) September 18—21:	Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was elected president of the International Academy of Aviation and Space Medicine ^during its 21st Congress at Munich, West Germany. (AP, B Sun, 9/22/73, A7) September 19:	Communications Satellite Corp. announced the award of a $65 900 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for construction of highcapacity satellites for lease to American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to provide domestic satellite communications services. Delivery of the first of four satellites was scheduled for late 1975. (ComSatCorp Release 73-48)
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)
Wendell S. Smith, Head of the Experiment Management Office of Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory for Meteorology and Earth Sciences, died in Baltimore, Md., of cancer at age 38. He had joined nasa in 1959 and had worked on early investigations of the meteorology of the upper atmosphere. In early 1973 he had headed a NASA group in a cooperative experiment with Soviet scientists to verify corresponding satellite measurements. (W Star-News, 12/16/73, C7) December 14:	A nasa C-45 aircraft equipped as a remote-sensing platform flew from Redstone Arsenal Airstrip, Ala., on the first flight in a series to study geological phenomena and water quality. The aircraft, obtained free from the Army and equipped by Marshall Space Flight Center with multispectral cameras and other fittings, covered three sites in Alabama with high- and low-altitude multispectral photography. The aircraft later would be used to investigate water resources, agriculture, land resources, ecology, and archaeology. It would also support the Earth Resources Technology Satellite and the Skylab earth resources experiment package. A thermal scanner would be added to the aircraft’s equipment early in 1974. (msfc Release 73-201)
Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, said in hearings on NASA’s tracking program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology that the percentage of Spacecraft requiring real-time control would increase from 70% to 90% in 1975. With increased number of satellites and volume of data, as well, new tracking capability would be required. NASA proposed a new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) for the late 1970s—possibly leased from the private sector—to support low-earth-orbit spacecraft. Two synchronous satellites would relay telemetry, voice, and video data from other spacecraft to a single U.S. earth station, or from the station to the spacecraft, tdrss would support all spacecraft below 5000 km (3100 mi), including shuttle, Spacelab, and automated spacecraft. The new system would give 88% continuous contact with spacecraft, realtime interactive experiments, and reduced dependence on foreign-based tracking stations. Half the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network stations could be closed, saving “tens of millions of dollars.” (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 602 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 332-km (206.3-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 90.0min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 29, believed by Western observers to be sixth in a series of reconnaissance spacecraft monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15]. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; SBD, 10/24/73, 266)
Rep, Wright Patman (D-Tex.) introduced H.J.R. 255 to change the name of Manned Spacecraft Center to Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in honor of the late President. He said: “Lyndon Johnson understood the importance of space exploration to the people of the United States and its ultimate benefits to all of mankind. He understood the necessity of this advance technology to our security, He understood the stimulation this new field would create in our educational systems. He understood the palpable gains to the average citizen from our weather, communications, and other applications satellites. He understood the challenge to excellence and achievement it posed to our scientists, engineers, and technicians. But most of all, he understood ... the need of man to explore, to reach out, and to seek new ways to bend science and technology to our use.” (CR, 1/29/73, S1467)
Advanced communications satellites were discussed at a joint meeting of the Cleveland Chapter of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Institute of Electrical Engineers at Lewis Research Center. Joseph N. Sivo, head of LeRc’s Advanced Communications Systems Study Office, said higher powered communications satellites offered “real potential in educational and health service areas.” Communications satellites could beam educational TV to the people of India or Appalachia, link medical centers with patients in distant places, or speed mail service. Recause of NASA program cutbacks, “industry will have to pick up where nasa left off.” (LeRC Release 73-3)
Cosmos 572 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 286-km (177.7-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.8° inclination. The 'satellite reentered June 23. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/13/73, 242)
Eruption of the Helgafell volcano on Heimaey Island off the Icelandic coast was recorded by a very-high-resolution radiometer on board Noaa 2 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 15, 1972. Data would be correlated with data from Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) and an Air Force aircraft. (Av Wk, 2/19/73, 67) January 26:	Cosmos 546 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 613-km (380.9-mi) apogee, 574-km (356.7-mi) perigee, 96.5-min period, and 50.6° inclination, (gsfc SRR, 1/31/73; SBD, 1/29/73, 131)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. announced it was in danger of running out of cash in 1974 and might have to seek new short-term credits against already built trijet aircraft on which airline customers had obtained agreements to delay delivery. Lockheed said it had retained an investment-banking firm, Lazard Freres & Co., to help find a solution to its financial difficulties, including a possible merger with a healthier company. Lockheed disclosed that it had already drawn $20 million more than the $250 million in Government-guaranteed loans granted to it in 1971 to save the firm from bankruptcy. (Witkin, NYT, 12/15/73, 1) By Dec. 19 command and telemetry systems were checked out, the memory of the onboard computer was loaded and read out, and the tape recorder, atmosphere density accelerometer, and cylindrical electrostatic probe were switched on. All spacecraft systems were checked out by Dec. 20 and were functioning normally. Experiment instrumentation checkout would be completed by Dec. 31. The Explorer 51 mission would consist of two phases. During Phase 1, excursions would be made at two- to four-week intervals, each lasting several days. The spacecraft perigee would be lowered in steps through a range of 150 to 125 km (95 to 80 mi). At each perigee step, telemetry data would be acquired. Phase 2 would begin after eight months and last four months; the spacecraft would be placed in a series of circular orbits ranging between 250 and 800 km (155 and 500 mi) in altitude. Explorer 51 carried 14 scientific instruments provided by a research team of scientists from nine institutions. In addition to the investigation of solar uv activity, the instrumentation would examine particle fluxes, airglow intensities, plasma densities, and temperatures and magnetic fields at low altitudes. To use the full spacecraft and instrument capabilities, a new rapid-response data system would provide data reduced to physical parameters, allowing the spacecraft to operate as a laboratory-in-space periodically reprogrammed to make optimum measurements in the light of interim results rather than gathering data in predetermined modes. Explorer 17 (launched April 2, 1963), the first ae satellite, had confirmed that the earth was surrounded by a belt of neutral helium. The second, Explorer 32 (launched May 25, 1966), was placed in a higher orbit than planned but the higher altitude enhanced the resolution of the measured atmospheric parameters. The spacecraft continued to return useful data for 10 mos. The AE program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the nasa Office of Space Science, (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73-269) December 15:	President Nixon issued Proclamation 4257 calling for nationwide observance of Wright Brothers Day Dec. 17: “It is both fitting and proper . . . , on this 70th anniversary of powered flight, that we should commemorate the achievements of two resourceful and farsighted men who have come to symbolize America’s inventive genius.” {PD, 12/17/73, 1462)
President Nixon signed Executive Order 11718 designating the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (intelsat) as an international organization entitled to enjoy certain privileges, exemptions, and immunities. (PD, 5/21/73, 673-4)
The U.S. defense outlay continued to increase despite improving relations with the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China, the U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement to limit strategic arms, the Vietnam cease-fire agreements, and sharp cutbacks in U.S. military forces, the Wall Street Journal noted. FY 1974 spending was projected at $79 billion, up $4.2 billion from FY 1973, “a shade above the Vietnam-war peak and a shade below the World War II pinnacle. While the White House talks detente, the Pentagon speaks of growing Soviet military power and the likelihood, given further price and pay inflation, of $100 billion-plus military budgets by the end of the decade.” (Levine, WSJ, l/Yl/73, 1) July 17—18:	NASA launched a series of 26 meteorological experiments on rockets and balloons from Wallops Station to provide an in-depth com> parison between remote sensors on satellites and sensors on rockets and balloons from a mid-latitude site. The project—divided into a day and night series to provide data both with and without solar energy input—• was conducted in conjunction with Nimbus 5 (launched Dec. 10, 1972) and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) satellites. Four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched carrying Goddard Space Flight Center acoustic grenades to measure temperature and winds. The grenades were ejected and detonated in flight, one at a time, from 30- to 95-km (19- to 59-mi) altitude. The first Nike-Cajun was launched July 17 and reached an altitude of 117.4 km (72.9 mi). The rocket performed satisfactorily. Thirty of the thirty-one grenades were successfully detonated and the sound returns were received by the ground microphone array. The second Nike-Cajun launched 79 minutes later reached an altitude of 116.2 km (72.2 mi) and detonated all of its 12 grenades successfully. The third Nike-Cajun was launched July 18 to a 114.9-km (71.4-mi) altitude. Rocket performance was satisfactory and all 31 grenades were successfully detonated. The final Nike-Cajun was launched two hours later to an altitude of 120.7 km (75 mi). The rocket performance was satisfactory and all 12 grenades were detonated successfully. In addition to the Nike-Cajuns, the launches included 4 balloonsondes, 3 Viper Darts, and 15 Super Lokis instrumented to obtain density and temperature data. Participating in the program with Wallops Station were White Sands Missile Range, the Air Force, and GSFC. (WS Release 73-7; nasa Rpts srl)
Brazil was reported to be negotiating with several companies for a $100million domestic communications satellite system to link its cities with remote areas not reached by ground systems. A special government commission would study proposals for the satellite program to relay thousands of simultaneous phone calls and multiple TV channels. If the program was authorized, Brazil would become the third country in the world with a nationwide domestic comsat system, (latns, Today, 3/16/73)
The People’s Republic of China was reportedly developing an intercontinental ballistic missile 20% larger than the largest one in the U.S.S.R., the New York Times said. Administration officials had said the missile was a three-stage, liquid-fueled icbm expected to have a range of 8000 to 11000 km (5000 to 7000 mi). Underground silos were being built at a missile test center west of Peking, a location which would permit the missile to reach major cities and military targets in the U.S. and U.S.S.R. Following the first successful tests, it would take three years before a force of 10 to 30 missiles could be deployed. (Beecher, NYT, 3/4/73, 17) March 4:	Laser beams, computers, and satellites were being used by NASA to gather data over a five-year span for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Geological Survey to help predict earthquakes along California’s 965-km (600-mi) San Andreas fault. Lasers at precise locations on either side of the fault were beamed to satellites Explorer 27 (launched April 29, 1965), Explorer 29 {Geos 1, launched Nov. 6, 1965), and Explorer 36 {Geos 2, launched Jan. 11, 1968) and bounced off tiny mirrors. Reflections were recorded by computers and sent to Goddard Space Flight Center, where analysis gave measurements of the slightest variation at a laser’s base. A mathematical model would eventually be constructed to assist in predicting quake behavior, (gsfc proj off; gsfc pao; LA Her-Exam, 3/4/73)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said on the Senate floor that NASA had been “second to none in its record of accomplishments during its first decade and a half.” The past 15 yrs had seen the U.S. go “from the depths of postsputnik depression to undreamed of heights in both the exploration and exploitation of the benefits of space.” The Skylab 3 crew (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14) had “just completed 59 highly successful days in space, in a mission already being hailed as perhaps the most productive in our history. Eighty-three nations have joined in a global communications satellite system [Intelsat] now carrying three-quarters of the world’s intercontinental telecommunications traffic.” (CR, 10/1/73, S18200)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 580 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 490-km (304.5-mi) apogee, 273-km (169.6-mi) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 70.9° inclination. The satellite reentered April 1, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; 6/30/74; SBD, 9/6/73, 10)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
The Federal Republic of Germany’s Aeros satellite (launched by NASA Dec. 16, 1972) was operating within expected limits. Five science experiments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. An anomaly had possibly degraded data from the U.S. neutral atmosphere temperature experiment; four other experiments were unaffected, (nasa prog off)
Successful applications of earth resources surveying by satellite were described by representatives of agriculture and the lumber, oil, and aerospace industries at a Johnson Space Center press briefing sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Lockheed Electronics Co. earth resources coordinator Gordon R. Heath said surveys from Earth Resources Satellites would provide lumbermen “a continuous flow of up-to-date information which has never before been available to them,” a new management tool for timber lands. “And better management will balance supply and demand . . . and help stabilize lumber prices.” Lumber company executive James B. Webster said the development of earth resources surveying was “one of the most important events in the history of man.” Incipient damage to trees from insects and forest fires had previously been impossible to detect. “And what we’ve got here is ... a system which will permit us to know what’s happening all over the world, with all the world resources at any given time.” Dr. Richard Phelps, technical information director for an agricultural firm, said a photo taken over a northern California area by Erts 1 (launched by NASA July 23, 1972) had been “a tremendous help” in complementing information from ground sources on farm crops. “It’s still very difficult for us to realize that we can obtain so much detail from an electronically reconstituted print transmitted from a satellite as far away from the earth as Wichita, Kansas, is from Houston.” (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 11-8 communications satellite into orbit with a 40 809-km (25 357.5-mi) apogee, 488-km (303.2mi) perigee, 12-hr 17-min period, and 62.8° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12/26/73, Ul)
The Federal Communications Commission’s Common Carrier Bureau petitioned the FCC to force Communications Satellite Corp. into an immediate 25% rate cut. The Bureau, representing consumers in the eight-year-old FCC investigation of ComSatCorp, said that increasing satellite traffic and the use of more efficient plant had increased ComSatCorp’s annual earning rate from 10% in 1971 to about 25%. (Aug, W Star-News, 8/25/73, Al; fcc pio)
The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)
Navy plans for collecting temperature and cloud-cover data directly from Air Force weather satellites were reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology. A receiver and computer processing center at Monterey, Calif., would prepare data for worldwide dissemination to the fleet and would process weather photos and atmospheric vertical-temperature profiles. (Av Wk, 10/8/73, 9) October 9:	The original name Cape Canaveral was restored to Cape Kennedy by the Dept, of the Interior, acting on a unanimous recommendation by an interagency committee of the Board on Geographic Names. Historians believed the Cape had been named Canaveral by Spanish explorer Ponce de Leon more than 400 yrs before, the Orlando Sentinel Star later reported. The action made no change in the name of NASA’s Kennedy Space Center, named for the late President John F. Kennedy. (Dept Int Release, 10/9/73; CR, 10/10/73, H8880; O Sen Star, 10/10/73, 1)
A New York Times editorial commented on the new role of science in President Nixon’s Administration: The extent to which technical expertise was indispensable to governmental decision-making in fields of environmental pollution, defense, and medical policy made it “surprising that the President now has chosen to lessen the role of science and scientists in his Administration.” Downgrading science and technology would have effect of a handicap “in getting first-class scientific advice quickly when he needs it. . . . The United States is powerful and prosperous today only because it has made such effective, large-scale use of scientific knowledge in all civilian and military fields.” (NYT, 2/7/73, 34) February 8:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 548 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 284-km (176.5-mi) apogee, 209-km (129.9-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Feb. 21. (gsfc SSR, 2/28/73; SBD, 2/9/73, 227)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 599 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 276-km (171.5-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.3-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 28. Western observers speculated that Cosmos 599, with three other Soviet satellites—Cosmos 596, 597, and 598, launched Oct. 3, 6, and 10—had monitored the Arab-Israeli war that had broken out Oct. 6. The quick succession of launches and recoveries were seen as evidence of almost continuous Soviet observation of the fighting by orbiting cameras. A Washington, D.C., source had said that the Cosmos orbits had permitted them to pass over the Middle East several times at altitudes of 196 to 322 km (122 to 200 mi) before reentry. The New York Times said the U.S. also could have been receiving information on the war from an Air Force satellite launched Sept. 27. Cosmos 600, 602, and 603 closely followed the first four Oct. 16, 21, and 27 and were also shortly returned. They were believed to be continuing the observation of tank battles, troop movements, aircraft strike damage, and even of supply centers in the U.S. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; SBD, 10/16/73, 228; 10/18/73, 241; 10/24/73, 266; 11/12/73, 60; Wilford, NYT, 10/18/73, 21; Gatland, CSM, 11/13/73)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1 788 000 firm-fixed-price contract for component parts of the multimode radar system for the C—5A aircraft, (dod Release 219-73) May 3:	NASA announced a delay in the launch of Intelsat-IV F—6 scheduled for May 4. Communications Satellite Corp. had said that a minor variation in the receiver gain had indicated the need for additional tests to determine possible causes of the variation, (nasa Note to Editors, 5/3/73)
A new satellite series, Intelsat IVA would begin service in mid-1975 to expand and improve communications capacity among nations, Com-SatCorp announced. The new series would double capacity by reusing frequencies for the first time by beam separation. The series would replace the global system of Intelsat IV satellites jointly owned with International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, in which Com-SatCorp held the major interest. Since Early Bird (Intelsat 1, launched April 9, 1965), satellites had expanded and improved world communications until, to date, there were 251 pathways among 80 antennas at 65 stations in 49 countries. Two thirds of all long-distance communications were via satellite. (ComSatCorp Release 73—5)
The dismantling of the Federal fellowship program would liquidate some excesses but, “on balance, is a destructive move” at a time “when the need for some kinds of scientists and engineers is actually growing,” a Science editorial said. “After Sputnik was launched, this nation engaged in a frantic effort to expand its scientific capabilities. For a number of years government funds available for research in the physical and biomedical sciences increased rapidly. At the same time, the Apollo program was implemented. These developments created a shortage of scientists and engineers.” When Government support ceased to grow and unemployment arose, those in the Government who wanted to dismantle the fellowship program had had a useful excuse. But the unemployment argument was no longer valid. “The index of employment opportunities has climbed above 100. In some regions there already are shortages of engineers.” In years ahead, “this nation will encounter many unexpected problems requiring the skills of scientists and engineers. We may well come to regret bitterly the fact that we have been unable to do better than follow destructive blow-hot, blow-cold educational policies. We should adopt the more realistic assumption that this nation must have good science, good medicine, and good engineering, and we should make it possible for the top students, regardless of financial ability, to participate.” (Abelson, Science, 4/6/73, 13) April 6—13:	Two satellites, five aircraft, and ten surface vessels were used to study the New York Bight. The waters extending from Staten Island to more than 32 km (20 mi) east of Asbury Park, N.J.—used as a dump for sewer sludge, acid wastes, and dredging and excavation materials— were dyed green. Water circulation at and near the surface was mapped to plan balanced use of the coastal environment and to assess the impact of natural and man-made substances on the coastal zone. Data gathered by sensors on the aircraft and on Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) were checked for accuracy by measurements gathered by surface vessels. The program was managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with participation by NASA and the Navy, Environmental Protection Agency, Coast Guard, Federal Aviation Administration, and State of New Jersey. (noaa Release 73-60) April 8:	The first closeup radar images of the moon’s surface—obtained during the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission—had been assembled by scientists and engineers from Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the Univ. of Utah, the Univ. of Michigan, and the Center for Astrogeology of the U.S. Geological Survey, NASA announced. The “pictures,” products of the Apollo lunar sounder experiment, would eventually provide a geological cross-section of the moon, detailing subsurface structure to a depth of 1.3 km (0.8 mi), (nasa Release 73-65)
A Science article commented on President Nixon’s Oct. 3 speech announcing National Medal of Science winners [see Oct. 3] : “How serious Nixon is about achieving the objectives cited in his remarks will be indicated by future budgetary activities. In recent months, however, there has been plenty of evidence that the Administration wants to make changes not only in the substance of science policy, but also in the way that policy is made. The most obvious indicator was the shift of the science advisory apparatus from the White House to nsf. Underlying the change seems to have been not just a dissatisfaction with the science advisory machinery, but also with the basic relationship between the scientific community and its federal patrons which has prevailed since World War II.” It would be wise for the scientific community to examine carefully the new terms which President Nixon seems to he offering. “However, the recent invitation from the White House did, figuratively, seem to be directed to scientists and engineers in general.” (Walsh, Science, 10/ 26/73, 365-8) Octobkr 27: The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 603 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 356-km (221.2-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 90.0min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite, which reentered Nov. 9, was believed by Western observers to be the seventh reconnaissance Cosmos launched during October to monitor the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15]. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; 11/30/73; SBD, 10/31/73, 307)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 559 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 324-km (201.3-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered May 23. (GSFC SSR, 5/31/73; SBD, 5/21/73, 116)
Creation and detection of antitritium—the counterpart of heavy, radioactive, hydrogen isotope tritium—was reported in the Soviet press by a Soviet scientific team using the U.S.S.R.’s largest nuclear particle accelerator at Serpukhov. The New York Times later said the discovery further strengthened the hypothesis that the universe was made up symmetrically of ordinary matter and antimatter. In a joint project of the Soviet Institute of High Energy Physics and the Institute of Nuclear Research, nuclear physicists Valentin I. Petrukhin and Vladimir I. Rykalin and team had examined 400 billion particles over several months before identifying four antitritium nuclei. It was the second identification of an antinucleus at the Soviet accelerator. In February 1970, Soviet scientists had reported the creation of antihelium. The search for antimatter was being spurred by the theory that the mutual annihilation of matter and antimatter might ultimately yield a new form of useful energy. (Shabad, NYT, 5/20/73, 41) May 21:	French satellites Castor and Pollux, jointly launched from Kourou Space Center, failed to enter orbit and fell into the sea when the Diamant-B launch vehicle failed to produce sufficient thrust for the separation of the 2nd and 3rd stages. It was the second straight failure for the French space program. On Dec. 5, 1971, the Polaire satellite had failed to achieve orbit when the 2nd stage of the Diamant-B booster malfunctioned. (AP, M Her, 5/22/73; Tass, fbis-W Europe, 5/21/73, F3)
nasa in cooperation with the Air Force launched Nnss 0-20 Transit satellite for the Navy from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a four-stage Scout booster. The satellite, launched as part of the Navy Navigation Satellite System, entered orbit with a 1139.4-km (708-mi) apogee, 902.8-km (561-mi) perigee, 105.6-min period, and 90.2° inclination. NASA would be reimbursed by the Air Force for the cost of the launch vehicle and services. (Pres Rpt 74; nasa oss; SBD, 11/1/73, 6; AP, NYT, 10/31/73, 13)
A sun-powered laser was being developed by the Air Force Avionics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, as part of an Air Force program to determine the feasibility of satellite optical communications. The device collected and focused solar rays through lenses and mirrors, stimulating material in the laser to produce light beams to transmit data, TV, voice, and other communications. The laser’s power output would equal that of solid-state lasers. A demonstrable brassboard working model of a sun pump laser was hoped for by the end of the fiscal year, (afsc Release 055.73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 562 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 473-km (293.9-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 70.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 7, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/6/73, 208)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. An Areas from Antigua, West Indies, carried a Goddard Space Flight Center meteorological experiment to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The launch was in conjunction with an overpass of the Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970), hut the mission was unsuccessful because of the rapid fall rate, caused by abnormal parachute performance, and because of the lack of radar track. (NASA Rpt SRL) An Aerobee 200A from White Sands Missile Range carried a Univ. of Hawaii solar physics experiment to a 228.4-km (141,9-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily but, because of failure of the solarpointing-attitude reaction control system, the experiment was unsuccessful. (gsfc proj off) November 24:	A Washington Post editorial criticized NASA’s dismissal of Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris [see Oct. 26]: “nasa has compiled a dismal record with respect to female and minority employment. Dr. Fletcher himself admits as much. The question is, what to do about it? Dr. Fletcher says that every effort is being made to correct the problem. By now NASA should have learned that institutionalized sexism and racism give way to neither simple pieties nor eloquent declarations of principle. Achieving equitable employment opportunities for women and minorities in large American institutions requires skill, determination and sustained effort, just as a successful space program does. That is a lesson for the 1970s that all major American institutions must learn if the tragedies of the 1960s are to be avoided in this country’s future.” (W Post, 11/24/73, A14)
Russian-born atomic scientist Dr. Eugene Rabinowitch, senior chemist on the Manhattan Project that led to development of the first atomic bomb and founder and editor of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, died in Washington, D.C., at age 71. An outspoken critic of the nuclear arms race, he had joined other workers on the Manhattan Project in 1945 in drafting the Franck Report, which cautioned the U.S. against use of the atomic bomb. At the time of his death, Dr. Rabinowitch had been working as a Woodrow Wilson Fellow at the Smithsonian Institution. His project was scientific revolution and its social implication. (Hailey, W Post, 5/16/73, B6) May 16:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by a Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with a 397-km (246.7-mi) apogee, 134-km (83.3-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.4° inclination. The satellite reentered June 13 (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; 6/30/73; SBD, 5/18/73, 108)
Air Force Secretary John L. McLucas outlined the Air Force role in space in a speech before the Military Order of the World Wars in Memphis, Tenn. Twenty-six military communications satellites orbited as a research effort had proved so successful they were converted to a basic operational system in 1967. Half of these were still operational. An experimental tactical communications program was essentially complete; satellites and some receivers for aircraft, ships, trucks, jeeps, and a man-pack had been tested. The first operational Fleet Satellite Communications System would improve control for Navy ships and Air Force strategic aircraft. A second military use of space provided data for weather analysis and forecasting. McLucas had announced in March that information from an advanced meteorological satellite program was being made available to the public through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Satellites also provided early warning of missile attack, detection of nuclear explosions in the atmosphere, and navigation data. A single satellite system to meet all requirements was under study. (Av Wk, 2/18/74)
NASA launched two Areas sounding rockets from Antigua, West Indies, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. Both launches were in conjunction with a Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970) overpass. The first Areas reached a 52.7-km (32.7-mi) altitude. Ejection of the payload-parachute unit was accomplished, but the nosecone remained attached to the instrumentation section shielding the sensors from the atmosphere. No data were acquired. The second Areas, launched 80 min later, reached a 51.2-km (31.8-mi) altitude but the payload-parachute unit did not eject and no data were received, (nasa Rpts srl) August 17:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite on a ThorBurner II booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base into orbit with an 853-km (530.0-mi) apogee, 808-km (502.1-mi) perigee, 101.5-min period, and 98.8° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 8/30/73; Pres Rpt 74)
NASA launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying a Univ. of Pittsburgh payload to 135.1-km (84-mi) altitude. The primary objective was to confirm an initial observation of nitric oxide in the auroral zone and collect data on processes producing it in certain auroral arcs. The rocket and recovery system performed satisfactorily. The telemetry signal varied from good with good scientific data on the upward trajectory to poor with marginal data on the down. (NASA Rpt SRL) March 2:	Communications Satellite Corp. would receive a $27 912 000 firm-fixed-price contract for lease of ultrahigh-frequency satellite communications service, the Navy announced [see Mar. 7], (dod Release 109-73)
Concorde 02, reproduction model of the Anglo-French supersonic transport, flew from Washington, D.C., Dulles Airport to Paris’ Orly Field in 3 hrs 33 min. The aircraft had participated in dedication of the Dallas-Fort Worth airport Sept. 21. (Concorde Bull 12, 1/1/74) September 26-27:	Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D—Wash.) explained S. 2495, a bill to apply NASA’s expertise to solving domestic problems, during the first day of two-day hearings on the state of the aerospace industry by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Sen. Magnuson, with Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Sen. John V. Tunney (D-Calif.), introduced the bill Sept. 27. The bill, the Technology Resources Survey and Applications Act, would amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to provide “an organization within NASA to carry out programs ... to resolve critical national problems. This would expand an activity already underway within NASA and enable us to better utilize a capability which has already exhibited an impressive record of success.” The programs would be determined by a National Technology Resource Council of Cabinet members and heads of technological agencies, which would make its recommendations to the President. Sen. Magnuson suggested changing NASA’s name to the National Applications of Science Administration. “I do believe the name . . . would accurately reflect the new role which my bill attempts to create for NASA.” Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified that foreign competition for U.S. and international aerospace markets was currently “of a scope, determination, and quality that we have not had to face since World War II. The underpinning of strong research and development programs—vital to our technological advance—is being downgraded to a serious degree. There is an alarming scarcity of private sources of financing for the development and production of new commercial aircraft. As a low-profit industry, traditionally averaging a profit about half that of other manufacturing industries, we lack the resources for reinvestment, cushioning against risk, and attracting investors. Above all, there is uncertainty in this transitional period about future national gods which might utilize our capabilities. Will we continue to contribute primarily to space exploration, defense, and long-range air travel, or will we next find ourselves emphasizing such efforts as environmental control, law enforcement, health delivery services, housing, and urban mass transit?” Dr. Wernher von Braun—Vice President, Engineering and Development, Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning—testified on the future of satellite communications: “There is no field in which the goals of space applications are expanding at a faster rate.” Ever since NASA demonstrated “that radio signals bounced off passive reflection satellites such as the Echo balloon or rebroadcast by active repeater spacecraft such as Early Bird, worldwide communications by satellite have been growing. . . . Satellites, by providing international telephone and television service, are an important force in overcoming regional and national barriers. It is difficult to maintain hostility and isolation in the presence of free communications.” Satellite communications would “soon be commonplace in our country.” With the advent of the reusable space shuttle to service and repair satellites in the 1980s, “even nations with limited fiscal resources can put in a network of smaller, far less expensive ground stations.” Thanks to NASA programs initiated a few years ago, “the United States is still quite active in the area of pioneering new technology for communications satellites.” (Transcript) September 27—29:	The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 12, carrying cosmonauts l/c Vasily G. Lazarev and flight engineer Oleg G. Makarov, from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:18 pm local time (3:18 pm Moscow time; 8:18 am edt) into earth orbit with 229-km (142.3-mi) apogee, 180-km (111.8-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Soviet news agency Tass announced the objectives of the two-day mission were to test improved flight systems, test manual and automatic control in various flight conditions, and obtain spectrographic data of separate sections of the earth “for the solution of economic problems.” The flight would further improve development of manned spacecraft. After six hours in flight the cosmonauts reported they had adjusted to weightlessness and were carrying out all scheduled activities. All spacecraft systems were functioning normally. During the first day, Lazarov—45-yr-old air force test pilot and physician—and Makarov— 40-yr-old engineer who had taken part in developing the control board and flight program for Yuri A. Gagarin’s Vostok 1 mission of April 12, 1961—maneuvered their spacecraft in orbit to test manual and automatic control and piloting techniques. The spacecraft was moved into a higher and nearly circular orbit, with parameters reported by Tass as 345-km (214.4-mi) apogee, 326-km (202.6-mi) perigee, 91-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The cosmonauts also made spectrographs of natural formations of the earth’s surface. They were reported Sept. 28 to be in high spirits and good physical condition. Tass reported a new spacecraft design and a new spacesuit, “very simple and comfortable,” were being tested. Spacesuits were worn for launch and descent but not during the flight itself. On Sept. 29 the crew oriented their spacecraft and fired the braking engine. The landing module separated from the spacecraft and entered descent trajectory. The parachute system was deployed at 7.6 km (4.7 mi) above the earth and engines softlanded the craft 400 km (250 mi) southwest of Karaganda in the Kazakhstan Steppe at 2:34 pm Moscow time (7:34 am edt). A medical check at the landing site showed “the state of [the cosmonauts’] health is good.” Soyuz 12 was the first Soviet manned space flight since the 1971 Salyut 1-Soyuz 11 mission. Soyuz 10 (launched April 23, 1971, carrying three cosmonauts) had docked with the orbiting Salyut 1 space laboratory (launched April 19) but the cosmonauts had not boarded. American observers believed the Soyuz spacecraft had spun out of control, causing the cosmonauts to become ill and necessitating an early return to earth. Three cosmonauts launched June 6, 1971, on Soyuz 11 had docked with and boarded Salyut 1. They worked successfully in orbit for 24 days but were found dead on landing, from pressure loss in the landing craft, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; fbis-Sov, 9/28/73, Ul-A>; 10/1/73, Ul—3; SBD, 9/28/73, 138; Kaiser, W Post, 9/28/73, Al; Shabad, NYT, 9/30/73, 1; Seeger, W Post, 9/30/73, 145) September 27:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite on a Titan IIIB-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base into an orbit with a 384.6-km (239-mi) apogee, 128.8-km (80-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.5° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 29. (Pres Rpt 74; Wilson, W Post, 10/16/73, A7)
Appointment of Roald Sagdeyev as Director of the Soviet Space Research Institute was announced in Vestnik, monthly publication of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Sagdeyev replaced Georgy I. Petrov, who went into voluntary retirement. Sagdeyev, a nuclear physicist, had been made a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences in 1964 and had become a full member in 1968. Before his appointment as Director, Sagdeyev had specialized in plasma physics at the Nuclear Physics Institute in Novosibirsk. (AP, W Post, 9/23/7$, Al; 9/24/73, A21) September 2—7:	The 66th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) was held in Dublin, Ireland. U.S. participants included Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan and Apollo 16 commander John W. Young. The 1972 fai Gold Space Medal was presented to Cernan in recognition of the Dec. 7-19, 1972, final Apollo mission which had “accomplished all of its goals and magnificently concluded the extraordinary and highly successful Apollo program.” Cernan also received t'he 1972 De la Vaulx Medal for his absolute world record of 21 hrs 32 min 44 sec for “Duration of Stay Outside his Lunar Module ‘Challenger’ Spacecraft,” set during Apollo 17. Young received the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for “remarkable leadership, skill, daring and dedication” as commander of the April 16-27, 1972, Apollo 16 mission and the V. M. Komarov Diploma, on behalf of himself and Apollo 16 Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II and Charles M. Duke, Jr., for successful completion of all but one of the mission’s 33 major experiments. The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Aeronautics was awarded to the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration “in recognition of its outstanding contribution to air traffic efficiency and safety by the development of the now fully operational Automated Radar Terminal System” (arts). The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Astronautics went to Boeing Co. Aerospace Group for design and production of the lunar roving vehicle (lrv) used during the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions. The Paul Tis-sandier Diploma was presented to Kay A. Brick for “her outstanding contributions to women’s aviation over the past 23 years” as a member and Chairman of the Board of the All-Women’s Transcontinental Air Race “Powder Puff Derby.” (naa News, 9/73, 1—2; faa Release 73— 155; A&A 1972) September 3:	The U.S. had “discreetly blocked” Soviet attempts to purchase 10 ilc Industries’ Apollo lunar-configured spacesuits, Aviation Week & Space Technology'said. The U.S.S.R. had been told that U.S. export of such technology could not be approved. (Av Wk, 9/3/73, 11) September 4:	World atlases were inaccurate in delineating outer boundaries of polar icecaps according to imagery returned by Nimbus 5 (weather satellite launched by NASA Dec. 10, 1972), NASA announced. A Goddard Space Flight Center study had shown that synoptic photos from Nimbus 5 clearly indicated polar regions underwent large-scale changes in a short time. Boundaries between the multiyear icepack around the North Pole and the large areas of first-year ice varied significantly within one freezing season. Even greater changes occurred around Antarctica. Nimbus 5 also was measuring daily rainfall distribution over the earth’s oceans to indicate to meteorologists how much energy was being released into the global atmosphere. An electrically scanning microwave radiometer aboard the spacecraft was measuring rainfall rate and heat thus released to enable forecasters to understand a tropical storm or hurricane and predict its 24- to 48-hr intensity, (nasa Releases 73-176, 73-175)
Direct satellite communications via Intelsat-IV F—4 began between Thailand and the People’s Republic of China, (upi, W Star-News, 8/24/73, A2; ComSatCorp pio)
Western Union Telegraph Co. President Earl D. Hilburn said the company had received letters from seven unidentified companies of intent to order $3 million worth of communications satellite transmission services. Identification would be withheld until all applications had been received. Western Union’s westar satellite system was the first U.S. system to be authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. Inauguration of services was set for mid-1974. (Western Union Release)
The U.S.S.R. launched its Molniya 1—24 communications satellite into orbit from Plesetsk. Tass announced a 37 970-km (23 593.5-mi) apogee, 480-km (298.3-mi) perigee, 679-min period, and 65.3° inclination. The satellite would ensure the operation of a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; fbis-Sov, 8/30/73, Ul; SBD, 9/6/73, 10)
The General Accounting Office released its study Cost Growth in Major Weapons Systems made at the request of the House Committee on Armed Services. Cost overruns on 45 major weapon systems in the U.S. arsenal had totaled $31.3 billion. Each of the 45 systems had incurred an overrun. (Text) March 26—27:	Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, delivered the report United States Military Posture for FY 1974 to the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Defense Appropriations: Strategic parity existed between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. “While the Soviet Union has a substantial advantage, not only in the numbers of strategic missiles, but also in missile throw-weight, the United States still has a substantial advantage in other areas of key importance to the overall strategic balance—e.g., missile accuracy, MIRVs [multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles], submarine quietness, sonars, and numbers of bombers and bomber payload. And, while the Soviet Union has enormous advantage in air defense, without an extensive ABM [antiballistic missile] defense . . . the air defense could be substantially undercut by ballistic missile attack, particularly ... a large number of mirvs.” The U.S. advantages were transitory, resting on a “technological lead that has been steadily narrowing over the past decade.” With the momentum of the Soviet offensive research and development program, “we cannot preclude the possibility that our technological lead in this area may further diminish or disappear altogether during the current decade.” Adm. Moorer believed “that the Soviet Union will soon succeed in its efforts to develcrp an effective MIRV system for its strategic missiles. Thus, the Soviet Union may be able to challenge our lead in both missile guidance and mirvs . . . , and thereby pose a significant threat to our Minuteman force.” (Text) In a statement confirmed later by Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim, Adm. Moorer said the U.S.S.R. was actively testing three new intercontinental ballistic missiles and might deploy 60 improved multiple-warhead versions of an existing missile during the summer. He said the People’s Republic of China was expanding production of weapon-grade nuclear materiel and slowly but steadily building a stock of strategic and tactical nuclear weapons. (Beecher, NYT, 3/28/73, 4; dod pio) March 27:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Fernando de Mendonca, Director General of the Brazilian Institute for Space Research (inpe), signed a Memorandum of Understanding to extend the NASA—inpe cooperative project in remote sensing using the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite launched by NASA July 23, 1972. The project’s purpose was to advance applications of spacecraft and aircraft remote sensing to monitor environmental conditions. INPE would establish a data-acquisition station at Cuiaba, central Brazil, and a data-processing facility in Sao Paulo state. There would be no exchange of funds; both agencies would share all data and information necessary for the conduct of the program; and inpe would make available to NASA, cost free, copies of erts data it acquired and processed. The data would be available to the domestic and international community. (nasa Release 73-82)
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket—second in a series of two—from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 52.5-km (32.6-mi) altitude. The objectives were to measure the ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption for the evaluation of the Nimbus 4 (meteorological satellite launched April 8, 1970) backscatter uv experiment, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The rocket was launched during a Nimbus 4 overpass. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The first rocket in this series was launched Feb. 13. (nasa Rpt srl) February 21:	The emergency team formed by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Navy’s Fleet Weather Facility to aid Jacques-Yves Cousteau’s crippled research vessel Calypso [see Feb. 15] had been disbanded, NASA announced. The Calypso had safely navigated the dangerous Drake Passage between Antarctica and the Ushuaia port, Argentina, using weather and ice information supplied by Ats 3 satellite. Satellite photos had been processed at Goddard Space Flight Center, turned over to fwf, and analyzed and information transmitted to Cousteau aboard the Calypso, (nasa Release 73-33)
A Huntsville News editorial commented on the planned Oct. 1 celebration of NASA’s 15th anniversary and the start of Space Week: “The spinoff from space exploration continues to help Americans and mankind from all kinds of new equipment to watching happenings in Europe or Asia right in your own living room because of the launch of satellites. Years will see new developments come from data already collected.” (Huntsville News, 9/24/73) September 25:	President Nixon sent a message to Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma following their splashdown ending the record July 28—Sept. 25 mission: “The record of your Skylab mission combines the traditions of those great explorers of history who have faced the uncharted reaches of the physical unknown with the traditions of those men of science who have unlocked the secrets of the universe and have thus opened the doors to man’s future progress. By your scientific endeavor and your physical endurance, you have converted a space vehicle into a repository of more scientific knowledge than mankind can immediately consume. In doing so, you have provided the basis for a quantum jump in human knowledge.” (PD, 10/1/73, 1197)
Tenth anniversary of NASA’s July 26, 1963, launch of Syncorn 2, the first communications satellite to relay digital data, telephone conversations, picture facsimile, and TV programs from synchronous earth orbit. The first telephone conversations were between President John F. Kennedy and Nigerian Prime Minister Sir Abubaker Tafawa Balewa and other messages between U.S., Nigerian, and United Nations officials, Aug. 23, 1963. Transmission on Syncom 1 (launched Feb. 14, 1963) had failed on insertion into synchronous orbit. Syncom 3 was launched successfully Aug. 19, 1964. (nasa Release 73-140; A&A 1963)
Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. had received an $8.7-million Air Force contract for production and support services for Atlas propulsion systems, the Wall Street Journal reported. The systems would launch communications satellites for Communications Satellite Corp. {WSJ, 11/7/73, 10)
U.S. heart specialist Dr. Paul Dudley White sent the first telegram via satellite between the U.S. and the People’s Republic of China, to inaugurate direct communications between Peking’s General Administration of Telecommunications and the New York headquarters of Western Union International Inc. Dr. White, one of the first U.S. physicians to visit the PRC in 1972, sent greetings from U.S. physicians to their colleagues in China, via Intelsat-IV F-4 (launched Jan. 22, 1972). (NYT, 7/20/73, 27; ComSatCorp pio)
The U.S. and United Kingdom concluded an agreement on U.K. access to U.S. space launch capabilities. The U.K. would purchase boosters and launch services from NASA for satellite projects of the U.K. Dept, of Trade and Industry. Launches would occur at NASA launch sites in U.S. The first U.K. satellite launched under terms of agreement would be X-4 technology satellite scheduled for 1974 launch from Western Test Range, (nasa Release 73-11)
President Nixon congratulated recipients of the 1973 Federal Women’s Award at the White House. Among the recipients was Marjorie R. Townsend, Project Manager, Small Astronomy Satellite, Goddard Space Flight Center [see Feb. 22], (PD, 3/12/73, 233)
The Federal Communications Commission granted permission to Communications Satellite Corp. to contract for three satellites to be used for a maritime communications satellite system. A construction permit would be granted later. FCC stipulated that ComSatCorp must allow all carriers already providing maritime service to invest and participate in the entire system. (AP, W Star-News, 8/30/73, D6; fcc pio)
A Univ. of Alaska Geophysical Institute team headed by Dr. Gerd Windier was examining potential of high-resolution satellite images in providing information on Alaska’s environmental conditions and hazards in a one-year pilot project of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NO A A announced. The project was using radiometer images received twice daily at noaa’s Gilmore Creek Command Data and Acquisition Center near Fairbanks from Noaa 2 and 3 satellites launched for noaa by nasa Oct. 15, 1972, and Nov. 6, 1973. (noaa Release 73-243)
West Germany’s Aeros Aeronomy Satellite (launched by nasa Dec. 16, 1972) was adjudged a success by NASA. Prelauch objectives—to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of main absorption— had been satisfied. Four of the five scientific instruments had performed satisfactorily. (NASA prog off)
Communications Satellite Corp. held its 10th Annual Meeting of Shareholders in Washington, D.C. Board Chairman Joseph H. McConnell reported that its global system, through the fourth generation of Intelsat satellites, provided more than 260 communications pathways among earth station facilities in 49 countries. “Along these pathways flows a major portion of all international long distance communications—telephone, television, teletype, high speed data, and facsimile. Almost 100 countries, territories, and possessions are leasing satellite services on a full-time basis. High-quality telephone calls can be made to more than 20 countries that cannot be reached by cable. . . . Over 900 million people on six continents can see an important event on TV as it happens.” Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp President, said, “At the end of 1965 ... we were leasing 66 voice grade half circuits on a full-time basis. Today we are leasing 3,146,” (ComSatCorp Rpt to Shareholders)
NASA announced plans for a 1976 launch of a Laser Geodynamic Satellite (lageos). The satellite would provide information for mathematical models on the earth’s movements and strains which caused natural disasters such as earthquakes. The measurements made by the spacecraft would be accurate within 2 cm (0.75 in) of actual earth movement. LAGEOS would be a solid sphere weighing about 380 kg (835 lbs) and measuring 0.6 m (2 ft) in diameter. It would be fitted with 600 laser Tetroreflectors designed to permit accurate laser ranging from ground stations. Marshall Space Flight Center, under the overall direction of NASA’s Office of Applications, had been assigned definition and development responsibility for the satellite, (nasa Release 73-261)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) photos showing pollution spreading across Lake Champlain would be used in court as evidence against a factory accused of discharging pollution, the Washington Post reported. The case, brought by the state of Vermont against the state of New York and the International Paper Corp., would mark the first use of a satellite photo in legal action. The photo, of Lake Champlain from 900-km (560-mi) altitude, showed a brown circle extending 0.6 km (0.4 mi) from the New York shore and originating from an International Paper Corp. mill. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/8/73, A3)
The Nippon Electric Co. of Tokyo had won a contract to design and install the antenna and communications equipment for the first Swiss communications satellite station, the New York Times reported. The station was being built above the Rhone Valley in the Valais canton. (Lusinchi, NYT, 10/6/73) October 7—13:	The International Astronautical Federation (iaf) held its 24th Congress in Baku, U.S.S.R. In a message of greeting, the Soviet Council of Ministers said: “Nowadays, when important positive changes take place in international situations, ever more favourable opportunities for development of scientific communication, exchange of experience and uses of scientific achievements for practical needs of mankind open to scientists.” Academician Sergey Vernov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences said Soviet artificial satellites, placed simultaneously in different orbits, had facilitated studies of many regions of earth’s radiation belts, including those where no space station had been before. He hypothesized the existence of an “unstable radiation zone” beyond the outer radiation belt where Soviet Electron satellites had recorded a flux of electrons with energies over 150 000 ev. He believed the zone to be a necessary link in the formation of the earth’s radiation belts. Honorary guests Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander, and Soviet Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy, Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, and Vladimir A. Shatalov participated in an open discussion. Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. could be good and equal partners in conquering space. Stafford said cooperation in astp had already solved colossal technical problems. “And if we can solve problems in space we can, consequently, solve considerable problems on earth.” Soviet scientists reported on a man-plant interaction experiment in which four researchers spent six months in a closed biological environment simulating the earth’s biosphere. The Siberian test project, sponsored by the Krasnoyarsk Institute of Physics, had demonstrated that man could live in an artificial atmosphere created by green algae, fastgrowing wheat, and a variety of vegetables. The plants had been irrigated with sewage waste and with condensed moisture from the atmosphere. The researchers had breathed oxygen released by the plants, eaten the vegetables, and baked bread from the wheat during a simulated space trip in an underground chamber. A paper by Soviet specialists reported that an electric field might divert a flux of charged particles from a spacecraft. The spacecraft’s exterior surface might act as one of the field’s electrodes while the vacuum of outer space acted as an insulating medium, providing an effective radiation shield. Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Marshall Space Flight Center Associate Director for Science, cochaired two sessions on scientific spacecraft systems. The 7th International History of Astronautics Symposium included the papers “From Back Fire to Explorer I” by Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, Kennedy Space Center; “R. H. Goddard: Accomplishments of the Roswell Years (1930-1941)” by Frederick C. Durant III, Assistant Director for Astronautics, National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution; “High Energy Propulsion at naca Lewis Engine Research Laboratory” by John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; and “Early Photography from Rockets” by Frank H. Winter of the Air and Space Museum. Dr. Maxime A. Faget, Johnson Space Center Director of Engineering and Development, received the 1973 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of the International Academy of Astronautics for “playing a major role in developing the basic ideas and original design concepts that have been incorporated into all the manned spacecraft flown by the United States. . . . An expert on vehicles suitable for reentering the Earth’s atmosphere, he is particularly noted for his contributions to the basic configuration of the command module and to the development of the pressure-fed hypergolic engines used on the Apollo modules.” The meeting, attended by 1500 scientists from 29 countries, elected Dr. Charles Stark Draper, Director of the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, iaf President. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/8/73; msfc Release 73-137; nasa Release 73-200; nasa Hist Off; Agence France-Presse, W Post, 10/12/73, A30) October 8:	Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists began to measure stratospheric constituents up to 24 km (80 000 ft) using a Fourier interferometer aboard the British prototype of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft. Eight scheduled flights from Fairford, England, sponsored by the U.S. Dept, of Transportation, were to obtain information on the potential pollution effect of supersonic transports on the atmosphere. In earlier flights the interferometer had detected nitric oxide between 12 and 24 km (39 000 and 80 000 ft) at less than one part per billion. Nitric oxide was believed to be vital in maintaining ozone balance in the stratosphere, (jpl Release 670; JPL pio)
Tracking of earth-orbiting satellites by the long-range perimeter acquisition radar (par) of the Safeguard Ballistic Missile Defense facility at Grand Forks, N.D., had been achieved ahead of schedule, Armed Forces Journal reported. PAR construction had begun in 1970; power testing, in June. The site was scheduled to be handed over to the Armed Air Defense Command in October 1974 and to become operational in early 1975. (AFJ, 9/73, 24)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 607 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 292-km (181.4-mi) apogee, 217-km (134.8-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 72.2° inclination. The satellite reentered Nov. 22. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; SBD, 11/13/73, 66)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 625 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 340-km (211.3-mi) apogee, 187-km (116.2-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 3, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; 1/31/74; SBD, 1/2/74, 2)
The Air Force announced issuance of a $1 358 695, firm-fixed-price contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for special tooling for F-4 jet fighter aircraft, (dod Release 20-73) January 10—12:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 11th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in Washington, D.C. The Dry-den Research Award winner for 1973, Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Laboratory Space Sciences Div., delivered the Dryden Lecture “High Energy Astronomy.” The lecture, which carried $1000 honorarium, had been named in 1967 in honor of the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first nasa Deputy Administrator, who died in 1965. Dr. Friedman said high-energy astronomy was “almost exclusively the subject of space research.” X-ray astronomy to date had revealed about 125 discrete sources and a “diffuse background which spans the energy range from 100 ev to tens of Mev.” X-ray sources revealed included supernova remnants, pulsars, and binary systems in the galaxy. Extragalactic sources included radio galaxies, quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and clusters of galaxies. Gamma ray astronomy had shown “no evidence for antimatter within the universe.” (Program; Text) A committee established by aiaa to evaluate NASA’s space shuttle program reported its conclusion that a shuttle system, including both manned and unmanned flight, ought to be built. The committee recommended a research and applications module system with interchangeable modules that could be removed in space to become part of an orbiting laboratory. Other nations should be encouraged to participate in shuttle development, the committee said. (Tech Rev, 5/73, 55) Advanced applications of the shuttle were discussed by J. E. Blahnik of Science Applications, Inc., and D. R. Davis of ITT Research Institute. An exploratory study had concluded that use of the shuttle orbiter for advanced, manned, high-energy missions from low earth orbit should be competitive with other proposed concepts, if orbital and refueling requirements were satisfied by using normal shuttle missions to deliver propellant in addition to their payload. (Program) January 10—13:	The American Astronomical Society met in Las Cruces, N. Mex. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. Robert Howard said six-year observations through the 46-m (150-ft) solar telescope at Mt. Wilson Observatory had shown sections of the sun’s outer atmosphere to be in motion with respect to time. Movements had extended to 259 000 sq km (100 000 sq mi) of photosphere—the sun’s gassy surface—and had appeared to be east-west or west-east. Some motions had been calculated at 6257 km per hr (3888 mph) ; others, at 7300 km per hr (4536 mph). Cause and significance of the motion were unknown. At a press interview Dr. John C. Brandt, chief of the Goddard Space Flight Center Solar Physics Laboratory, said Indians in New Mexico, Arizona, and California nine centuries ago might have recorded a star explosion. Drawings on walls and ceilings of a cave at Chaco Canyon National Monument, N. Mex., closely resembled an explosion of July 4, 1054, as recorded by the Chinese. Similar drawings had been found in Arizona and California. (Alexander, LA Times, 1/11/73; AP, W Post, 1/14/73, A13) January 11:	Cosmos 543 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 309-km (192.0-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 24. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; SBD, 1/12/73, 54)
The retirement, effective Dec. 31, of Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator, and Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science, was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Dr. Newell had transferred to nasa in October 1958 from the Naval Research Laboratory, where he had been Science Program Coordinator for Project Vanguard, the Nation’s first satellite program, and Acting Superintendent of the Atmosphere and Astrophysics Div. He served four years as nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications before becoming Associate Administrator in 1967. Dr. Newell held the American Institute of Aeronautics’ Pendray Award, the American Astronautical Society’s Space Flight Award, the President’s Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service, and the nasa Distinguished Service Medal, among other honors. Dr. Fletcher said:	“Dr. Newell’s efforts in the space program antedate the birth of nasa. He has served this agency with distinction and dedication and he will be sorely missed.” Johnson, who had joined NASA from the Navy in 1960, had served as Deputy Associate Administrator of the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1970. He had assumed his present post in 1971. “Mr. Johnson has been an able and conscientious leader in advancing our unmanned space programs and we are sorry to see him go,” Dr. Fletcher said, (nasa Ann; nasa Releases 74^4, 74-5)
Unusual pulsed-noise signals detected by Soviet scientists at Gorky Univ. [see Oct. 16] might be from experimental U.S. Air Force communications satellites in highly elliptical Molniya-like orbits, Aviation Week & Space Technology said. Possible sources were satellites orbited March 21, 1971, and Aug. 21, 1973—thought to be test vehicles for the Air Force’s planned Satellite Data System. (Av Wk, 11/5/73, 47) The primary objectives were to place the spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with a local equator crossing time of 8:30 am to permit the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, make an in-orbit evaluation, and check out the spacecraft before turning operational control over to noaa’s National Environmental Satellite Service (ness) . Operational responsibility for the spacecraft was transferred to noaa Nov. 29. Excellent data were being returned. The orbit would permit regular, dependable daytime and nighttime meteorological observations in both direct-readout and stored modes of operation in support of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). Noaa 3 was the second operational spacecraft to provide temperature soundings of the earth’s atmosphere as well as direct-readout and globally recorded cloud-cover data. The three-axis-stabilized satellite carried redundant very-high-resolution radiometers, vertical-temperature-profile radiometers, and scanning radiometers. Noaa 3 was the fourth in the Improved tiros Operational Satellite series of second-generation meteorological satellites. The prototype had been Itos 1 (launched Jan. 23, 1970), and the first NOAA-funded spacecraft, Noaa 1, had been launched Dec. 11, 1970. Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) continued to provide meteorological data. The first series of spacecraft had included nine satellites—Essa 1 through Essa 9 (launched 1966-1969). The tos program was a joint NASA and Dept, of Commerce effort under a Jan. 30, 1964, agreement. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for the design and development of the spacecraft and ground systems, launch checkout and evaluation, tracking and data acquisition, and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle, ness was responsible for operating the spacecraft and processing the data, (nasa prog off; GSFC proj off) November 6:	Fourteen hairline cracks were found in the eight stabilizing fins of Skylab 4’s Saturn IB launch vehicle during a routine inspection at Kennedy Space Center. The cracks were discovered just after the Saturn rocket had been loaded with 157 cu m (41 500 gal) of fuel. Six of the fins had two cracks each, the two others one crack each, all at the juncture of the 5-m (16-ft) aluminum fins and the body of the launch vehicle. During rocket inspection, Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue practiced launch abort procedures in a simulator at Johnson Space Center. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/8/73, A3; AP, W Star-News, 11/7/73, B8)
The first direct TV transmission from the U.S.S.R. to Cuba was made. The Soviet Red Square Parade, telecast from Moscow, was transmitted via a Molniya satellite and a ground station in eastern Cuba. Regular TV and communications traffic was expected to begin in 1974. {Av Wk, 11/12/73, 9)
Soviet Academician Boris N. Petrov said in Moscow that India’s first scientific satellite—to be launched in late 1974—would study solar neutrons, gamma rays, and x-ray emissions from outer space and the earth’s ionosphere. It would be launched by a Soviet booster of the kind used for Intercosmos satellites. Subsequent Indian satellites would include those for meteorology and the study of natural resources. (SF, 2/74, 41)
Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched by NASA May 14) had become Space Object 1973—027A—one of 584 man-made earth satellites and 41 deep space probes constituting “the increasingly heavy and varied traffic in space,” the New York Times reported. The latest earth-orbital traffic count catalogued by the North American Air Defense Command’s Space Detection and Tracking System showed 341 U.S. earth satellites, 204 Soviet, 9 French, 6 Canadian, 5 British, 4 Japanese, 4 European Space Research Organization (esro) , 3 West German, 3 Italian, 2 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (nato), 2 Chinese, and 1 Australian. The oldest was Vanguard 1 (launched by NASA March 17, 1958). The heaviest traffic lay 160-965 km (100-600 mi) from the earth, where U.S. and Soviet scientific and military satellites orbited. Most remote was Pioneer 10 (launched by NASA March 2, 1972), which was 547 million km (340 million mi) from the earth. Nearly 2300 pieces of space “junk”—used rockets, heat shields, and disposable spacecraft parts—floated in earth orbit but no serious collision or traffic jam had occurred in space to date. Two Navy experimental satellites had come close enough to tip antenna booms in 1965, “a possible warning of problems to come.” (Wilford, NYT, 6/17/73, 4:4) June 18:	The first relay of a telecast across the U.S. by a domestic communications satellite was made. A cable TV program featuring House Speaker Carl B. Albert (D—Okla.) was transmitted from Germantown, Md., by American Satellite Corp. antenna via Canadian Anik 2 comsat to Anaheim, Calif., received by new mobile ground station, and delivered to cable TV systems. (SBD, 6/2/73, 292; Am Sat Corp pio)
Experiments by 50 European scientists at the European Nuclear Research Center (cern), near Geneva, had indicated that electromagnetism and the “weak” force of radioactive decay—two of nature’s four basic forces—might be expressions of the same phenomenon, the New York Times reported. The findings had been supported by experiments at the National Accelerator Laboratory near Batavia, 111. If accurate, the findings would support the long-sought goal of a “unified field theory” relating the four seemingly diverse forces, which also included gravity and the “strong” force that bound together particles of the atomic nucleus. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/30/73, 29) NASA and the Dept, of Defense were in the final phase of a joint study to determine the most efficient development method for the shuttle space tug, or upper stage, for high-energy orbit missions. “One consideration is the adaptation of existing stages such as the Agena, Centaur, or Tran-stage, which could be modified for use with the shuttle. Since the modification . . . would not satisfy all of the science, application and DOD requirements that are now projected for the 1980s, we are also examining costs and technical characteristics of new configurations which would have the performance capability required to accommodate the entire range of prospective payloads. It may be possible to phase these two Tug approaches in a way that will provide adequate transportation capability when needed while reducing near-term funding requirements. We . . . expect to reach a final decision by the end of this calendar year.” Dr. Fletcher presented 1973 Payload Model: Space Opportunities 1973—1991, a study of the number and kinds of payloads that could be launched through 1991 with the space shuttle and Spacelab using budgets at the FY 1973 level. The study was not a program plan but an estimate of kinds of payloads that could be flown. Dr. Fletcher felt “the full range of the space capability offered” by the Shuttle was even greater than the model indicated. Anticipated possible annual space payloads for all NASA programs and the user community, excluding DOD, began with 12 in 1973 and moved through 18 in 1974, 38 in 1980 (when the shuttle was to begin its operational phase), 61 in 1985, to 70 in 1990 and 59 in 1991. The 70 payload opportunities in 1990 included 21 automated and 27 sortie (Spacelab) payloads for nasa and 17 automated and 5 sortie for non-NASA, non-DOD users. Anticipated requirements through 1991 totaled 810 payloads, 572 for nasa and 238 for non-NASA, non-DOD users, nasa and other non-DOD agencies were expected to use 69% of the shuttle traffic and dod 31%. The model anticipated NASA automated payloads through 1991 might include 77 for astronomy, 43 for physics, 49 for planetary exploration, 8 lunar, 26 life science, 53 earth observations, 22 earth and ocean physics, 2 communications and navigation, and 6 space technology. Anticipated user totals were 120 automated communications and navigation payloads, 59 earth observations, and 9 earth and ocean physics. Possible nasa sortie payloads were forecast at 58 in astronomy, 52 in physics, 24 in earth observations, 43 in space processing, 24 in earth and ocean physics, 11 for communications and navigation, 28 in life science, and 46 in space technology. User sortie payloads might be 10 for space manufacturing and 40 foreign payloads. (Transcript) October 31:	The first powered flight of the X-24B lifting body was aborted when the igniters failed to function properly during the prelaunch sequence check. The B-52 aircraft and the captive X-24B returned to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., without mishap, (nasa prog off) October 31—November 22: The U.S.S.R. launched biological satellite Cosmos 605 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 400-km (248.6mi) apogee, 214-km (133-mi) perigee, 90.7-min period, and 62.8° inclination. Tass reported that Cosmos 605 carried white rats, steppe turtles, insects, fungi, and instruments to monitor their condition. Objectives of the mission were to study the effects of space on living organisms and to test life-sustaining systems for biological subjects. The spacecraft was recovered Nov. 22. Dr. Avetik I. Burnazyan, U.S.S.R. Deputy Minister of Public Health, said in a Pravda article on Nov. 9 that the satellite was a continuation of earlier Soviet experiments designed to gain statistically reliable data on the effects of weightlessness on individual cells of organisms and the effects of radiation on the genetic properties of organisms. Previous Soviet biological satellites included Cosmos 110 (launched Feb. 22, 1966, carrying two dogs for a 22-day mission) and Cosmos 368 (launched Oct. 8, 1970, carrying yeast cells, seeds, and onion bulbs all of which were exposed to radiation during a 6-day mission). (gsfc SSR, 10/31/ 73, 11/30/73; fbis-Sov, 11/1/73, Ul; 11/9/73, Ul; 11/13/73, Ul-U3; NYT, 11/25/73, 23; SBD, 11/2/73, 10) During October:	Selection of Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) to receive the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for 1973 was announced by the National Aeronautics Assn. The trophy would be presented Dec. 17 in Washington, D.C., for “leadership and inspiration to all elements of aviation in the United States, both military and civilian, and for serving as an articulate spokesman for American aviation and space in the Congress and throughout the world.” (naa News, 10/73, 1)
Definitive agreements drawn up to establish International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (intelsat) went into effect, replacing the interim arrangements in effect since August 1964. Under the agreements, intelsat would operate under a four-component structure of a Roard of Governors, Assembly of Parties, Meeting of Signatories, and an Executive Organ. The Roard would have primary responsibility for design, development, construction, establishment, operation, and management of the comsat system. The Assembly— composed of a representative of the government of each member nation—would meet every two years to consider matters of concern to the governments. The Meeting of Signatories—representatives of governments or telecommunications entities—would convene annually to consider operational and other matters of interest to investors. Each member of the Meeting would have one vote. The Executive Organ would be headed by a Secretary General responsible to the Roard of Governors for performance of financial and administrative services. Under the agreements, Communications Satellite Corp. would furnish technical and operating management services for intelsat for a six-year period ending Feb. 12, 1979. Services would be performed under policies set by the intelsat Roard of Governors. At the end of the ComSatCorp contract, intelsat would continue to contract with “one or more competent entities” to provide technical and operational management functions “to the maximum extent practicable.” Agreements called for election of a Director General by Dec. 31, 1976. The Roard of Governors would hold its first meeting in Washington, D.C., March 14. (Text; ComSatCorp Release, 2/1/73)
The Communications Subcommittee of the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization—a United Nations affiliate—voted 20-to-l in London to convene an international conference of governments in October 1974 on the establishment of a global maritime satellite communications service. The one dissenting vote was cast by the U.S., which argued that formation of a new organization was premature. The U.S. favored operation of a maritime service by the 80-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. (Av Wk, 3/26/73, 59-60) March 6:	The Air Force launched an unidentified reconnaissance satellite on an Atlas-Agena booster from Eastern Test' Range at 4:30 am EST. Orbital parameters: 36 679-km (22 791.3-mi) apogee, 35 855-km (22 279.3-mi) perigee, 1435-min (23.9-hr) period, and 0.2° inclination. (UN Registry; Today, 3/7/73)
The European Space Research Organization had awarded the British Aircraft Corp. Electronic and Space Systems—on behalf of the STAR consortium of European electronic and aerospace companies—a $24-million contract for design, development, and manufacture of Europe’s first geostationary scientific satellite, GEOS, Spaceflight reported. The three-year development program would include 15 companies in 10 European countries. GEOS, scheduled for a summer 1976 launch on a Thor-Delta booster, would carry nine scientific experiments to measure electric and magnetic fields and particle densities and distributions for two years. (SF, 10/73)	_
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 11-7 communications satellite from Baykonur into orbit with 39 860-km (24 767.9-mi) apogee, 503km (312.6-mi) perigee, 717.9-min period, and 62.8° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; Tass, fbis—Sov, 10/24/73, Ul; Sov Aero, 1/7/74, 4)
Aviation pioneer Roy W. Hooe died in Martinsburg, W. Va., at the age of 78. He had been a member of the five-man crew of the Question Mark, a trimotor aircraft which set a 151-hr endurance record during pioneer tests of mid-air refueling in 1929. Hooe had retired as an Air Force master sergeant in 1950 after 30 yrs in the Air Force and its predecessor flying services. (W Star & News, 4/21/73, A12) April 19:	The U.S.S.R., with the cooperation of the Polish People’s Republic, launched Intercosmos Copernicus 500 from Kapustin Yar to mark the 500th anniversary of the birth of the Polish scientist Nicolaus Copernicus. The satellite entered orbit with a 1518-km (943.2-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 102.1-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Copernicus 500—built by Soviet and Polish scientists and carrying Soviet, Polish, and Czechoslovakian instruments—measured solar radiation and characteristics of the earth’s ionosphere before reentering Oct. 15. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73, 10/31/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/20/73, LI; Warsaw pap, fbis—Poland, 4/25/73, G4; SBD, 4/20/73, 238)
Naval Air Test Center development of a rescue system to pinpoint the position of any downed aircraft anywhere on earth was reported by r/a Roy M. Isaman, Test Center Commander, in a telephone interview with the Associated Press. A distressed aircraft would use a transmitter of less than five watts to bounce a signal off a communications satellite in stationary orbit back to one of eight Navy navigation stations under construction. (B Sun, 11/30/73, A3)
Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, President of Communications Satellite Corp., announced organizational changes to strengthen new roles in domestic and international satellite communications. Three new vice presidents were elected by ComSatCorp’s Board of Directors: David C. Acheson, Senior Vice President and General Counsel; John A. Johnson, Senior Vice President; and George P. Sampson, Senior Vice President in charge of International Systems Division. The subsidiary COMSAT General Corp. was formed to carry out ComSatCorp’s U.S. domestic programs. It would be headed by John A. Johnson, President; Joseph H. O’Connor, Vice President and Treasurer; John L. Martin, Jr., Vice President; and Jerome W. Breslow, Secretary. ComSatCorp had formed the International Systems Div. to consolidate all activities related to the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s Global Satellite System. The division would be headed by George P. Sampson, Senior Vice President in charge of International Systems Div.; Richard R. Colino, Assistant Vice President for Technical Development and Support; and H. William Wood, Assistant Vice President for International Systems Operations. (ComSatCorp Release 73-9)
Cosmos 575 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 267-km (165.9-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 65.3° inclination. The satellite reentered July 3. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/22/73, 304)
A $110-million “fail safe” satellite system to monitor the 1290-km (800mi) Alaskan oil pipeline was being planned by rca Alaska Communications, Inc., United Press International quoted rca Corp. Board Chairman Robert M. Sarnoff as saying in Anchorage, Alaska. (NYT, 9/15/ 73, 11)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, testified on long-term objectives during the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization. Among effects of space and aeronautics on “all Americans and, to a degree, people throughout the world, in 1985,” he foresaw a rise in air cargo revenues from the current $1.6 billion per year to $14 billion per year, with development of automated handling and compatible aircraft. Trade and tourism would flourish with the use of hypersonic jet aircraft, “which we will be thinking about in 1985 and maybe other nations will have developed.” Such an aircraft could fly from Washington to Peking in l1/^ hrs. Hydrogen fuel that produced water rather than pollutant fumes would replace present aviation fuels. In space, Dr. Fletcher saw a proliferation of domestic satellites leading to economic use of long-distance telephone calls for “discussing almost anything.” Large-scale digital computers—spinoffs of the space age—would be used educationally; “computer-aided instruction is the coming thing. This is the quickest way to learn if we can afford to build the system, and by 1985, we think We can.” Other NASA objectives to be realized within the next 10 to 15 yrs were a satellite-operated search-and-rescue system that picked up signals from pocket-sized radios aboard life rafts, the use of space age sensors in preventive medicine and for rapid diagnosis, a global disaster-alert and relief-control system to monitor major disasters, biological space processing to separate viruses or bacteria in the production of vaccines, an international space laboratory, an international lunar expedition, and expanded planetary exploration. Dr. Fletcher said NASA could be called an environmental agency. “It is not just that space is our environment, but it is rather that . . . virtually everything we do, manned or unmanned, science or applications, helps in some practical way to improve the environment of our planet and helps us understand the forces that affect it. Perhaps that is our essential task, to study and understand the earth and its environment.” (Transcript)
Approval by both countries of results of the Feb. 12-17 Moscow meeting of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Working Group on the Natural Environment was announced by NASA. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed to a cooperative project for detecting features linked to changes in structure of the earth’s crust, for recognizing them on space images to develop a classification system, and for studying the relationship between the space imagery features and previously known subsurface geologic structures. The Group identified as a possible project development of remote-sensing methodology to determine vegetation productivity and agreed to develop a plan for a joint project to measure soil moisture content using microwave techniques. The U.S. would study a Soviet proposal to coordinate satellite water-temperature measurements with surface measurements obtained by a Soviet ship and to compare temperature, plankton, and color measurements by Soviet ships with U.S. satellite observations. The U.S.S.R. would study U.S. proposals to test a hydrological simulation model using remote-sensing data and environmental factors to infer the presence of shallow aquifers—areas of water underground and close to the surface. (NASA Release 73-106)
nasa launched an Aerobee 200A sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center astrophysics experiment to a 213.2-km (132.5-mi) altitude. The flight was nominal until 250 sec into the flight, when high-voltage problems developed. Final results would be determined after recovery of the payload, (nasa proj ; off) August 23-September 13: Intelsat-IV F—7 communications satellite was launched by nasa for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (intelsat). The 1379-kg (3041-lb) satellite was launched from Eastern Test Range at 6:57 pm edt by an Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle into a highly accurate transfer orbit with a 35 819.5-km (22 257.2-mi) apogee, 548.1km (340.6-mi) perigee, and 27.3° inclination. NASA’s primary objectives were to conduct design, performance, and flight-readiness reviews for the Federal Communications Commission; to ensure compatibility of intelsat spacecraft with NASA launch vehicles and launch environmental conditions; and to launch Intelsat-IV F—7 into a transfer orbit that permitted the apogee-kick motor to insert the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit on the equator over the Atlantic Ocean. During a design life of seven years the spacecraft would add 12 TV channels to those available between the U.S. and other countries and would increase the telephone capacity by 3500 two-way circuits. The apogee-kick motor was fired at 8:30 am edt Aug. 25 and Intel-sat-IV F—7 entered a near-circular orbit with a 35 778-km (22 231.4-mi) apogee, 35 773-km (22 228.3-mi) perigee, 1435.6-min period, and 0.4° inclination. The spacecraft was at 327° east longitude, drifting at 0.15° per day, and was expected to reach its planned station of 330° east longitude over the Atlantic Ocean within 10 days. NASA adjudged the mission a success Sept. 13. Intelsat-IV F—7 was the fifth communications satellite in the Intelsat IV series. Intelsat-IV F—4 (launched Jan. 22, 1972) was operating satisfactorily over the Pacific. Intelsat-IV F—5 (launched June 13, 1972) was operating over the Indian Ocean. The launch of Intelsat-IV F-6, postponed in May, was tentatively planned for December, (nasa prog off; gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; ComSatCorp, Tech Ops OIF & Launch Rep) August 24: The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 581 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 282-km (175.2-mi) apogee, 171-km (106.3-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The spacecraft reentered Sept. 6. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; 12/31/73; SBD, 9/6/73, 10)
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket—first in a series of two—from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 58.1-km (36.1-mi) altitude. The objectives were to measure the ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption for the evaluation of the Nimbus 4 (meteorological satellite launched April 8, 1970) backscatter uv experiment, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The rocket was launched during a Nimbus 4 overpass. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRl)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya II-6 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 39 284-km (24 410-mi) apogee, 441-km (274.0-mi) perigee, 705-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network. Western observers said later that Molniya II-6 also might transmit communications during a manned mission. Reports that Soviet tracking ships used for manned space flights had been sighted heading for their stations in the Atlantic possibly indicated an upcoming manned launch, (gsfc SSR, 7/31/73; fbis— Sov, 7/12/73, LI; SBD, 7/12/73, 58; NYT, 7/12/73, 4)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1-25 communications satellite from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 39 798-km (24 729.3-mi) apogee, 566-km (351.7-mi) perigee, 717.9-min period, and 64.8° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 11/15/73; SBD, 11/15/73, 96)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 597 from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 214-km (133-mi) apogee, 163-km (101.3-mi) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 12. Cosmos 597 was the second of seven Soviet satellites launched and returned in quick succession, leading to Western speculation that they were reconnaissance craft monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15]. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; SBD, 10/10/73, 193)
Explorer 48. Small Astronomy Satellite, launched for NASA by an Italian crew from the San Marco Facility Nov. 16, 1972, was adjudged a success. It had satisfied its primary objective of measuring the spatial and energy distribution of primary galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation for six months. Explorer 48 had observed a weak but finite component of high-energy gamma ray photons at galactic latitudes greater than 20° and a positive flux of gamma rays from the Crab Nebula, established as a source of 60 to 200 mev radiation. Spacecraft-control-section performance had excelled except for a degraded star sensor. An anomaly in the experiment readout system in late May had caused some degradation in the scientific data and a June failure in the experiment low-voltage power-supply circuitry had halted experiment data transmission. The first anomaly had corrected itself; attempts were being made to correct the second. (NASA prog off)
Problems of the European space program were described in a Science article by Dominique Verguese of Paris Le Monde: Since 1964 the European Space Research Organization and the European Launcher Development Organization had spent $1 billion on space. One third had been used for the successful launchings of seven satellites but the remainder had been spent on an expensive and yet unsuccessful booster. Interest in the booster had dissipated despite the French desire to continue and the offer to pay for 60% to 70% of the costs. At two European conferences on space (December 1971 and December 1972) plans were made to merge ELDO and ESRO into a single agency and to allow member nations to cooperate with NASA on building a sortie lab for the space shuttle. France had threatened to leave ESRO unless more emphasis was placed on applications satellites and ESRO closed its plasma laboratory in Italy and its sounding rocket range in Sweden. France had also insisted that more use be made of national facilities and teams rather than esro’s technical center. Final agreements and objectives on a European applications satellite could not be made because of the conflicting interests of each nation. Nor could it be decided what role national programs should play. But Europe had successfully launched 26 satellites and had acquired an industrial competence which could easily provide a firm basis for more ambitious projects. (Science, 3/9/73, 984-986)
The Air Force announced contract awards: a $5 992 290 cost-plus-fixed-fee award to General Dynamics Corp. for automatic-flight-control technology to enhance the maneuvering performance of fighter aircraft and a $5 406 500 fixed-price-incentive contract for A—7D aircraft mission simulator, aerospace ground equipment, spare parts, and data, (dod Release 597—73) December 13:	The Air Force launched Dscs F—3 and Dscs F-4 communications satellites from Eastern Test Range on one Titan IIIC booster, after two postponements to correct faulty instrumentation in the tran-stage of the launch vehicle. Dscs F-3 entered orbit with a 36 124.9-km (22 447-mi) apogee, 35 799.9-km (22 245-mi) perigee, 24-hr 5-min period, and 2.0° inclination. Dscs F-4 entered orbit with a 36 137.8-km (22 455-mi) apogee, 35 944.7-km (22 335-mi) perigee, 24-hr 9-min period, and 2.0° inclination. On Dec. 19 the press reported Air Force officials as saying that the satellites—part of the Defense Satellite Communications System Phase 2—were operating well in preliminary tests and would be positioned on operational stations at 13° W and 175° E in synchronous orbit approximately 80 days after launch. They would replace two DSCS 2 satellites launched Nov. 2, 1971, which had ceased operating. (Pres Rpt 74; SBD, 12/13/73, 226; 12/19/73, 250)
Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner and Grumman Corp. President John C. Bierwirth signed an agreement for the Grumman Aerospace Corp. to build 48 additional F—14 jet fighter aircraft at current contract prices. The Navy would not exercise further options under the current contract and would limit its purchases to 134 aircraft. Future purchases would be dependent upon congressional authorization and funding. (Text) March 9:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite by Titan IIID launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base into orbit with 263-km (163.4-mi) apogee, 152-km (94.5-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 95.7° inclination. The satellite reentered May 19. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/73; 5/31/73; NYT, 3/10/73, 31)
An emergency team put together by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Navy’s Fleet Weather Facility was aiding Jacques-Yves Cousteau’s damaged oceanographic research vessel Calypso. The Calypso, damaged by an iceberg Jan. 16 while exploring the Antarctic Ocean, would have to navigate the treacherous Drake Passage to the port of Ushuaia, Argentina, for repairs. The best conditions for the crossing passage would be determined from weather and ice floe information supplied by Nimbus and noaa weather satellite photos and fwf sea ice experts. Calypso had been instrumented to receive weather and satellite communications via Ats 3 (launched by NASA Nov. 6, 1967) by Goddard Space Flight Center for participation in an experiment with nasa [see Feb. 8]. (nasa Release 73—28) 0 Dr. Harold A. Rosen, codeveloper with Dr. Donald D. Williams of the first synchronous communications satellite (Syncom 1, launched Feb. 14, 1963), was named the “Southern California Inventor of the Year” by the Patent Law Assn, of Los Angeles. Dr. Rosen, manager of the commercial satellite systems division of the Hughes Aircraft Co. Space and Communications Group, held 18 patents for inventions related to the synchronous satellite. He was cited for “revolutionizing the satellite industry.” (LA Her-Exam, 2/16/73; SBD, 2/27/73, 301)
“I am aware of the need to maintain a strong, independent position as Science Adviser. I do not believe there will be insurmountable difficulties in dealing with this challenge. The newly established Science and Technology Policy Office will be the strong staff arm to help me carry out these new duties.......I have structured this office to maintain a maximum degree of objectivity and impartiality on science policy matters. ... I intend to call upon the significant and broad capabilities existent within the Foundation. ... I will also call upon other Government agencies for assistance whenever appropriate.” Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Executive Vice President for Research and Development and Planning with Gould, Inc., and former Presidential Science Adviser, on July 24 commented on nsf’s new role as “the Government’s highest level policy and advisory body with technical competence.” He saw the new arrangement at nsf as unstable, with “formidable and demanding” tasks. He saw two possible resolutions: NSF could restrict itself to science and academic research or it could transcend its historic past and achieve the national stature necessary to influence agencies and departments on technical programs that cut across operating boundaries and to serve as the technological beacon for other agencies. Science, Dr. David said, had not been downgraded. “Science and technology will continue to-be the warp and woof of our society,” but the national scene had changed. The former White House apparatus, 1957—1965, had been “more weighted toward space and military matters. Importantly, the apparatus was also responsible for development of programs to strengthen the infrastructure of science and engineering. ... In recent years we have seen the emphasis shifting toward consumer and public-oriented technologies in energy, transportation, health, education, natural resources, ecology and environment, and social systems. This shift brings with it a powerful new set of policy issues which illustrate the necessity to include not only science and technology, but also economic, social, legal, and political factors”—consumer markets, public preferences, and political beliefs, “matters with which the Federal establishment has little experience or expertise. It is in such matters that the new NSF office must exert leadership and influence.” (Transcript) July 18:	RCA Corp. announced that its subsidiaries RCA Global Communications, Inc., and RCA Alaska Communications, Inc., had signed a $3 750 000 contract with McDonnell Douglas Corp. to develop an uprated Thor-Delta launch vehicle to launch domestic satellites. It was the first time private industry had set design requirements and provided funds to modify a launch vehicle. Under contract terms, the Thor-Delta payload capacity would be augmented by 30% to enable RCA to place high-capacity domestic communications satellites into geostationary orbit above the equator economically, (rca Release)
A European Space Conference in Brussels failed to reach agreement on future programs, including the establishment of a European space agency. Spaceflight magazine later attributed the failure to divergent interests. The U.K. was concentrating on its maritime satellite, West Germany on the Spacelab, and France on the L-3S launcher. Sweden and the Netherlands required more time, and France was disappointed that the U.K. would not join West Germany in supporting the L-3S project. The meeting would reconvene in Brussels July 31 to meet NASA’s Spacelab decision deadline of Aug. 10. (SF, 9/15/73, 321)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Kennedy Space Center Director, announced that ksc would go on a single daylight shift from 8 am to 4:30 pm, effective Jan. 6, 1974, when the U.S. returned to daylight saving time by Presidential order. Other KSC measures to conserve energy were establishing a computer system to promote car pooling, limiting automobile speeds to 50 mph, curtailing drive-through tours, reducing lighting, and rescheduling visitor tours, (ksc Release 284-73) December 19:	The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites on a single booster from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters were: Cosmos 617—1485-km (922.7-mi) apogee, 1336-km (830.2-mi) perigee, 114.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 618—1488-km (924.6-mi) apogee, 1445-km (897.9-mi) perigee, 115.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 619—1490-km (925.8-mi) apogee, 1424-km (884.8-mi) perigee, 115.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 620—1496-km (929.6-mi) apogee, 1460-km (907.2-mi) perigee, 115.4-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 621—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1407-km (874.3-mi) perigee, 114.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 622—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1371-km (851.9-mi) perigee, 114.3-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 623—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1389-km (863.1-mi) perigee, 114.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 624—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1353-km (840.7-mi) perigee, 114.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. The Western press reported that the satellite system would operate in support of Soviet naval forces, providing maximum communications between ship and fleet commanders and naval operations within the U.S.S.R. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; Sov Aero, 12/24/73, 96)
The U.S. Postal Service issued an eight-cent stamp commemorating the 500th anniversary of the birth of Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus. First-day ceremonies, sponsored by the Smithsonian Institution and the National Science Foundation, were held at the National Museum of History and Technology. The first-day flight cover featured a photo of Orbiting. Astronomy Satellite Oao 3, named Copernicus and launched by nasa Aug. 21, 1972. (usps Philatelic Release 8; Flight cover)
The skeleton crew at aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office at Jackass Flats, Nev., would be disbanded by late June, snso Nevada Operations Chief John P. Jewett was quoted as saying. The facility would be shut down June 30 following termination of the nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program [see Jan. 5]. More than $1.2 billion had been spent on program since its inception in 1959. (upi, Orlando Sentinel, 1/7/73)	! January 8-23:	The U.S.S.R. launched its Luna 21 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 11:55 am local time (1:55 am est). The “automatic station” was separated from the “satellite” in earth orbit and placed on a close to the planned trajectory for the moon. Tass said the purpose of the mission was to “further scientific studies of the moon and near-lunar space.” During the flight to the moon all systems were reported functioning normally. On Jan. 12 Luna 21 entered lunar orbit with 110-km (68.4-mi) apolune, 90-km (55.9-mi) perilune, 1-hr 58-min period, and 60° inclination. Orbital corrections were made Jan. 13 and 14 and on Jan. 14 the spacecraft was placed in an elliptical orbit with a low point of 16 km (10 mi) from the moon’s surface. Luna 21 softlanded on the eastern fringe of the Sea of Serenity Jan. 16 (Jan. 15 est) and released the 840-kg (1850-lb) self-propelled Lunokhod 2 vehicle to make scientific investigations of the moon’s surface. Lunokhod 2 resembled its predecessor, Lunokhod 1 (placed on the moon Nov. 17, 1970, by Luna 17). It carried flags, pennants with Lenin’s has relief, state coat of arms, and the inscription “50th Anniversary of the U.S.S.R.” and was equipped with a control system, radio and TV devices, and scientific instruments including a French-made laser reflector. The reflector was designed to measure the distance between the earth and the moon to within 20-30 cm (10-12 in). Between Jan. 16 and Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2, powered by solar batteries and controlled from the ground by a special crew, photographed the lunar soil, rocks, and panoramic moonscape; determined chemical composition of the surface layer; measured the glow of zodiacal light near sun; and looked for cosmic dust. A highly skilled ground crew maneuvered vehicle over the shortest and safest routes, orienting it to a complex relief map of route. Lunokhod 2 was turned to bypass obstacles without decreasing speed. On Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2 was commanded to terminate operations in preparation for lunar night. Luna 17 was the first unmanned spacecraft to land on the moon and deploy an automatic lunar explorer. The last mission in the series, the unmanned Luna 20 (launched Feb. 14, 1972), had landed on the moon and returned to earth with lunar samples, (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; Tass fbis-Sov, 1/8/73, LI; 1/15-19/73, LI; 1/22-23/73, LI; 1/26/73, 4; SBD, 1/9/73, 38; Shabad, NYT, 1/17/73, C14) January 8:	Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, nasa Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) Program Director, was quoted by Aviation Week & Space Technology as saying U.S.S.R. would use a U.S.-supplied very-high-frequency (vhf) transceiver on Soyuz spacecraft during rendezvous and docking maneuvers with Apollo spacecraft in July 1975 mission. Transceivers had been used in lunar modules for Apollo rendezvous and docking in lunar orbit. The U.S. also would build a receiver for Apollo spacecraft that could operate on Soviet communication frequencies and might lend to the U.S.S.R. equipment for use by cosmonauts and astronauts during joint portions of mission. Dr. Petrone had said NASA engineers, in discussions with Soviet engineers, had noted that necessity of concentrating on interpreter for exchange of technical information had made them more aware of technical problems than they would have been in direct English conversation. March meeting of U.S. and Soviet ASTP planners would consider flammability problems. (Av Wk, 1/8/73,
A New York Times editorial praised Federal Communications Commission policy in authorizing construction of communications satellites: “Fortunately, the F.c.c. has not approved one chosen entity or single system but has decided to throw open the airwaves to various competitive groups.” There should be no corporate dominance of systems that depended on Federal funds. As fcc developed its open skies policy for satellites, “it should also consider the use of educational and public service broadcasts on a free or reduced-rate basis. Here is where the main ‘profit’ should accrue from quasi-public satellite communications.” A second Times editorial praised the agreement announced Dec. 5, 1972, that permitted the U.S. firm rca Global Communications, Inc., to use channel of Canada’s Anik 2 satellite to provide domestic communications service in the U.S.: The agreement signaled “a beam of light in broadcasting and business communications across the international oceans of the world.” In the near future Americans might receive some programs originating in Canada; later, from Europe. “Operating procedures and telecommunications systems must be synchronized; problems of copyright and aerial piracy must be overcome. And then international agreements would have to be hammered out as difficult as those on human and other national rights that have been dormant for years in the United Nations. Intelsat, a temporary arrangement between nations interested in orbital systems, will soon have the machinery for regular coordination with a secretariat in Washington.” (NYT, 1/13/72, 28) January 14:	A building boom of nuclear power plants in 1972 was reported by the New York Times. The Atomic Industrial Forum, a group seeking to foster development of atomic energy for peaceful uses, had reported 33 plant commitments made, with a total capacity of 36.3 million kw. The Atomic Energy Commission had reported 29 nuclear power plants operable in the U.S. with a total capacity of 14.7 million kw, or 3.8% of total electric utility capacity. Fifty-five plants with a total capacity of 47.8 million kw were being built and 76 with 80-million-kw capacity were planned, aec had predicted that in 1980 nuclear power capacity would be 23% of total U.S. electric capacity. (Smith, NYT, 1/14/73, 5:3) January 14-17:	The American Chemical Society held a regional meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Cyril A. Ponnamperuma and Dr. Peter M. Molton, Univ. of Maryland chemists, presented results of studies in which a Jupiterlike atmosphere of methane and ammonia had been produced in a flask at the University’s Laboratory of Chemical Evolution. Results had shown the chemicals necessary for establishing life probably existed in Jupiter’s upper atmosphere. “Jupiter today may have the kind of atmosphere that the primitive earth had 4 billion or 4% billion years ago,” Dr. Ponnamperuma, former NASA specialist in life chemistry, said. Further studies had shown that bombarding primitive chemicals with electrical discharges triggered complex chemical reactions forming aminonitriles—precursors of purines and pyrimidines, main components of dna and RNA, chemicals dictating the genetic make-up of every living cell. Aminonitriles combined with water became amino acids, ingredients of all proteins. Ponnamperuma and Molton said they would ask NASA to explore Jupiter’s atmosphere during the planned 1977 flyby mission to that planet. If a scientific probe could find the same life building blocks as produced in the laboratory, life in Jupiter’s clouds would be almost a certainty. (Kirkman, W Star & News, 1/17/73, A9; Cohn, W Post, 1/18/73, A14) January 15:	President Nixon had sent Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, a letter praising nasa’s contribution to the Administration program to assist minorities in finding a profitable role in the U.S. economic system, NASA Activities reported. (NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 6)
The appointment of French engineer Robert L. Mory as European Space Research Organization (esro) Sortie Lab liaison officer at Marshall Space Flight Center was announced by msfc. Mory had been esro launcher coordinator for NASA launches of ESRO scientific satellites, a member of the commission to create esro in February 1963, and an esro member since April 1964. (msfc Release 73—72)
nasa Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on the scheduled spring 1974 launch of the Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications hearings on research into short-term weather phenomena. Based on utility demonstrated by Applications Technology Satellites for storm monitoring, the first operational prototype geostationary meteorological satellite was a forerunner of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) system. Once the satellites were placed in orbit and checked out by NASA, they would be turned over to NOAA as a part of the operational system, which could observe the earth’s surface day and night, using visible-light and infrared sensors, and acquire in situ data from ocean buoys, aircraft, ships, river stage stations, and other ground-based remote stations. The GOES system—of two satellites in geostationary orbit viewing the western U.S. and Pacific Ocean area and the eastern U.S. and Atlantic area—would provide near-continuous surveillance of all tropical Atlantic storms, all tropical storms of the central and eastern Pacific Ocean, and all storms of observable size within the limits of the U.S., its territories, and its surrounding coastal waters, except Alaska. Improved sensors were expected to provide new and improved data on severe storm causes and development. (Transcript)
Cosmos 563 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 306-km (190.1-mi) apogee, 190-km (118.1-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65.2° inclination. The satellite reentered June 18. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/7/73, 211)
The U.S.S.R. had launched three times as many reconnaissance satellites as the U.S. during 1972 but had achieved only 25% more time in orbit because of the expanding U.S. use of long-endurance “Big Bird” spacecraft, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The U.S.S.R. had obtained 366 days in orbit for its Cosmos satellites; the U.S. total was 295 days. An improved design of U.S.S.R. reconnaissance satellites had been used for 80% of the launches, the magazine said. The new design provided for ejection of hardware—probably a vernier propulsion unit —one or two days before spacecraft recovery. The propulsion unit was used to change the spacecraft orbital path to bring it directly over the ground target. Spacecraft might also be equipped with high-resolution, narrow-field-of-view cameras for a close-look mission. Three of a total eight U.S. launches had been new-generation Big Bird satellites equipped with a giant high-resolution camera, the magazine said. The remaining satellites had been launched by a Titan IIIB-Agena booster, while the number of launches using the Thorad booster had continued to decline. The mission of the Titan IIIB-launched spacecraft was probably changing from mainly close-look to both close-look and search-and-find missions and used as gap fillers for the high-cost Big Birds. (Av Wk, 2/12/18, 50-51) February 12-17:	The NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on the Natural Environment met in Moscow to review progress and plan continued cooperation in geology and geomorphology; vegetation, soils, and land use; water, snow, and glaciology; microwave techniques; and oceanology. Delegations were led by NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications Leonard Jaffe and Soviet Academician Yu. K. Khodarev. (nasa Release 73-106) February 13:	Pioneer-G, the second Jupiter-mission spacecraft, arrived at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for the opening of the launch window on April 5. If successfully launched with an accurate trajectory in the first few days of window, the spacecraft, designated Pioneer 11, might be programmed to acquire sufficient speed from the Jupiter flyby to continue to Saturn. When the spacecraft reached the Jupiter vicinity in January 1975, Jupiter and Saturn would be nearly aligned. The spacecraft could, under favorable conditions, acquire part of Jupiter’s orbital velocity during the flyby to speed it to Saturn. The predecessor Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972) had been the first spacecraft to undertake an outer planetary mission. It was due to arrive at Jupiter in December 1974. (itsc Release 27-73)
The West German government announced it was withdrawing from the multinational European Launcher Development Organization (eldo). eldo had been building the Europa II launcher to launch a communications satellite into earth orbit Oct. 1, but the project collapsed with West Germany’s defection. (Kent, latns, M Her, 6/1/73)
The Federal Communications Commission authorized Western Union Telegraph Co. to build the first domestic satellite communications system in the U.S. Six other proposals were pending and fcc had indicated it would approve “all qualified applicants.” (Jacobs, WSJ, 1/31/73, 1)
The U.S.S.R. launched Oreol 2 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 1974-km (1226.6-mi) apogee, 399-km (247.9-mi) perigee, 109.1min period, and 73.9° inclination. The satellite, a Soviet-French cooperative mission, would continue the program begun by Oreol 1 (launched Dec. 27, 1971) to study the upper atmosphere at high latitudes and the nature of the polar lights, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; Tass, fbis~-Sov, 12/27/73, Ul; UN Registry)
American Telephone & Telegraph Corp. planned to sell its stock ownership in the Communications Satellite Corp. to the public, the Washington Star and Daily News reported, at&t had purchased 2 895 750 shares, 29% of the total, in 1964 and would have to sell as a condition set by the Federal Communications Commission for participation in a domestic satellite system. (W Star & News, 3/22/73, A20)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 558 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 491-km (305.1-mi) apogee, 267-km (165.9-mi) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 70.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Dec. 22. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; 12/31/73; SBD, 5/18/73, 108)
The Air Force announced award of a $2 056 889 cost contract to Utah State Univ. to study disturbed and undisturbed infrared atmosphere. Rocketborne instruments .would measure optical and infrared emissions, both natural and those stimulated by atmospheric dosing from a rocket-borne electron source, (dod Release 113-73) March 5—8:	nasa’s Fourth Annual Lunar Science Conference, at Johnson Space Center, was attended by more than 750 scientists from the U.S. and 12 foreign countries. Visitors included scientists from the U.S.S.R. who presented papers on Apollo lunar samples received from the U.S. At the opening session Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator said, “I can see at least a decade of fruitful analysis, synthesis, and integration of the information locked up in the material brought back and still coming back from the scientific stations left on the moon” in the Apollo program. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, California Institute of Technology scientist, described “lunar cataclysm.” Lunar dust brought back by Apollo astronauts had been estimated to be as old as 4.5 billion yrs. But most lunar rocks were less than 4 billion yrs old and none were younger than 3 billion yrs. The best explanation was that 3.9 billion yrs ago the moon was battered and bombarded on an unprecedented scale, creating so much heat that old rocks were destroyed and a new generation of rocks was created. Since then the moon might have experienced minor volcanic eruptions but nothing like that period of cataclysm. Some scientists believed the moon had cooled and gone into a period of hibernation. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of the State Univ. of New York said even the orange soil found by Apollo 17 astronauts had turned out to be 3.71 billion yrs old, an age disappointing to scientists who had believed the moon had been formed by more recent volcanic activity. Dr. Keith A. Howard, U.S. Geological Survey geologist, compared the lunar landslide found near the Apollo 17 landing site to a large, high-velocity avalanche on earth. Dr. Howard suggested that gas within the lunar soil had been released during the slide. Apollo 17 samples would be searched for evidence of fluids. One Apollo 17 instrument placed on the lunar surface had made an atom-by-atom search for evidence of lunar atmosphere. Although the moon had no atmosphere, traces of argon, neon, and helium had been found. Dr. John H. Hoffman, associate professor of physics at the Univ. of Texas, said only argon appeared to have been generated from the moon’s interior. Neon and helium apparently had been deposited by the solar wind. Conference attendees unanimously voted to congratulate NASA on completion of the Apollo program by sending a letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: The conception, design, and implementation of lunar exploration represented “an extraordinary human and technological achievement.” To explore another planet, it had been necessary for man “to achieve many successive levels of technological capability and to surpass formidable barriers. This was accomplished brilliantly by the dedicated engineers and astronauts of NASA in conjunction with skilled management. On this technical base a new branch of science has been built.” (Transcript; Goddard News, 3/73, 2; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; NASA Activities, 4/15/73, 67) March 5-9:	More than 1000 administrators, congressmen, and government, industry, and university scientists attended the Erts 1 Earth Resources and Technology Satellite Symposium sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center in New Carrollton, Md. Two hundred papers presented results from Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) experiments in agriculture and forestry, mineral resources and geology, environmental surveys, land-use mapping, and marine surveys. Dr. Marian Baumgardner, scientist at the Purdue Univ. Laboratory for the Applications of Remote Sensing, said results from Erts 1 study of semi-arid regions suggested that the satellite could identify and map vegetative, species, and management differences in range lands; gross soil patterns and differences related to agricultural and land-use-management problems and practices; areas of surface water and changes related to ground water recharge; crop damage by hail and windstorms; and areas of bare soil and related problems of erosion and conservation. Dr. William A. Fischer, U.S. Geological Survey scientist, said data from an Erts 1 study of Alaska had reinforced recent plate tectonic theories of a continuing mobility in the earth’s crust. The satellite had mapped fractures previously unknown or not put together as continuous structures in the earth’s crust. The fractures indicated “there has been a fundamental movement, extending deep down into the crust.” Dr. John Miller of the Univ. of Alaska said seismic data and Erts 1 identification of previously unknown fractures “has been an important input to the design of a bridge structure across the Yukon River . . . and possibly the pipeline.” (Transcript)
The B-l development program director, m/g Douglas T. Nelson (usaf), told the press in Washington, D.C., that construction of the swing-wing strategic bomber had fallen behind schedule, forcing a nine-month postponement of a decision on whether to produce B-ls at an estimated $54 million each. The decision date had been rescheduled for May 1976. First flight of a B-l prototype had been rescheduled from April to June 1974. B—1 prime contractor Rockwell International Corp. had been “falling noticeably behind schedule” in installing subsystems because it had had to spend more time than anticipated on assembling the airframe. By slowing the development program the Air Force hoped to avoid a program cost increase during the current fiscal year, but development problems would result in a $78-million total increase, to bring the total development cost to $2.79 billion. (WSJ, 7/13/73) July 13:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by a Titan HID booster into orbit with a 273.6-km (170-mi) apogee, 154.5-km (96-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 96.2° inclination. Press reports termed the spacecraft a “Big Bird” photo-reconnaissance satellite. The satellite reentered Oct. 12. (Pres Rpt 74; Av Wk, 8/27/73, 30)
The European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) Council, meeting in Paris, agreed to defer its final decision on the fate of the Europa II launcher until a further meeting, scheduled for March 30. France advocated continuing the project to provide a launch vehicle for communications satellites. West Germany said it desired to leave the Europa program. (SF, 4/73, 212)
A decision by de Havilland Aircraft of Canada Ltd. to build the world’s first short takeoff and landing (stol) passenger transport aircraft was reported by the Washington Post. The firm would shortly begin work on two prototypes of 48-passenger, turboprop DHC—7 aircraft to be test-flown within two years. The aircraft would be certifiable by 1975. The Canadian government had approved $80 million for development of the DHC—7, designed for routes under 800 km (500 mi). The aircraft would operate from 600-m (2000-ft) runways with minimal noise and pollution. (Botwright, W Post, 1/21/73, L2) January 22:	Former President Lyndon B. Johnson died of heart attack in Austin, Tex., at the age of 64. During his senatorial career preceding his election to the Vice Presidency in 1961, Johnson had served in 1957 as Chairman of the Prepardeness Investigating Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Armed Services, where he had instituted an inquiry into the status of U.S. satellite and missile programs. Hearings led to establishment Feb. 6, 1958, of the Senate Special Committee on Space and Astronautics with Johnson as Chairman. The Special Committee prepared the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 establishing NASA (effective Oct. 1, 1958). Before passage of the Space Act July 29, 1958, the Senate created the permanent Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences July 24. Johnson became first chairman—the position he held until 1961. Johnson was Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council 1961—1963 and was instrumental in persuading President John F. Kennedy to select attainment of a manned lunar landing within the decade as a national goal. Johnson had become 36th U.S. President on assassination of President Kennedy in November 1963 and had seen the first successful manned circumlunar flight, made by Apollo 8 Dec. 21—27, 1968, before he left office in January 1969. (W Post, 1/23/73, Al; CR, 1/29/73, S1467)
NASA’s 15th anniversary year—memorable for advances in earth resources technology, aeronautics progress, expanded international cooperation in space, and increased promise for future manned and unmanned planetary exploration—boosted the U.S. space program from the spectacular orbit of Apollo lunar exploration to a steady program of extended service to science and mankind. Skylab’s triumph heralded the approach of the shuttle era that would weld with the earth the vast regions of near-earth space, extending man’s transportation system into regions beyond land, sea, and air. The newest Pioneer probes began penetration into the mysteries of outer planetary space. Budget restrictions in line with President Nixon’s January 1250-billion target for total Government spending slowed space shuttle manpower buildup, suspended work on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory, and required phase-out of communications satellite work and curtailment of work on nuclear propulsion. But Skylab, the space shuttle, the scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the Viking, the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, and many applications and aeronautics projects were retained in a balanced and productive program. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for the past seven years and member of the NASA staff since October 1958, retired at the end of the year. Dr. Newell had been Science Program Coordinator in the Nation’s first satellite program, the Naval Research Laboratory’s Project Vanguard, before establishment of NASA. Tight funding and the near completion of the Skylab missions brought a net reduction in NASA Civil Service employees of 1646, including retirements, during the calendar year, with a total 25 598 on board Jan. 5, 1974. Headquarters employees dropped by a net change of 80, Kennedy Space Center by 117, Johnson Space Center by 110, Marshall Space Flight Center by 374, Ames Research Center by 49, Flight Research Center by 13, Langley Research Center by 62, Lewis Research Center by 494 (with the phasing down of Plum Brook Station), Goddard Space Flight Center by 289, and Wallops Station by 14. aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office was closed with the end of the nerva program. Further reductions of 628—including 405 at msfc and 200 at LeRC—were scheduled in 1974, to bring the FY 1974 end-of-year total to the required 24 970 ceiling. Aerospace industry employment in the Nation increased to 946 000 in June but declined to 935 000 by the year’s end. Techniques developed for aerospace activities were applied to earthquake prediction, development of residential solar heating, and fuelsaving integrated systems for housing. NASA added 550 technical briefs to its more than 5000 technical innovations already available for U.S, industry use. More than 68 000 U.S. industrial and commercial firms requested additional data on these innovations. Some 3000 firms spent $625 000 for special assistance from nasa’s Regional Dissemination Centers; 1500 firms purchased 1891 computer programs and related documentation for $221 530. NASA liberalized its patent-licensing procedures to speed technology transfer and during 1973 five exclusive patent licenses, the largest number since the program’s inception, were granted. A nasa liaison office was opened in New York City to work directly with city agencies on public safety, drug detection, and fire prevention. A rechargeable heart pacemaker was developed under nasa auspices by the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Electronic components designed for space use were incorporated in the device, which could be recharged at home by the patient, eliminating the need for surgery every two years to replace conventional devices. A new radio transmitter temperature pill allowed doctors to check localized internal body temperature changes. A portable visual testing device permitted early detection of eye disorders. A test hospital room for paralyzed patients used space-developed devices for remote operation of communications systems and appliances. The nasa FY 1974 appropriation of $3,002 billion was $13.9 million below the budget request, $62.4 million below the $3.0645-billion FY 1973 authorization, and $406 million below the FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion. (A&A 1972; A&A 1973; Aerospace, 2/74, 6-11; nasa Off Comptroller; nasa Off of Admin; NASA SP-5119; nasa Release 73281)
Preliminary data from the May 17 Plowshare underground nuclear blast in western Colorado indicated the blast had not damaged vast oil shale deposits in the area, Atomic Energy Commission spokesman Dr. Charles Williams told the press in Rio Blanco, Colo. Oil industry officials had claimed the blast could damage the shale, a future energy source, (upi, W Post, 5/25/73, A3) May 23—June 6: The 16th Annual Meeting of the Committee on Space Research (cospar) was held in Constance, West Germany. Data from the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite launched by nasa July 23, 1972, was presented in a three-day symposium on applications of space techniques to monitoring environmental problems. Recently analyzed data from the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7-19, 1972) necessitating changes in existing lunar models were presented during working group meetings. Other topics included space biology, astronomical experiments conducted by space vehicles, and data from planetary explorations. The National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council’s Space Science Board submitted its report United States Space Science Program, including progress in NASA’s geodetic satellite program. The program continued to provide essential ingredients in support of the emerging earth and ocean physics applications program (eopap), which would make geodetic satellite measurements for a global geometric network of reference points to a 10-m (33-ft) accuracy, refine knowledge of the gravity field for determination of geoid features of 1000 km (620 mi) accurately to about 10 m (33 ft), and evaluate the geodetic instruments used. The U.S.S.R. presented its report Space Research Performed in the USSR in 1972, including data from Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971, to orbit the moon). Meteoric particles near the moon were found not to exceed their density in interplanetary space. The moon’s perturbing effect on the earth’s magnetic loop and on interplanetary magnetic fields of solar origin were confirmed. Analysis of the sample collected by the Feb. 14-25, 1972, Luna 20 mission showed that the primary rocks of continental regolith were chiefly anorthosite rocks which sharply distinguished “continents” from “maria.” The sample contained finely dispersed metal iron of very high corrosion resistance, just as found in material from Luna 16 and Apollo 11 and 12. (nasa Release, 3/23/73; nasa pio; US text; jprs 59778, trans of USSR rpt) May 24:	President Nixon sent a message to the first Skylab crew on the eve of its Skylab 2 launch to join the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop, launched May 14: “Already the courage and ability which you and your colleagues have shown in coping with the initial difficulties of the mission have given us a great sense of confidence in the Skylab team. Through those efforts you have shown the world that man is prepared to meet and overcome the challenges of space.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/26/73, Al)
Western Union Telegraph Co. announced it had received authorization from the Federal Communications Commission to construct four more earth stations for the terrestrial segment of its westar domestic communications satellite system. It would build on sites near Atlanta, Ga.; Chicago, 111.; Dallas, Tex.; and Los Angeles, Calif. The first westar earth station was under construction at Vernon Township, N.J. (Western Union Release, 6/14/73)
Cosmos 554 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 329-km (204.4-mi) apogee, 171-km (106.3-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The spacecraft reentered May 27. Western observers believed it was a reconnaissance satellite and that it had exploded or been exploded during recovery. By the end of May more than 180 pieces had been recorded by tracking stations, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73; 5/31/73; O’Toole, W Post, 5/19/73, A12; SBD, 4/20/73, 285; 5/21/73, 116)
The European Space Research Organization had begun negotiations with Communications Satellite Corp. and RCA Global Communications, Inc., to select a corporate partner that would own the U.S. portion of its proposed experimental communications satellite system, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Five companies had submitted bids to the ESRO competition. A final choice would be made before June. (Av Wk, 4/16/73, 9)	_	_	__
Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory held the first public demonstration of its new heart pacemaker that used electric and electronic components designed by NASA for spacecraft use. The new pacemaker, smaller and longer lasting than conventional models, could be implanted more quickly and easily. It had no life-limiting components or radioactive emissions, was immune from outside interference sources, and could be recharged by patients at home. It incorporated modified space satellite power cells, (nasa Release 73—150; Cohn, W Post, 8/8/73) August 8:	Spare-time diversions of the astronauts aboard the Orbital Workshop in the May 25-June 22 Skylab 2 mission and in Skylab 3 since July 28 launch were described in a Christian Science Monitor article. Skylab 3 Astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, the first physicist in space, had been fascinated by the zero-g antics of his spiders Arabella and Anita and his mummichog minnows. Skylab 2 Astronaut Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had experimented with a big blob of water which floated before him instead of splashing on the spacecraft deck. The blob had taken on the form of the sun and planets as he spun it in space. He had blown it into a bubble with a straw and then had blown bubbles within the bubble. His Skylab 2 colleague, Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., had discovered that centrifugal force could impel him around the weightless spacecraft upright if he got himself off to a fast enough start racing around the Workshop. Other astronaut pastimes included “marooning” (doing acrobatics in remote sections of the spacecraft), “hamming it up” for TV and “home movies,” reading novels and poetry, ricocheting weightless rubber balls around the laboratory, and flying paper airplanes. (Salisbury, CSM, 8/8/73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 560 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 325-km (201.9-mi) apogee, 178-km (110.6-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite reentered June 5. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; 6/30/73; SBD, 5/30/73, 162)
The Air Force announced the award of $13 974 000 firmfixedpriceincentive contract to Boeing Co. for Minuteman force modernization for FY 1973. (dod Release 61-73) February 3:	The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—23 communications satellite from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 39 772-km (24 713.2mi) apogee, 578-km (359.2-mi) perigee, 717.6-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite was to help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 2/6/73, LI; SBD, 2/6/73, 198; gsfc SSR, 2/28/73)
Cosmos 576 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 331-km (205.7-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered July 9. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; 7/31/73; SBD, 6/29/73, 333)
An Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial commented on the July 23 anniversary of the launch of NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite. Its first year of operation “has proved that space technology has produced yet another useful tool for man to improve his life on earth. The erts experiment has shown—at a relatively modest cost of $160 million—that it is feasible to measure, catalogue and monitor the contents of the earth’s crust.” It had also yielded “more pertinent information faster and cheaper than all previous methods of tackling this job in the limited areas where it was possible.” Erts 7’s most important contribution probably would be “the tremendous capability it can provide for man to detect, monitor and control the sources of pollution that are poisoning his environment.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/30/73, 7) July 30—August 3:	Wallops Station used a Boeing 737 jet aircraft from Langley Research Center to measure aircraft noise characteristics for comparison with existing noise prediction techniques. The primary objective of the study—part of a Federal effort to understand and reduce aircraft noise pollution—was to obtain data on noise from aircraft landing and takeoff procedures close in and at long distances from airports. The data would be used to update existing analytical techniques. (Wallops Release 73-8) July 31:	At a European Space Conference meeting in Brussels, aerospace ministers from 11 countries decided to proceed with Spacelab development, linking with NASA’s shuttle program, as part of a European space “package deal.” The agreement also included development of the proposed French L-3S launcher, development of the MAROTS experimental maritime communications satellite, and creation of a new single European Space Agency (esa) by April 1, 1974. The new agency would merge die European Space Research Organization (esro) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo). (nasa Release 73191; Gatland, GSM, 8/28/73; W Post, 8/73/A3)
nasa’s Explorer 48 Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Nov. 16, 1972, from Italy’s San Marco Equatorial Range) successfully completed a two-month comprehensive study of celestial gamma rays. Its gamma ray detector had been turned on Nov. 19, 1972, and had observed gamma rays in the region of the galactic center, galactic plane, and various x-ray sources. A sky map of gamma rays would be prepared. (nasa Release 73-17)
Cosmos 555 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 230-km (142.9-mi) apogee, 216-km (134.2-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 81° inclination. The satellite reentered May 7. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73, 5/31/73; SBD, 4/30/73, 333)
Dr. Wolf V. Vishniac, Univ. of Rochester microbiologist and biological scientist in NASA’s Viking Mars lander program, died at age 51 after falling down a steep slope during a scientific expedition to Antarctica for NASA. Dr. Vishniac was studying how microbes multiplied in the arid Antarctic soil. He had been a member of NASA’s Lunar and Planetary Missions Board 1967—1970. He had served on the Office of Manned Space Flight’s Joint Editorial Board on Space Biology and Medicine since 1965 and was coediting Volume One of “Space Biology and Medicine.” He had been a member of the Viking Biology Team since 1969, had served on the Lunar Sampling Analysis Team in 1968 and 1969, and had been active on the Space Sciences Board of the National Academy of Sciences, (nasa Release 73-277; AP, NYT, 12/ 13/73, 48) December 10-14:	More than 120 papers by scientists worldwide were presented at the Third Earth Resources Technology Satellite Symposium sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center. The Symposium highlighted data from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by nasa July 23, 1972), which had provided more than 100 000 images of the earth’s surface. Also emphasized was the extension of scientific techniques and findings discussed in a March symposium, including applications directly benefiting the public in dealing with local and regional resource problems, (nasa Release 73—271; gsfc pio) December 11:	Mariner 10, NASA’s two-planet probe launched Nov. 3 toward Venus and Mercury, had discovered that the gas remnants of the exploding star Gamma Velorium in the Gum Nebula were twice as hot as scientists had expected, the Washington Post reported. Instruments aboard the spacecraft had detected ultraviolet radiation from the nebula so intense that it corresponded to temperatures as high as 56 000 K (100 000°F), suggesting that some stars were undergoing even more violent nuclear reactions than expected. Dr. Bruce Murray, California Institute of Technology scientist, was surprised that so old a nebula was still radiating any detectable heat. The discovery might be “the start of a whole new field of astronomy. . . . Never before have we been able to detect interstellar radiation associated with this temperature range.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/11/73, A10)
Latin America opposed direct and uncontrolled satellite transmission of TV programs during the Second World Broadcasting Conference in Buenos Aires, Argentina, The U.S. delegation had maintained that censorship of direct transmission would be restriction of the freedom of information. Argentine jurist Augusto Ferrer replied that “without governmental control . . . individual countries would find themselves subject to various forms of intervention in their cultural sovereignty, in their national security, and in their psychological development.” Conference President Jose A. Castro said the rest of the Latin American countries had come out against direct broadcasting, (fbis—Inter-American Affairs, 12/21/73, Al)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held hearings on geothermal energy. Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., Assistant Director for Research Applications with the National Science Foundation, testified Sept. 11 that geothermal energy was recognized as a “currently viable and relatively unpolluting energy resource.” Its importance depended upon development of new technologies and “resolution of institutional constraints.” NSF was recommending a program to develop necessary technologies and “to synthesize these into pilot plants capable of generating power from a variety of geothermal sources.” An advantage of geothermal energy was “that construction of power plants can be carried out in a relatively short time.” With solution of the technical problems in extracting the earth’s heat and converting it into electricity, “the commercial impact of geothermal energy could begin to be felt within this decade. Geothermal energy is, therefore, counted on to contribute at least regionally to a resolution of the energy crisis in the short term as well as to provide sizable blocks of energy in the remaining years of this century.” (Transcript) September 12:	The Federal Communications Commission approved five applications for permission to build domestic satellite networks—from American Satellite Corp., jointly owned by Fairchild Industries, Inc., and Western Union International, Inc.; rca Global Communications, Inc., and rca Alaska Communications, Inc.; gte Satellite Corp. and National Satellite Services, Inc., a Hughes Aircraft Co. subsidiary; American Telephone & Telegraph Co.; and Communications Satellite Corp. GTE also was authorized to begin interstate toll telephone service in competition with AT&T. ComSatCorp was given interim authorization to proceed with procurement of high-capacity satellites for lease to AT&T “at its own risk.” fcc said ComSatCorp appeared not to have complied with an Fcc order to form a separate corporation to engage in domestic satellite activities, (fcc pio; ComSatCorp Release 73-48; W Post, 9/13/73, D12)
U.S. Patent No. 3 781 647 was awarded to Peter E. Glaser, Vice President for Engineering Sciences of Arthur D. Little Co., for a system to produce electricity with satellite solar power stations. The proposal was to orbit satellites at 37 500-km (23 300-mi) altitude in geostationary position to convert radiation received by solar cells to direct current and then to microwaves for transmission to an earth station. There the microwave beam would be converted to electric power. The patent said a belt of solar cells 5 km [3 mi] wide around the earth could provide more than 200 times the projected world electrical energy requirements for 1980. (Jones, NYT, 12/29/73; Pat Off pio)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 557 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 249-km (154.7-mi) apogee, 213-km (132.4-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Western observers noted the satellite, reported by some sources to be equipped with remotecontrolled photographic equipment, was put into an orbit almost identical to that of the crippled Salyut 2, launched April 3. Observers later speculated it had been a Salyut-class spacecraft launched as a docking target for a manned Soyuz [see May 19]. The satellite reentered May 22 without maneuvering to extend its lifetime or an apparent attempt to recover it. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; SBD, 5/15/73, 81; O’Toole, W Post, 5/15/73, A14; 5/19/73, A12; SF, 1/74, 39-40; Lyons, NYT, 9/26/73, 33)
Dr. Frank T. McClure, Deputy Director of the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, died in Baltimore, Md., following a heart attack. He was internationally known as an authority on combustion, rockets, and guided missile technology and was inventor of the Navy satellite doppler navigation system. For this invention he had received nasa’s first inventions award in 1961. (W Post, 10/19/73, Cll)
The National Academy of Engineering announced election of 70 members, including Director Edgar M. Cortright, Jr., of Langley Research Center; Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Marshall Space Flight Center Director; Ames Research Center engineer Robert T. Jones; Robert J. Parks, Assistant Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director for Flight Projects; and Communications Satellite Corp. President Joseph V. Charyk. (nae Release, 4/5/73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 577 from Plesetsk into orbit with 308-km (191.4-mi) apogee, 170-km (105.6-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Aug. 7. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/73; 8/31/73; SBD, 7/50/75, 147)
Newspaper editorials and columnists commented on the Aug. 17 Dept, of Defense announcement that the U.S.S.R. had flight-tested multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles (mirvs) . New York Times: “Since the Soviet mirv tests have been anticipated for so long, there is no justification for a panic reaction from Washington, or a further fattening of the strategic weapons budget. The latest Soviet tests increase the urgency of concluding a MIRV limitation accord, but they also add to the already overwhelming mutuality of interest in achieving it.” (NYT, 8/20/73, 20) Washington Post: “The potential of the mirv technology coupled with the Soviets’ giant missiles—especially given their present numerical advantage in certain key categories—could be menacing indeed.” It was “precisely this Soviet potential which argues for a serious, effective and non-wasteful approach to the circumstances in which we now find ourselves. This ... is no time to proceed with turkeys and lemons, or to box ourselves into investments in weapons systems whose cost is exceeded only by their irrelevance to such danger as we would be confronting a few years hence if the ‘worst case’ regarding Soviet armament came true.” Before the issue of phasing out the present U.S. arsenal in favor of less vulnerable sea- and air-based forces, “one reaches the more immediate question of how this Soviet development can or cannot be tamed within the context of the current phase of the arms negotiations.” (W Post, 8/20/73, 24) August 21:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by a Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with a 39 132-km (24 315.5-mi) apogee, 392-km (242.6-mi) perigee, 11-hr 41min period, and 63.3° inclination. The press later reported that the spacecraft would test techniques to be used in the usaf satellite communications system that provided polar coverage for the Strategic Air Command bombers. (UN Reg; Av Wk, 9/10/73, 17)
Janet Lee, 17-yr-old representative of the Republic of China (Taiwan) on the December 1972 NASA-conducted International Youth Science Tour of America, had written to tour coordinator Mrs. Lillian Levy saying she could sometimes see Skylab “flying over my head like a little sparkling star in the evening,” NASA Activities reported. Mrs. Levy also had heard from tour participant Karl Muller of Mbabane, Swaziland: “It is very pleasing to see that Swaziland is enlisting the aid of satellites in agriculture. The idea of using satellites for detecting forest fires is particularly interesting, since Swaziland has the world’s largest man-made forest.” (NASA Activities, 7/15/73, 116) July 16:	itos-e Improved Tiros Operational Satellite, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, failed to reach orbit after a 10:10 am pdt liftoff from Western Test Range on a two-stage, long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Early flight data indicated that abrupt cessation of the hydraulic pump output 270 sec after 2nd-stage ignition had caused loss of hydraulic pressure and thrust vector control. The spacecraft tumbled and failed to achieve orbital velocity. Investigation was begun immediately at Goddard Space Flight Center. The meteorological spacecraft had been intended for sun-synchronous orbit to make day and night cloud-cover observations, to make continuous observations of weather features from its synchronous altitude, and to obtain global-scale quantitative measurements of the earth’s atmospheric structure. ITOS-E, which was to have been christened Noaa 3, was the fourth spacecraft in a series of second-generation meteorological satellites. Noaa 1 (itos-a) was launched Dec. 11, 1970, and was operational for nine months. ITOS—B was launched Oct. 21, 1971, but did not achieve orbit because of a Delta 2nd-stage failure. Noaa 2 (itos-d) was launched successfully Oct. 15, 1972, and had been NOAA’s primary operational spacecraft. (NASA prog off)
Cosmos 573 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 401-km (249.2-mi) apogee, 195-km (121.2mi) perigee, 90.5-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The satellite reentered June 17. The Western press later quoted a Soviet source as identifying the mission as a test of an unmanned Soyuz spacecraft in preparation for an upcoming manned launch. Western tracking stations reported the orbit was identical to one used during manned Soviet flights. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/18/73, 265; B Sun, 1/6/13)
Fifteenth anniversary of the first U.S. satellite, Explorer /, launched by the Army Ballistic Missile Agency and Jet Propulsion Laboratory Jan. 31, 1958. The U.S. and the Western world had entered an age of space with the launch of the 14.0-kg (30.8-lb) stovepipe-shaped satellite. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, recalled the mood of excitement surrounding the launch that had followed two successful U.S.S.R. launches and a failure in the first U.S. attempt to launch Vanguard. “I think we were all aware that this wasn’t just another mission—that perhaps the entire world was watching this one.” Explorer I had made significant scientific contribution with the discovery of the Van Allen Radiation Belt surrounding the earth. The satellite had transmitted data until May 23, 1958, when its small batteries were exhausted. It reentered the earth’s atmosphere Mar. 31, 1970. (nasa Release 73—14; icsc Release 17-73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 14 from Plesetsk to obtain meteorological information for weather forecasts. Orbital parameters: 892-km (554.3-mi) apogee, 872-km (541,8-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite would study cloud and snow cover and gather data on reflected heat, (gsfc SSR, 3/31/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/21/73, LI; SBD, 3/22/73, 124)
NASA launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from Woomera, Australia, carrying a Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy experiment to a 167.4-km (104-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 7—8:	Scientists from the European Space Research Organization (esro), nasa Hq., Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and four U.S. universities met at Marshall Space Flight Center on project SOREL, a sunorbiting relativity experiment. SOREL, a satellite to orbit the sun and measure relativistic gravity phenomena, had been proposed by esro in 1970. Final results of the mission definition study and Sorel’s scientific merits and technical feasibility were discussed, (msfc Release 73-161; msfc pao)
The Navy’s Fleet Weather Facility (fwf) had said that satellite imagery from NASA-developed weather satellites was becoming “indispensable” to Arctic and Antarctic shipping operations, NASA reported. The location of ice masses from satellite photos might ultimately lead to extension of shipping operations through the entire six-month polar night. Weather satellite imagery was provided the Navy by Goddard Space Flight Center. (nasa Release 73-174)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 598 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 331-km (205.7-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 16. Cosmos 598 was the third of seven Soviet satellites launched and returned in quick succession, leading to Western speculation that they were monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15].
The opening of a direct telephone link via satellite between Canada and the People’s Republic of China was announced by the Canadian Overseas Telecommunications Corp. Calls would be transmitted via Intelsat-IV F—4, launched Jan. 22, 1972, by NASA for the Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Previously, calls originating in Canada had been Touted through submarine cables to Tokyo and relayed to China from there. (AP, W Post, 10/2/73, C2)
A New York Times editorial criticized “boom-and-bust science”: Scholarship and research were “caught between the penny-pinching of economy-minded conservatives and the hostility of those, at the other end of the spectrum, who equate science expenditures with support of the military. A more realistic view of national needs should make it evident that none of the nation’s and the world’s critical problems—from environmental issues to the urgent need for food, energy and transportation—will be solved without the innovative contributions of trained minds. The continued boom-and-bust cycles in support of education and research constitute a costly waste of the nation’s human resources. Perhaps the President’s recent presentation of the National Medal of Science to eleven top scientists—the first such awards since 1970—represents a signal of Administration desire for a sounder approach.” (NYT, 10/15/73, 36) October 16:	The U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 600 entered orbit with a 355-km (220.6-mi) apogee, 192-km (119.3-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 23, believed by Western observers to be fifth in a series of reconnaissance spacecraft monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15], Cosmos 601 entered orbit with a 1494-km (928.3-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 101.8-min period, and 81.9° inclination. It reentered Aug. 15, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; 8/31/74; SBD, 10/18/ 73, 241-242)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held hearings on NASA’s proposed space tug. The hearings sought to determine the tug’s role in the space shuttle program, the tug’s fiscal impact on the program and the overall manned space flight budget, the operational impact on NASA’s latest proposed mission model and on projected cost-per-flight of the shuttle, the Dept, of Defense role in development and use of the tug, and NASA’s and industry’s progress in tug conceptual design. Charles V. Donlan, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Deputy Director of Advanced Programs, presented an overview of the tug program Sept. 5 but made no recommendations, pending completion of a study. NASA would later recommend program approach and supporting rationale. Representatives of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div,, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Martin Marietta Co. Denver Div., and Grumman Aerospace Corp. presented results of efforts to date, with supporting data to substantiate the options afforded NASA in proceeding with tug development. Options under study included liquid-storable and cryogenic systems for a growth-stage tug, the Centaur as an expendable or recoverable launch vehicle, an expendable Thor-Delta vehicle, an expendable or recoverable Agena vehicle, and an expendable or growth-stage Transtage vehicle. (Transcript) September 6:	The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 584 from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 331-km (205.7-mi) apogee, 210-km (130.5-mi) perigee, 89.9min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Sept. 20. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; Sov Aero, 9/10/73, 110)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 579 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 307-km (190.8-mi) apogee, 174-km (108.1-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Sept. 3. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; 9/30/73; SBD, 9/6/15, 10)	...	.
The Soviet research ship Professor Vize sailed from Leningrad with 60 scientists from Soviet weather service centers on an expedition to collect data on ionizing radiation of the sun and its influence on the upper stratosphere. During the two-month project the scientists would observe the June 30 solar eclipse, launch a series of high-altitude research rockets with onboard measuring instruments and photo equipment, and take deep measurements of the Atlantic Ocean. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 6/1/73, May 30:	The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 7528, a $3.046-billion FY 1974 nasa authorization bill, $28 million lower than the $3.074-billion House bill passed May 23. The Senate authorization—$30 million above NASA’s requested $3,016 billion—would be NASA’s lowest since FY 1962 and the lowest percentage of the total Federal budget—less than 1.2%—in 12 yrs. It would provide $2,231 billion for research and development, $34 million more than NASA’s request but $24 million less than the House bill; $110 million for construction of facilities, as requested but $2 million less than the House bill; and $705 million for research and program management, as requested but down $2 million from the House bill. The Senate Committee would retain Skylab funding at NASA’s requested $233 million and space shuttle funding at $475 million. It concurred with the House addition of $7 million for Earth Resources Technology Satellite program funding and added $5 million to space applications funding to replace NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft, lost in an April 12 crash. (CR, 5/30/73, S9866; S Rpt 93-179)
Compendium of Meteorological Satellites and Instrumentation (nssdc 73— 02) was published by the National Space Science Data Center, Goddard Space Flight Center. Prepared by the U.S. Air Force Environmental and Technical Applications Center’s Air Weather Service, the book included an overview of programs and brief descriptions, orbital information, and operating status of 98 satellites launched or planned since 1959 by the U.S., U.S.S.R., France, and U.K., with some 200 experiments. (Text)
First anniversary of the launch of Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite from Western Test Range July 23, 1972. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, at an anniversary celebration at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, said the use of space technology to solve the earth’s problems was “a second giant stride for mankind.” Erts 1 had had “a profound effect on the thinking of the world, particularly on our approach to the emerging problems of protecting our environment and maintaining the quality of life for all of Earth’s people. I think it means that we do have to be sensitive to how we use these precious resources; not just clean air and water, but clean land.” In the program to follow, “the ocean is also going to be a precious resource that we must conserve.” Dr. Fletcher said 38 countries were participating in the ERTS program, with 300 principal investigators—200 in the U.S. and 100 in foreign countries—examining ERTS data. Dr. William Nordberg, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory for Meteorology and Earth Sciences, reviewed Erts 1’s year-end status: its multispectral scanner was fully operational, the retum-beam-vidicon TV cameras had been turned off but could be reactivated, one of the two tape recorders was still operating, although at reduced capacity. More than 60 000 erts scenes—equivalent to an area more than four times the globe—had been imaged, 333 000 unique messages had been relayed from some 140 platforms at remote sites, and nearly 3 million photos had been reproduced at the NASA Data Processing Facility. (NASA Activities, 8/15/73, 134-6)
Erts I Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by NASA July 23, 1972) was “important tool” to facilitate better management of the earth “that has not received appropriate recognition,” a Science editorial said. Many investigators, selected from 600 research proposals, were studying its images. (Of 310 proposals accepted, 100 were from scientists of foreign nations.) “Policy with respect to distribution of pictures is one of complete openness. Nationals of any country are free to purchase them at a nominal cost.” Canada was operating its own Erts 1 receivers; Brazil, Mexico, and Venezuela were moving toward establishing their earth stations. “The Brazilians are particularly enthusiastic about erts, for it is giving them a first look at much of the Amazon valley. Their enthusiasm is likely to be contagious, and other developing countries will find erts a valuable source of many kinds of information.” (Abelson, Science, 2/2/73, 431; NASA OA)
The U.S.S.R.’s Luna 19 automatic station (launched Sept. 28, 1971, toward lunar orbit) had discovered cosmic plasma on the near side of the moon, Tass reported. Mikhail Kolesov of the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had said the maximum concentration of matter was at 10 km (6 mi) from the lunar surface. Origin of the plasma was unknown but the plasma was believed to be greatly affected by solar wind. (fbis-Sov, 10/3/73, Ul) October 3: The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites on a single booster from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters were: Cosmos 588—1495-km (929-mi) apogee, 1450-km (901-mi) perigee, 115.3-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 589—-1489-km (925.2-mi) apogee, 1417-km (88Q.5-mi) perigee, 114.9-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Cosmos 590—1489-km (925.2-mi) apogee, 1435-km (891.7-mi) perigee, 115.1-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 591—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1349-km (838.2-mi) perigee, 114.1-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Cosmos 592—1486-km (923.4-mi) apogee, 1333-km (828.3-mi) perigee, 113.9-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 593—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1366-km (848.8-mi) perigee, 114.3-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Cosmos 594—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1383-km (859.4-mi) perigee, 114.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 595—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1400-km (869.9-mi) perigee, 114.7-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Kenneth W. Gatland of the British Interplanetary Society later said in a Christian Science Monitor article that the satellites possibly were being used as a maritime communications system “to keep shore bases and command centers in contact with far-ranging elements of the Soviet fleet.” Since 1971 two eight-satellite systems had been orbited each year four to five months apart. Gaps of seven to nine months occurred between launches during the winter, when the Soviet northern fleet was hampered by sea conditions. The last Soviet eight-satellite launch was June 8, into similar orbits, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; CSM, 11/13/73; SBD, 10/4/73, 170; Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/3/73, Ul) The U.S.S.R. also launched Cosmos 596 from Plesetsk, into orbit with a 268-km (166.5-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 9. Cosmos 596 was the first of seven Soviet satellites launched and returned in quick succession, leading to Western speculation they were reconnaissance craft monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15]. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; SBD, 10/9/73, 192)
NASA launched an Areas sounding rocket from Antigua, West Indies, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center meteorology experiment to a 42.7-km (26.5-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in the upper atmosphere, monitor anomalous ultraviolet absorption, and extend the data base for a climatology of stratospheric ozone in the tropics. The launch was in conjunction with a Nimbus 4 satellite (launched April 8, 1970) overpass. Because only one of four optical channels transmitted data and the thermistor was reading open, no significant data were received, (nasa Rpt SRl)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics continued hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, identified locations for space shuttle development: Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., as the launch and landing sites; NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility for the external tank production; and the Rockwell International Corp. facility at Downey, Calif., for orbiter and systems integration. “The major unknown, at the moment, is where the solid rocket boosters will be produced and tested. We expect that this location will be identified when the solid fueled rocket booster contract is awarded this November.” Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in omsf, contrasted a typical operational communications satellite program using expendable launch vehicles with one using the space shuttle. Launched on the Titan IIIB-Centaur launch vehicle, each spacecraft was estimated at 467 kg (1030 lbs). To fulfill 1979-1990 requirements for reliable communications services, 26 spacecraft would be required. Use of the Titan IIIB-Centaur would require 26 new spacecraft and 26 new launch vehicles, at an average cost for each flight of $25.8 million. “If the same program is carried out using the Shuttle and Tug, the cost changes significantly. First, with the Shuttle we can apply the low cost approaches to payload design. We are no longer constrained by weight limitations; therefore, we can ruggedize the spacecraft structure, simplify the design and verification test program, and thus reduce both development and unit spacecraft cost.” The shuttle and tug combination could deploy and retrieve 2 satellites on a single flight, making 13 flights to deploy 26 spacecraft—10 new and 16 refurbished. On 8 of these flights 2 spacecraft would be deployed and retrieved. “The total cost for conducting the program would be $14.9 million per spacecraft flight, compared to the $25.8 million for the expendable approach—a savings of 42 percent.” m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, discussed disposition of facilities at Lewis Research Center’s Plum Rrook Station, which would he closed because of FY 1974 budget cuts. LeRC was discussing the station’s availability and capability with potential user agencies—including the Electric Research Council, which planned to establish an electric power research institute, and the Eusi-ness and Employment Council of the Governor of Ohio, which had recommended establishment of a state-funded Ohio Development Center. LeRC was studying possible use of the station’s reactor for environmental research by the Environmental Protection Agency. The Plum Rrook space power facility was being prepared to test the shroud for NASA’s Viking spacecraft but “there are no additional programmatic needs for the use of this facility and it is anticipated that it will be placed in a standby mode by the end of Fiscal Year 1974.” (Transcript)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Senate colleagues and the press that he had learned of consideration in the Executive branch of a proposal to transfer authority over all U.S. weather satellites from civilian to military control. He believed plans also were under consideration for placing all earth observation satellites under military control. He called for “serious reflection” over any such plans, noting that civilian control of peaceful space activities had been a standing U.S. policy for 15 yrs. (Sen Moss Release 73—304)
The decision to publicize weather information from a secret Air Force satellite system was announced by Under Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas at a Washington press conference. Information would be made available to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration from “several” satellites orbiting at altitudes of 800 km (500 mi), providing more precise information on cloud cover than available from the higher altitude noaa satellites. A usaf—noaa meeting March 19 would arrange for transfer of information. (W Star & News, 3/7/73, A6)
Western Union Telegraph Co. announced it had received Federal Communications Commission authorization to construct the first of five earth stations for the $70-million WESTAR domestic communications satellite system [see May 3]. The first station would be built in Vernon Township, N.J. (Western Union Release)
rca Global Communications, Inc., and RCA Alaska Communications, Inc., applied to the Federal Communications Commission for authority to build and operate an interim communications satellite system by Aug. 1. The $7.4-million system would use Telesat Canada’s satellite with five earth stations to provide voice, message, and TV traffic between both U.S. coasts and Alaska until rca’s domestic satellite system, proposed in 1971, was approved and began operation. (W Post, 3/13/73)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held hearings on solar energy for heating and cooling. Dr. George 0. Lof, Colorado State Univ. professor of civil engineering, testified June 7 that heating and cooling buildings by solar energy was technically feasible and closely approaching economic viability. “With adequate funding, the dual involvement of industry and university . . . can be expected to move solar heating and cooling into public use within a very few years.” Electric power from solar energy, however, would cost several times the present cost of conventional power and the best method was not even known. A major study funded by the National Science Foundation was beginning at Colorado State Univ., with West-inghouse Electric Co. collaboration, of the best system and conditions for generating solar power. (Transcript) June 8:	The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites—believed by Western specialists to be a military communications data-relay system—on a single booster from Plesetsk. The satellites entered earth orbit: Cosmos 564, with a 1482-km (920.9-mi) apogee, 1397-km (868.1-mi) perigee, 114.6-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 565, with a 1493-km (927.7-mi) apogee, 1448-km (899.7-mi) perigee, 115.3-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 566, with a 1484-km (922.1-mi) apogee, 1435-km (891.7-mi) perigee, 115.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 567, with a 1486-km (923.4-mi) apogee, 1413-km (878.0-mi) perigee, 114.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 568, with a 1483-km (921.5-mi) apogee, 1377-km (855.6-mi) perigee, 114.4-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 569, with a 1480-km (919.6-mi) apogee, 1361-km (845.7-mi) perigee, 114.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 570, with a 1482-km (920.9-mi) apogee, 1340-km (832.6-mi) perigee, 114.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 571, with a 1480-km (919.6-mi) apogee, 1322-km (821.5-mi) perigee, 113.7-min period, and 74.0° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/12/73, 233; Shabad, NYT, 6/10/73, 41) • Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, telegraphed congressional congratulations to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, for the Skylab 2 astronauts’ achievements in repairing the solar array on the Skylab Workshop (launched May 14): “The magnificence of this accomplishment and the significance of this achievement is nearly impossible to put into perspective.” Congress sent congratulations to the astronauts, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and his team, and “all of your group who work in complete anonymity hut under the intensive examination of history.” (CR, 6/8/73, S10691)
A Solar Observing Optical Network (soon) to survey solar activity and warn of space events disruptive to satellite, radar, and communication operations was being acquired by the Electronic Systems Div. of the Air Force Systems Command, afsc announced. The Air Force Weather Service would use the system to pinpoint the location and magnitude of solar disturbances. The system when completed would consist of five optical telescopes and a computerized data-processing and communications package, (afsc Release 075.73) During May:	Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite—launched by NASA July 23, 1972—had completed more than 4200 orbits, or 16 18-day whole-earth coverage cycles, and acquired 190 scenes per day for a 57 893 total. System performance had exceeded expectations; registration of multispectral scanner images in different spectral bands was within 55 m (180 ft), or one third, of prelaunch prediction. Erts 1 had produced high-quality images of every major land mass; North America had been covered 10 times. Pictures had been made available to all citizens of the world. (NASA prog off; Goddard News, 6/73, 2)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) had returned valuable imagery and digital tapes from the spacecraft’s multispectral scanner to the Brevard County, Fla., Planning Dept., Kennedy Space Center reported. John W. Hannah, Brevard Development Administrator and principal investigator in the Brevard erts experiment, had said interpretation of the images would yield information on beach erosion, street development patterns, landscape disturbances, identification of land use, and land drainage patterns, (icsc Release 14-73)
A laser to transmit 1 billion bits of data per second between satellites was being developed for the Air Force by GTE Sylvania, Inc., United Press International reported. The system, using peripheral equipment with lighter weight and less power than present satellite radio networks, would send more information faster and would operate on a narrow bandwidth to reduce interference and interception. {LA Times, 5/5/73)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
Noaa 2 (itos—d) meteorological satellite, launched Oct. 15, 1972, for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration hy NASA, was adjudged a success. NASA had achieved prelaunch ohjectives of launching the spacecraft into sun-synchronous orhit with a local equator crossing time between 9:00 and 9:20 am and of conducting in-orbit engineering evaluation before turning the operational control of the spacecraft over to NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service Noaa 2 had completed one year of flawless operation, making regular daytime and nighttime meteorological observations in both readout and stored modes of operation in support of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System and for incorporation into worldwide daily weather charts and reports. Day and night global scanning radiometer automatic picture transmissions were being supplied on direct readout to more than 700 worldwide users. (NASA prog off)
Univ. of Texas physicists A. A. Jackson IV and Michael P. Ryan, Jr., proposed in a Nature article that the event that leveled forests in a wide region of Siberia on June 30, 1908, was the passage of a black hole that had plunged completely through the earth. They suggested that ships’ logs for that date be examined for evidence of an unusual occurrence. The object that fell on Siberia had been referred to as the Tunguska meteorite, although it had left no crater or other clearly identifiable meteorite residue. “We suggest that a black hole of substellar mass . . . could explain many of the mysteries associated with the event.” (Nature, 9/14/73, 88-89) September 14—23:	The first major international aerospace show in Latin America was held in Sao Paulo, Brazil. More than 250 firms from 11 nations displayed products from satellite equipment to metal forgings, aircraft, helicopters, and small components. Aircraft exhibited included the British Hawker Siddeley Harrier vstol [vertical or short takeoff and landing] fighter, Fokker F-28 twin-jet transport, Israel Aircraft Industries’ Arava cargo transport, Aeronautica Macchi MB-326 jet trainer-fighter, Aerospatiale A-300B Airbus, Canadair CL-215 amphibian, Northrop F-5E light jet fighter aircraft, and Lockheed C-5A heavy logistic transport. Of the nations invited to participate by the sponsoring Brazilian Ministry of Aeronautics, only Japan and the U.S.S.R. had declined. (Av Wk, 9/17/73, 22; Interavia, 9/73, 954) September 17:	The liquid-fueled “core” vehicle of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was moved from the Vertical Integration Building to the Solid Motor Assembly Building in the Titan complex at Kennedy Space Center. Twin 26-m (85-ft) solid-fueled-rocket strap-on boosters would be attached to the core. The Titan-Centaur, scheduled to be launched on its proof flight in January 1974, mated the Titan III core vehicle and its twin solid-fueled rockets with the Centaur high-energy liquid-fueled final stage. The 49-m (160-ft), 3610-kg (7959-lb) configuration was designed to carry heavy payloads on orbital and planetary missions, such as the Viking Mars mission and the joint U.S. and West German Helios mission to the sun, during the mid- and late 1970s. The liftoff thrust of the twin solid-fueled boosters was 10.8 million newtons (2.4 million lbs). On its proof flight the Titan-Centaur would carry a mass model of the Viking spacecraft and a 66-kg (145-lb) Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment (sphinx) spacecraft, to measure in orbit for one year the interaction of space plasmas with high-voltage surfaces. The main purpose of the flight would be to demonstrate that the launch vehicle and launch facilities could support operational missions and that the Centaur could perform an operational two-burn mission and an operational three-burn mission carrying a payload to a synchronous altitude of 35 888 km (22 300 mi). The effort to integrate the Titan with the Centaur had begun in the mid-1960s when NASA recognized the need to fill a performance and cost gap between the Atlas-Centaur and Saturn launch vehicles, (ksc Release 215-73)	*
The Air Force System Command’s Space and Missiles Systems Organization (samso) announced the establishment of a system program office to develop the Defense Navigation Satellite System (dnss). The space-based radio navigational system would permit suitably equipped users to determine precisely three-dimensional position, velocity, and time information globally. On successful completion of testing, the Dept, of Defense might approve deployment of DNSS to provide a universal positioning and navigational capability for military and civilian users on land, sea, and air. (afsc Newsreview, 10/73, 11)
The People’s Republic of China was expanding communication lines to rest of world with the aid of American communications satellite technology, the New York Times reported. Communications Satellite Corp., RCA Global Communications, Inc., and Western Union Internationa] had provided ground stations that would be operational before the end of 1973, to link Peking and Shanghai via satellite to 63 nations that also had ground terminals. (Lyons, NYT, 1/5/73, 4) January 5:	NASA began program cutbacks to adjust to a lower spending level in compliance with President Nixon’s $250-billion target for total Government spending in FY 1973. Space shuttle manpower buildup would be slowed, delaying the first orbital flight. Work on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) was being suspended at least one year and work on communications satellites would be phased out, with cancellation of ats-G. Work on nuclear propulsion would be discontinued and work on nuclear power curtailed. Plum Brook Station of Lewis Research Center would be closed. In aeronautics, quiet, propulsive-lift, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft would be canceled, but technology would continue to be developed. Skylab, space shuttle, Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), Viking, Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, and many applications and aeronautics projects would be retained to continue essential elements for a balanced and productive space and aeronautics program within tight fiscal restraints. NASA also would continue development of a new front fan to reduce jet aircraft engine noise. NASA spokesmen told the press that the cutbacks would trim 700 civil servants from the NASA payrolls and would save the Government $200 million through June 30, 1973. (nasa Release 73-3; W Post, 1/6/73)
nasa Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews described nasa’s Earth Observatory Satellite (eos) program in continued testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1974 authorization hearings. The satellite, a potential new start for 1974, was intended to provide a multidisciplinary earth observations capability to support the areas of meteorology, environmental quality, earth resources and, in some respects, the earth and ocean physics program. The system would be the first major shuttle-compatible spacecraft with modularity, giving ability to retrieve and repair modular elements of the spacecraft, and the spacecraft might also be modular in basic size. “We may be able to build up a different size and weight spacecraft, using these modular techniques.” Elements were expected to serve the several disciplines without significant changes in components through the modular buildup. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator in OAST, testified that Lewis Research Center was providing technical management on several Environmental Protection Agency contracts. Turbines, heat exchangers, combustors, and fuel controls obtained from NASA’s low-cost jet engine research would be evaluated for use in automobile turbine engines. A memorandum of understanding with epa would expand LeRC responsibility for component and system development for advanced automotive power systems and would exploit LeRC test facilities. (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 556 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 233-km (144.8-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and an 81.4° inclination. The satellite reentered May 14. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; SBD, 5/9/73, 49)
