The North American Air Defense Command had predicted more than 10 000 pieces of space clutter would be circling the earth by the year 2000, the Los Angeles Times reported. More than 3200 man-made objects were already orbiting the earth, with one object falling back to earth daily. More than 77% of the total had resulted from explosions of satellites already in orbit, norad said. Space exploration by countries other than the U.S. contributed to increasing space clutter, (upi, LA Times, 22 Sept 74)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented nasa’s $3.247-billion FY 1975 budget request’ and program [see 4 Feb.] to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to open hearings on the nasa authorization bill. In a review of FY 1974 accomplishments, Dr. Fletcher pointed out that as the Skylab program came to an end the three crews had traveled some 113 million km and orbited the earth 2475 times in a working scientific laboratory—chalking up “about 100 miles per gallon of fuel.” Skylab had focused on the sun, the earth, and man. “Apollo extended man’s reach to the moon; Skylab added near-Earth to man’s domain.” In answer to questions Dr. Fletcher said the principal difference between nasa’s minimum request to the Office of Management and Budget and the final figures sent to Congress by the President was the $89 million subtracted from the shuttle program, causing a four- to six-month delay. Other differences brought a total decrease of $124 million below “what we could have gotten by with without any major changes” in nasa’s program. The proposed minimum budget would not have restored any of the programs nasa had had to drop because of FY 1974 budget cuts and therefore had been “well below the constant level” envisaged for nasa in FY 1973. Of $7.9 million cut from aeronautics programs, the chief reduction was in the quiet propulsion lift technology program, deleting the system integration model effort. Deletion of $1 million from the requested technology utilization increase canceled proposed increases in numbers of dissemination centers and reduced buildup of support to state and local governments. A $5.7-million cut in the amount requested for earth observations instruments had deferred their development. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, said there had been “some discussions during the past several months” of an omb proposal to consolidate weather satellite programs under the Department of Defense. NASA, dod, omb, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had decided “to keep separate systems for the dod and NASA [with NOAa], but we will make maximum use” of hardware commonality in building satellites for them. (Transcript)
Columbia Broadcasting System newsman Walter Cronkite recalled the two most exalting moments in his years of TV space coverage, during an interview with the Christian Science Monitor. The first was “Alan Shepard’s little 15-minute plop-down into the Atlantic. Rocketry itself was so uncertain ... I just didn’t know whether or not I was going to he able to watch.” The second was the first lunar landing. “That was a highly emotional moment for me. The actual touchdown, not so much Neil Armstrong’s walk.” Cronkite, preparing for the TV documentary “Space: A Report to the Stockholders,” said he still believed the major achievement of the moon landing was that “it proves that we truly have the capability at this stage of man’s civilization to do any dam thing we want—the most outlandish or the most practical things.” Of course there were important spinoff values. “Probably one of the most important industrial spinoffs ... is the command that U.S. industry had gotten in the computer business. ... I attribute that almost solely to the space program.” Cronkite said that recent cutbacks in the manned program were proper. “It is just about where it ought to be— most of the concentration now is in unmanned satellites” and a deliberate, but not crash, program toward the reusable space shuttle. If newsmen were allowed to travel on the space shuttle, he’d go “on any flight they offered me.” When asked if he wouldn’t he missed by American TV viewers at blastoff, he said, “What do you mean. . . ? I hope to he broadcasting all the time from inside!” (CSM, 19 July 74)
Development of a new generation of communications satellites—such as Westar 1 (launched 13 April), Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May), and three others scheduled for launch in 1974 and 1975—would bring the fifth revolution in human communications, Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said in a New York Times article. The satellites would provide a “quantum jump in the capacity of Americans to talk to and see one another.” The most immediate effect would be to reduce cost of long-distance communications and increase number of words and pictures'exchanged. Overseas calls originating in the U.S. had jumped from about 10 million a year in 1965 to 60 million in 1973. Dr. Jastrow predicted that by 1982 the U.S. would originate 1 billion overseas calls and a call halfway around the world would cost the same as a call next door. Other consequences might be a world language and the ability of people to live where they pleased. With an inexpensive satellite-transmitted dial-up conversation by color TV, people would not have to live in cities; “every house can be transformed into an office, a theater, or a classroom by pressing a few buttons.” Long-term effects might knit mankind into a global society, enriched by freer exchange of ideas and reduced fear between nations. A unified global society, however, would be an organism of great collective power in which the individual would be restricted to one role. “The prospect is not pleasant. But the transformation . . . will take place slowly . . . and most of our descendants will be conditioned to accept their more restricted options.” (NYT, 9 June 74, 4:6)
Federal support to universities and colleges had declined 7%, to $3823 million, during FY 1973 in the first decline since 1970, the National Science Foundation reported. The drop had been largely the result of a $267-million decrease in funds from the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare but other significant decreases were posted by nsf, down $40 million; Dept, of Defense, down $11 million; and NASA, down $8 million. Federal funds for academic science activities totaled $2463 million, 5% below 1972. Two science fields had shown an increase in Federal r&d support between 1972 and 1973'. Life sciences’ $934 million was a 4% increase; engineering’s $204 million was up 6%. (nsf Highlights, 15 July 74) 15— 16 July: Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1—first U.S. domestic communications satellite, launched by NASA 13 April—began operations during inaugural ceremonies in New York and Los Angeles. Russell W. McFall, Chairman of the Board and President of Western Union Corp. transmitted the first message, from New York to Los Angeles, using the original Morse key to tap “What hath God wrought!” It was the same message sent by inventor Samuel F. B. Morse 24 May 1844 over the first experimental telegraph, a 65-km line between the Capitol in Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md. Regular commercial operations began 16 July, providing services for Westar J’s first two commercial customers, American Can Co. and Bank of America. (Westar Inaugural Transmission press kit, 15 July 74) 16— 29 July: NASA launched Aeros 2 (Aeros-B) aeronomy satellite for West Germany from Western Test Range at 4:51 am pdt on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle into polar orbit with an 879.0-km apogee, 221.3km perigee, 95.65-min period, and 97.44° inclination. The NASA mission objective—to place the Aeros 2 satellite in an earth orbit permitting successful achievement of the scientific objectives—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 26 July. The scientific objective was to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of the main absorption. The long-range objective of the satellite, which carried one Goddard Space Flight Center and four West German experiments, was to provide a model of the ionosphere from which upper atmospheric conditions could be predicted. By 29 July the vehicle and experiments were performing satisfactorily and the West Germans were initiating spacecraft operations. A July 1965 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany had provided for a series of cooperative satellite projects. The Aeros program, the second in the series, was authorized by a 10 June 1969 agreement and Aeros 1 was launched 16 Dec. 1972. The 1974 contract between NASA and the West Germany Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (bmft) for the Aeros 2 launch provided for reimbursement of NASA for launch vehicle and services. NASA would also provide one experiment, tracking, and backup for data acquisition, bmft was responsible for development of spacecraft and instrumentation operation and control of the satellite after launch, and data reduction and analysis except for the gsfc experiment. The spacecraft reentered 25 Sept. 1975. (nasa mors, 30 Nov 72, 8 & 29 July 74; NASA Releases 69-91, 74-183; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 75) The 1969 launch of Apollo 11 was commemorated 16 July by ceremonies at Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. At 9:32 am edt, the moment of launch, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., unveiled a plaque designating the site a National Historical Landmark. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the thousands of guests: “No matter our achievements, ... we cannot relax our pursuit of knowledge, for we must face the coming crises of our time. Every effort must be made to see that the opportunity which our technology presents is not lost. We may be sure that the opportunity will not occur soon again, if ever. To fail now would mean a ravaged environment and depleted resources— a plunge into a new and terrible Dark Age from which there would be no return.” Unless “we continuously restore the fund of basic knowledge, we shall ultimately exhaust it. . . . “Some day we will establish scientific outposts on the Moon, and even tap its mineral resources. And in the not-too-distant future astronauts may tread the surface of Mars and the glaciers of the moons of Jupiter in search of extraterrestrial life. . . . The future began here at 9:32 a.m. on July 16, 1969. At that moment on July 16 in the year 2069, launch windows to Mars, Neptune, and Pluto will be open. Will we fly through those windows? I think we will.” In 19 July ceremonies at the San Clemente, Calif., Western White House, Armstrong presented President Nixon a plaque bearing the names of each astronaut who had represented “this country in a flight above the surface of the Earth.” President Nixon told Armstrong the greatest contribution to the space program was not the exploration or technology but the “spirit you and your colleagues . . . have had the opportunity to demonstrate.” The Smithsonian Institution hosted 20 July activities marking the day of the landing. Speaking on the Mall in Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Under Secretary Robert A. Brooks said Apollo 11 had been a “dramatic demonstration . . . that progress in human affairs does not spring full blown from the efforts of one man or group of men. What we saw was the culmination of the efforts of hundreds of scientists and engineers from Leonardo da Vinci ... to the Apollo 11 astronauts. Each built on what his predecessors had accomplished until the accumulation of knowledge made possible the kind of quantum leap forward represented by the Apollo Program.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, called the day of the landing “the day man ended an era of one-planet civilization and began a new age as traveler and colonizer of the universe.” Despite difficulties, men would “make more of these steps into the vast but exciting reaches of the solar system.” A 21 July service at the Washington Cathedral in Washington, D.C., dedicated the Space Window donated by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator at the time of the landing. The window, designed by Rodney Winfield, depicted whirling orange, red, and white stars and orbiting planets on a deep blue and green field. A thin white trajectory, representing a manned spacecraft, emphasized man’s minuteness in God’s universe. During the ceremony, Armstrong presented a 7.18-g, 3.6-billion-yr-old lunar rock, brought from the moon by Apollo 11, to the Cathedral. The rock would be inserted into a hydrogen-filled plexiglass container embedded as the centerpiece of the window. (PD, 22 July 74, 815; NASA Activities, 15 Aug 74, 5-14; transcript; program)
The space shuttle would introduce a new mode oi space research in the 1980s, Dr. John E. Naugle, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, said at a space transportation system press briefing in Washington, D.C. Sounding rockets gave the scientist an immediate return of data but only for a very short-duration flight. Satellites provided longer mission times but it might be five to seven years from the initiation of the project until data were received. Experiments flown on the shuttle could remain in orbit from 7 to 30 days and then be returned immediately for evaluation. This capability would be a powerful tool in the development of new technology. Dr. Myron S. Malkin, Space Shuttle Program Director, said NASA’s commitment to Congress called for a total development cost of $5.15 billion in 1971 dollars for two operational shuttle vehicles plus $10.5 million for each of 725 missions projected for 1980-1990. Mission costs would be shared by participating experimenters, and estimates were now running at $9.05 million per flight because of reduced estimates for external tank development. Cost for a shuttle flight, which could take 29 500 kg into orbit, contrasted with $18 million for a 4500-kg payload launched on an expendable Atlas booster and up to $58 million to orbit 14 000-18 000 kg on a Saturn IB. Shuttle development was on schedule; the first approach and landing tests were to be in the second quarter of 1977 and the first manned orbital flight in 1979. Orbiter manufacture was under way. The main engine oxygen burner had been tested 14 April and the first big engine firing was scheduled for the end of 1975. NASA would need a fleet of seven orbi-ters at $250 million each if the projected missions were flown. Elwood W. Land, Jr., of the Space Shuttle Systems Office said a 25-astronaut flight corps probably would be maintained to fly missions averaging more than one a week. LeRoy E. Day, Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, reported the main engine was being designed to make 55 starts before refurbishment was necessary. Engine lifetime would be much longer. The solid boosters were being designed for 20 flights. Phillip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration, said that all but the smallest expendable launch vehicles would be phased out about three years after the shuttle became operational. (Transcript)
A spherical object from Cosmos 654 satellite was reported recovered in Ohio. Cosmos 654, launched 17 May 1974, had been reported by the press as a Soviet ocean surveillance satellite. The debris was believed to have been a portion of the staging system used to move the craft from its initial low, near-circular orbit into a higher, longer life orbit with a 1022-km apogee and 915-km perigee. There the nuclear systems required for ocean surveillance radar equipment and sensors could decay naturally before the orbit decayed years in the future. (.SBD, 3 Oct 74,164-5; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 74) 3, 4, 9 October: The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications held hearings on H.R. 14978 and H.R. 15781, bills to establish offices in the Dept, of the Interior and NASA to operate an Earth Resources Survey System. Hugh T. Loweth, Deputy Associate Director for Energy and Science of the Office of Management and Budget, testified that more experimentation was needed before the Earth Resources Technology Satellite program entered the operational phase, but witnesses from industry and other agencies of Government recommended accelerating the program immediately. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Associate Administrator, and Charles A. Mathews, Associate Administrator for Applications, opposed adoption of the bills, stressing NASA’s desire for “an evolutionary approach” that minimized an artifical distinction between experimental and operational satellites and concentrated instead on immediate dissemination of data and simultaneous improvement of the system [see 6, 8, 9 Aug. and 18 Sept.]. (Testimony)
The U.S. Army Electronics Command was awarding a $1 689 116 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Cincinnati Electronics, Inc., to develop, fabricate, and test ultrahigh-frequency satellite-line-of-sight manpack transceiver models, (dod Release 231—74) During May: Preliminary discussions aimed at an eventual global system of second-generation meteorological satellites were held in Geneva, sponsored by the 139-member World Meteorological Organization. Delegates considered establishment of a worldwide forum for presentation of data requirements by users, creation of a mechanism for filing launch plans and distributing advance information on capabilities to potential users of planned satellites, and prospects for training users to interpret and apply data from advanced satellites. Talks were held concurrently on technical standardization of systems, including preliminary standards for ground stations, coordination of transmission times and frequencies, and standardization of automatic-picture-transmission installations. Agreements made at the informal sessions would be taken back to the technical agencies of the various countries and implemented, without the necessity of official review. One result was agreement on L-band frequencies, with U.S. satellites to transmit on 1690 me. Soviet sources revealed that the U.S.S.R.’s first synchronous meteorological satellite would be launched in 1977 or 1978 and placed over the Indian Ocean at 70° E. The press reported that it was expected to be technically compatible with U.S., European Space Research Organization, and Japanese satellites in its class. (Av Wk, 20 May 74, 21) June 1974 Primary mission objective was to investigate the interaction between the solar wind and the earth’s magnetic field. Secondary objectives included locating magnetic neutral points or lines during both quiet and disturbed solar wind conditions and studying magnetic field topology at large radial distances over the polar caps. By 20 June all booms and electric antennas had been extended and the spacecraft had despun to the planned five to six revolutions per minute. The transmitters and all experiments were operating satisfactorily. Hawkeye 1 was the sixth of the Univ. of Iowa’s Injun series, which had begun with the 29 June 1961 launch of Injun 1 and provided a comprehensive study of charged particles trapped in the earth’s magnetosphere. The Hawkeye program was managed by Langley Research Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. LaRC also had responsibility for the Scout launch vehicle, (mors, 13 May 74, 20 June 74; NASA Release 74-138K)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May, transmitted the first instructional TV course broadcast directly by satellite. The course, on career education for elementary school children, originated at the Univ. of Kentucky and traveled by land wires to NASA’s Rosman, N.C., antenna for transmittal to the satellite. The spacecraft rebroadcast the program to more than 300 graduate education students throughout eight Appalachian states. Signals came through strongly in all the receiving areas. Students would receive university credit for successful completion of the course, which included taped lessons, programmed instruction, laboratory sessions, and live seminars. Seminars would use Ats 3, launched 5 Nov. 1967. The course was part of the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare’s Health Education Telecommunications (het) experiment to determine the effectiveness of satellite-transmitted educational TV. (nasa Release 74-172; McElheny, NYT, 3 July 74, 37)
The European Space Research Organization announced the award of three contracts totaling nearly $66 million for design and development of two spacecraft and one satellite communications payload: $25.2 million to GEC-Marconi (United Kingdom) as the prime contractor for the marots maritime communications satellite payload to be launched in 1977; $20.76 million plus launch and postlaunch support to Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd. (U.K.) as prime contractor for the MESH consortium, for the marots spacecraft platform and satellite integration and support; and $19.56 million to Dornier-System GMBh (Germany) as prime contractor for the star consortium, for the isee-b International Sun-Earth Explorer, to be launched with isee-a in 1977 in a cooperative nasa-esro program. Norway, the first nonmember country to participate in an ESRO project, had agreed to contribute 1.5% to the marots development budget of about $97 million and to share in fixed common costs, (esro Release, 3 Dec 74; Av Wk, 2 Dec 74,38)
Detection of a “plasma mantle” by the European Space Research Organization’s Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite (launched by NASA 31 Jan 1972) was announced by West German space scientists at the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Munich. Scientists had become aware of the new belt of electrically charged particles circling the earth while assessing data collected by a specially developed “plasma ana-lysator” in the satellite. The belt of particles emitted from the sun and trapped in the earth’s magnetic field was said to be between 10 060 and 20100 km thick. (B Sun, 24 Oct 74, A3; A & A 1972)
The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by a Thor-Burner II booster into an orbit with an 878-km apogee, 781-km perigee, 101.4 min period, and 98.9° inclination. The press later identified the satellite as part of the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (dmsp). (Pres Rpt 74; SBD, 26 March 74, 138; Av Wk, 25 March 74,22)
Images sensed 1 Jan. 1973 by nasa’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched 23 July 1972, had dramatically recorded a Santa Ana wind condition in Southern California, Univ. of California scientists reported in Science. The Santa Ana, rarely recorded by satellite, increased the danger of brush fires, crop and structural damage, and wind erosion in the open desert. The Erts 1 images provided scientists their first view of the entire dynamics in progress at one time. Monitoring such environmental conditions might aid resource management decisions. (Bowder et al., Science, 7 June 74, 1077-8)
The Federal Communications Commission authorized Western Union Telegraph Co. to launch its second domestic communications satellite. Western Union had requested that Westar-B be assigned a 119° west longitude position [see 2 May], a position the fcc reserved for systems authorized to serve Alaska and Hawaii. However, the fcc took into account petitions filed by Western Union’s competitors, also requesting the location, and assigned the satellite a temporary station at 90° west longitude. The satellite was to be moved to 91° within 30 days after NASA’s Ats 6 was moved from 94°. If Western Union was later authorized to serve Alaska and Hawaii, the FCC could authorize a move to a more appropriate location. (FCC Memorandum Opinion,- Order and Authorization, FCC 74^-584)
The House passed, by a roll call vote of 407 to 7, H.R. 15572, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans FY 1975 appropriations bill. The bill—passed as recommended to the House by its Committee on Appropriations 21 June—appropriated $3,203 billion to NASA, $44.1 million below the FY 1975 budget request and $63.9 million below the FY 1975 authorization. Research and development funds totaled $2,327 billion, construction of facilities $135.67 million, and research and program management $740 million. An additional $4,435 million had been provided in the Special Energy Bill. The House cut $6.2 million authorized as planning funds for the Large Space Telescope, noting that the lst was not among the top four priority telescope projects selected by the National Academy of Sciences. Also the House deferred the $8.0 million requested to initiate seasat and recommended that the satellite be configured to fly on an early mission of the space shuttle. The Committee urged NASA to reprogram funds to begin work on erts-c as soon as possible but directed the agency not to reprogram any funds for cost overruns on the Viking project without requesting additional funds from Congress. Other cuts from the authorization included $15.8 million for the construction of facilities and $9.6 million for research and program management. (CR, 26 June 74, H5746-73; Com Rpt 93-1139)
Space engineers in India were testing subsystems for their first satellite launch vehicle, in preparation for eventual launch of a 40-kg satellite into near-earth orbit. All instruments and payload had been developed at Vikram Sarabhai space center. (Delhi Overseas Service, FBIS-India, 17 Sept 74, U4) Meanwhile a number of nations also were moving toward domestic satellite systems. Algeria had begun installation of the first of 14 earth terminals for its domestic satellite system following award of a $9.6-million contract to GTE International, a subsidiary of General Telephone & Electronics Corp. The system would begin operations soon after 1 Jan. 1975, when Algeria would lease one transponder from the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Brazil would begin leasing an Intelsat transponder for its domestic service 1 June 1975. Indonesia had begun development of two satellites of its own; initial terminals in a 25-station system would be easily convertible from operation with an Intelsat satellite to later operation with an Indonesian comsat. Malaysia was purchasing three ground terminals to use Intelsat comsats. The Phillippine government was considering a similar plan and, with Malaysia, possibility of switching from an Intelsat to Indonesia’s planned satellite. Saudi Arabia had installed two terminals with 11-m-dia antennas for domestic service, which, with the completion of two larger stations in mid-1975, would be moved to remote locations for use with an Intelsat or the planned Arab League satellite. {Av Wk, 23 Sept 74, 23; Johnsen, Av Wk, 30 Sept 74, 22; Hughes contract officer, interview, 27 June 75)
NASA’s Explorer 45 (sss-a Small Scientific Satellite launched 15 Nov. 1971) was turned off. The spacecraft had been investigating the causes of worldwide magnetic disturbances associated with large solar flares. Major accomplishments of Explorer 45 included the first measurement by satellite of man-made stimulated electromagnetic emissions in the magnetosphere; first measurements of alpha particles in the equatorial region of the magnetosphere, where they were 100 times more numerous than expected; first detailed analysis of the interaction of electromagnetic waves with charged particles; measurement of the earth’s ring current, which produced the magnetic storm main phase; and measurement of the closest approach to the earth of the boundary of the magnetosphere at about 25 000-km altitude. (Goddard News, Nov 74) 30 September-4 October: The fourth simulated Spacelab mission of the airborne science-shuttle experiment system simulation (assess) program was conducted at Marshall Space Flight Center using an Ames Research Center Learj et. The Lear 4 mission was the first in which substitute experiment operators were trained as crewmen. Their performance would be compared with that of the principal investigator and his team during previous missions. During 10 nighttime flights into the base of the stratosphere, the crew measured infrared radiation at selected wavelengths from targets believed to be forming new stars, (msfc Release 74-185) 30 September-5 October: A seminar to predict the probable state of the world in the year 2000 was held by the Smithsonian Institution for nasa as part of nasa’s “Outlook for Space” study begun during June. Experts from various fields discussed a new age-oriented global culture, the probability of widespread famine, the prolonged disruption of technological economies by high oil prices, and the spread of nuclear power beyond control of the great powers. Seminar participants concluded that the intensification of nationalism would continue, particularly in response to economic stresses. Speakers from the high-technology sector, however, stressed that the U.S. would not have to suffer from scarcity of resources, although resource extraction would be more expensive and would require new technology. Satellite reconnaissance to find mineral resources and to monitor threats to the global environment would still be necessary. The group also proposed surveillance to track all asteroids crossing the earth’s orbit so that the impact of an asteroid might not be mistaken for a nuclear attack. Communications satellites were considered both useful for uniting countries and dangerous in their potential to increase threats of demagoguery. Many participants agreed that the time for uncontrolled free enterprise was passing and that we would require independent agencies for both planning and technology assessment, exempt from the special interests of particular government departments. Specialists also proposed that NASA’s planning and analytical abilities be applied to national concerns in their full complexity, taking into account world economic, political, and social problems. (Sullivan, NYT, 8 Oct 74, 16; GSFC proj off, interview, 13 Aug 75)
The Titan IIIE-Centaur proof-flight vehicle (TC-1), launched by NASA from Eastern Test Range Complex 41 at 9:48 am edt carrying a Viking spacecraft model and the sphinx satellite, was destroyed after the Centaur engine failed to start. At 8.1 min from launch, after normal separation from the Titan booster, the Centaur main-engine start failed and the vehicle automatically went into the restart sequence. A second attempt to start the engine failed at 9.2 min after liftoff. Since the vehicle had not achieved orbital velocity the Range Safety Officer at the Antigua, West Indies, tracking station transmitted destruction commands and the Centaur was destroyed at 12,5 min after the liftoff. The vehicle fell into the Atlantic Ocean 3530 km downrange. Inflight data indicated that the liquid-oxygen boost pump had failed to operate during both attempted engine starts. A committee was formed to investigate the failure and recommend corrective action. Although the primary objective of demonstrating the capability of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was not accomplished, some objectives were fulfilled: demonstration of the capability of the launch facility to support a Titan-Centaur launch, structural integrity of the vehicle, Centaur guidance and control of the Titan, Titan-Centaur separation, and Centaur standard shroud capability. The Viking Dynamic Simulator had been instrumented to verify flight loads for the two planned 1975 missions to Mars. Remaining attached to the Centaur stage, the vds was to have flown a typical Viking launch trajectory with a shortened bum to limit the spacecraft to a low earth orbit, to test the guidance system, and estimate injection accuracy. The sphinx Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment spacecraft had been intended for launch into an elliptical orbit to investigate the effect of charged particles in space on high-voltage solar cells, insulators, and conductors. The launch vehicle combined NASA’s versatile high-energy liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen Centaur upper stage with the Air Force-developed Titan III booster, a two-stage liquid-propellant core rocket augmented by two strap-on solid-fueled rocket motors. It was designed to fill the performance and cost gap between the Atlas-Centaur and the Saturn vehicles and boost NASA’s heaviest unmanned payloads into orbit or interplanetary trajectories. The first of six scheduled operational missions—the U.S. and West German Helios solar probe scheduled for the fall—would be configured to a two-burn mission to obtain data lost on the proof flight. The Titan-Centaur program was managed by NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center was responsible for the Titan-Centaur system. The Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization was responsible for the Titan IIIE booster, including aerospace ground equipment and Launch Complex 41 site activation. Kennedy Space Center directed launch operations at etr. (NASA mors, 25 Jan, 24 June 74; NASA Release 74r-25; UPI, W Post, 12 Feb 74, A2; Robinson, Today, 13 Feb 74)
The North American Air Defense Command’s count of objects in orbit around the earth totaled 624 payloads and 2349 pieces of debris, left from 7038 objects placed in space by man since the beginning of the space age in 1957. Space debris was falling back into the atmosphere at a rate of one piece a day, but norad’s tracking and impact prediction pro-gram analyzed the decay trajectory of each satellite that might survive reentry and predicted the time and area of impact, issuing warnings if any were deemed hazardous. Most returning objects were burned up by friction heat on reentry and most of the rest fell into oceans and seas. To date, the only fatality caused by space debris was a cow killed nearly 13 yrs ago when an 88-kg chunk of metal from a U.S. space probe struck the earth near a Cuban village. Eventually, however, increasing space debris and reentries might require traffic control assistance for supersonic aircraft and spacecraft. “Short of sending up some sort of a celestial vacuum cleaner . . . the best approach . . . appears to be tracking and impact prediction,” NORAD spokesmen said. (Miles, LA Times, 7 Jan 74)
Japan Rocket Development Assn., an industry group, had proposed a three-phase, $9-billion Japanese program to launch 65 satellites between 1978 and 1987, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Nineteen satellites, each weighing under 300 kg, would be launched in the $3.3-billion Phase 1 for engineering, meteorological, geographical survey, communications, navigation, and ionospheric research missions. Of 25 spacecraft in the $2.8-billion Phase 2, some would have earth resources survey missions. Weighing up to 600 kg, they would be launched by N—2 rockets incorporating McDonnell Douglas Delta 1st stages and two 4500-kg, Japanese-built upper stages. The first prototype N-2 was scheduled for summer 1975. The 21 Phase 3 satellites, some weighing 1000 kg, would be orbited at a cost of $2.6 billion, and many would be launched by a Japanese O-model launch vehicle still being designed. The program also called for launch trials for Japanese M-X boosters. (Av Wk, 23 Sept 74,21)
Skynet IIB, United Kingdom military communications satellite, arrived at Kennedy Space Center to be prepared for November launch by NASA on a Thor-Delta launch vehicle. NASA had launched Skynet A and B in 1970. Skynet IIA, launched 18 Jan. 1974 into too low an orbit, had reentered the atmosphere. {Spaceport News, 18 Oct 74)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress the Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1973 Activities. In his transmission message the President said: “This year has been particularly significant in that many past efforts to apply the benefits of space technology ... to problems on Earth are now coming to fruition.” Data from Skylab and Earth Resources Technology Satellite Erts 1 were being used for applications including resource discovery and management, environmental information, and land use planning. Communications satellites had become a principal method of international communication and important in meeting national defense needs. Skylab had provided new information on the energy characteristics of the sun that could aid understanding of thermonuclear processes and contribute to development of new energy sources. Skylab had proved that man could effectively live and work in space for extended periods of time. Advances in aeronautics had contributed to defense of the Nation and helped reduce aircraft congestion and provide quieter, safer, more economical and efficient aircraft. The report said that in previous years NASA’s emphasis in space had been to expand human knowledge of phenomena, develop and operate space vehicles, and preserve U.S. leadership in aeronautics and space technology. But 1973 had been the year of “cashing in” on the technology development and knowledge obtained from lunar and space exploration programs. (CR, 8 April 74, H2677; Text)
The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites on a single booster from Plesetsk, in its second eight-satellite launch of the year [see 23 April]. Orbital parameters were: Cosmos 677—1466-km apogee, 1398-km perigee, 114.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 678—1533-km apogee, 1466-km perigee, 116.0-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 679—1511-km apogee, 1466-km perigee, 115.8-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 680—1492-km apogee, 1466-km perigee, 115.5-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 681■—1472-km apogee, 1466-km perigee, 115.3-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 682—1466-km apogee, 1453-km perigee, 115.1-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 683—1467-km apogee, 1434-km perigee, 114.9-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 684—1467-km apogee, 1416-km perigee, 114.7-min period, 74.0° inclination. The U.S. press speculated that the satellites were part of an operational system for worldwide naval communications, (gsfc Whly SSR, 19-25 Sept 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 20 Sept 74, Ul; SBD, 23 Sept 74, 101; 21 Oct 74,52)
The Air Force launched Nts 1 Navigation Technology Satellite on an Atlas F booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base into orbit with a 13 762-km apogee, 13 440-km perigee, 7-hr 48-min period, and 125.1° inclination. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Naval Research Laboratory and originally called Timation 3A, would test techniques under consideration for the Dept, of Defense’s navstar Global Positioning System (gps) . Nts 1 carried receivers and transmitters to broadcast its exact position continuously and an atomic clock to transmit ultraprecise time signals, navstar, when completed in the mid-1980s, would be a system of 24 satellites providing worldwide, accurate, and instantaneous three-dimensional positions of air, sea, and surface vehicles equipped with a gps receiver. (Pres Rpt 74; Av Wk, 22 July 74,14; ajfsc Release oip 274.74)
U.S. officials were increasingly concerned by strong pressure from developing countries, backed by the U.S.S.R., to restrict the use of satellites to broadcast TV programs from one country directly to the home sets of another, the Washington Post reported. Old cultures were afraid of being “irremediably debased by the hard sell’ techniques so commercially lucrative in the ‘advanced’ societies.” As the world’s technological giant, the U.S. was the most suspect and the trend among the developing countries was “to tie up . . . the use of satellites by the ‘space-faring’ nations . . . before they gain too great a head start.” (Welles, W Post, 16 March 74, A18)
Large underwater oscillations, called “internal waves” and usually invisible at the surface, had been detected by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists Dr. John R. Apel and Robert Charnell, using images from NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972), noaa announced. The scientists speculated that internal-wave formation by lunar and solar tides and their subsequent 'breaking and dissipation of energy were important processes in the gradual lengthening of the day over millions of years. The waves also affected the propagation of sound in the ocean and contributed to the mixing processes in its upper layers. Internal waves changed the way sunlight was reflected from the ocean surface overlying them, and the change was detected in the satellite images, (noaa Release 74-32) 2b February: The U.S. Postal Service announced the design of a 10-cent stamp to commemorate the Skylab program. To be issued 14 May on the first anniversary of the launch of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop, the stamp would depict the 7 June 1973 two-man spacewalk that freed the jammed solar panel during the Skylab 2 mission (25 May to 22 June 1973). The horizontal stamp was designed by Robert T. McCall of Arizona, (usps Release 11)
An Erts 1 photo map of the contiguous 48 states of the U.S., the first ever assembled from satellite images, had been completed for NASA by the Dept, of Agriculture’s Soil Cartographic Division, NASA announced. The three- by five-meter map was composed from 595 cloud-free black and white images taken 25 July-31 Oct 1972 from an altitude of 912 km by the multispectral scanner on Erts 1 (launched by NASA 23 July 1972). The mosaic would provide a base for regional compilation of investigation results, provide the first synoptic look at the U.S. for scientists examining subcontinental lineaments and faults, permit construction of a national surface water inventory, provide a base for a national-vegetation-cover and continuous-land-classification inventory, provide an accurate assessment of the national water drainage network, and document 1972 national land use. The mosaic would be displayed publicly for the first time in ceremonies at nasa Hq. 26 April, (nasa Release 74-91)
The second Meeting of Signatories of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (intelsat) was held in Acapulco, Mexico. The delegates determined that a 1.106226% investment share would entitle a signatory or group of signatories to representation on the Board of Governors, (intelsat Release 74-17; intelsat pao, interview)
The Air Force Systems Command announced that it would launch an S3-1 satellite late in 1974 as part of a three-launch series to measure atmospheric effects on satellites. The first satellite would be placed in polar orbit with a 4000-km apogee and a 140-km perigee. It would be equipped with ionization gauges and accelerometers to measure air density and to provide data on space vehicle trajectory, slowdown, and decay. Other devices would measure atmospheric heating sources, solar radiation, and atmospheric parameters. With a mass spectrometer in addition, to gather neutral and ion composition data, the experiments would help researchers understand physical and chemical processes in interactions of the sun’s radiation with the upper atmosphere, as well as neutral atmospheric effects on the ionosphere. The low-altitude measurements would be used to predict the occurrence and duration of radio blackouts and of atmospheric effects on orbits, (afsc Release oip 137.74)
A Soviet earth station to provide U.S.—U.S.S.R. Hot Line communications via Intelsat and Molniya satellites went into operation. The comsat station, near Moscow, was constructed under a bilateral agreement signed in Washington 30 Sept. 1971 to improve the Washington-Moscow direct communications link in an effort to reduce risk of war. (ComSatCorp Off Internat’l Affairs, interview, 23 Jan 75; A&A 1971, 1972) .
McDonnell Douglas Corp. had been awarded a $13-million contract by Alyeska Pipeline Service Go. to produce 100 000 heat pipes for the trans-Alaska pipeline, the Seattle Journal of Commerce and Northwest Construction Record reported. The heat pipes, called cryo-anchor soil stabilizers, were developed by McDonnell Douglas for thermal control of Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched 15 May 1973) and unmanned satellites. They would prevent thawing of permafrost around the pipe supports of elevated portions of the 1285-km pipeline by removing heat from the ground and transmitting it to an above-ground radiator, where it would be dispersed into the atmosphere. (Seattle Journ Commerce & NW Constr Record, 15 July 74)
Communications Satellite Corp. reported a net income of $21 013 000, or $2.10 a share, for the first six months of 1974—up from $15 223 000, or $1.52 a share, for the same period in 1973. Operating revenues for the period were $63 322 000, up from $55 902 000 in 1973. The increased revenues had resulted from a gain in the number of half-circuits leased by ComSatCorp to its carrier customers for overseas satellite communications. (ComSatCorp Release 74-41)
The Air Force awarded a $42.8-million fixed-price-incentive firmaward-fee contract to Rockwell International Corp. to design, develop, fabricate, launch, and operate three prototype satellites in the navstar Global Positioning System. Included in the contract were associated hardware, qualification model, and computer programming and services. In addition, two navigation subsystems would be delivered for use aboard a NAVSTAR satellite to be developed by the Naval Research Laboratory. When completed, the 24 satellites in the NAVSTAR system would provide worldwide precise positioning and navigation, day or night, and under all weather conditions, (dod Release 268-74)
NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite—routinely surveying crops, forests, watersheds, and mineral deposits on the earth since its 23 July 1972 launch—had transmitted photos of seven major Soviet antiballistic missile launch and radar installations at the Sary Shagan development site in southern Russia, the San Diego Union reported. The newspaper pointed out the erts satellites might be used to discover whether the Soviets were violating arms limitation agreements. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 15 Dec 75)
NASA launched Symphonie 1, French and West German experimental communications satellite, at 9:39 pm est from Eastern Test Range on a three-stage, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The 402-kg satellite entered a transfer orbit with a 38 071-km apogee, 402-km perigee, 688.2-min period, and 13.2° inclination. Nine seconds after the Thor-Delta’s 3rd stage separated from the 2nd stage, the inertial measurement unit (the altitude-sensing portion in the 2nd-stage guidance system) stopped functioning, but the failure did not affect the path of the already separated 3rd stage. In addition, the main engine cutoff was achieved by fuel depletion with 430 kg liquid oxygen remaining instead of with the planned depletion. The anomalies, which did not affect the mission, were under investigation. Ground controllers in West Germany activated the apogee kick motor, the first using liquid propellant, at 6:00 pm est 21 Dec., putting the spacecraft in circular geosynchronous orbit with 35 810-km apogee, 35 767-km perigee, 23-hr 56-min period, and 0.3° inclination. The spacecraft was despun and three-axis-stabilized and its large solar panels were successfully deployed 24 Dec. Symphonie 1 drifted eastward to its final station at 115° W longitude over the west coast of Africa and began operations 2 Jan. 1975. The NASA mission objective—to launch the spacecraft into a transfer orbit that would permit the onboard propulsion system to place it in an accurate synchronous orbit—was satisfied and the mission was adjudged successful 6 Jan. Symphonie 1 would provide 1200 telephone circuits, 8 voice channels, and 2 color TV channels for experimental communications between Europe, Africa, and South America. The first of two Symphonie satellites, provided for by a French-West Germany agreement signed June 1967, the satellite was developed by a French-German industrial consortium under the direction of the French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) and the West German Gesell-schaft fur Weltraumforschung (Gfw). In October 1973 NASA agreed to provide the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis and in June 1974 signed a launch services contract with CNES-Gfw. Goddard Space Flight Center in cooperation with French and West German ground stations was responsible for tracking the spacecraft during launch and transfer orbit operations. GSFC was also responsible for the launch vehicle. (nasa mors, 13 Dec 74, 6 Jan 75; NASA prog off, interview, 29 Aug 75; NASA Release 74-316)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched 23 July 1972, stopped transmitting useful stored global data, following continued degradation of its tape recorder. After two years of operation, Erts 1 was providing only real-time imagery, making world-wide coverage no longer possible. Good continuous U.S. coverage was being maintained by ground stations in Canada, Alaska, California, Maryland, and Brazil. The satellite * had been designed for one-year operational lifetime, (gsfc proj off, interview, 30 July 75; Av Wk, 19 Aug 74, 17; NASA Release 73-62; NASA, ERTS-A Fact Sheet, 12 July 72)
Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1 (launched 13 April) made America’s first mail delivery via satellite, sending a “mailgram,” combination telegram and letter, from New York to Los Angeles. A 60-word mailgram to the West Coast cost $1.35, rather than the $6.00 for a telegram. Regular, one-business-day transmission of mailgrams by satellite from New York to Los Angeles would begin in late September, with mailgram traffic from the East Coast to Texas and parts of the West Coast beginning late in the year. (NASA Hq WB, 7 Oct 74; AP, B Sun, 6 Sept 74, A3)
In a Skylab awards ceremony at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented Group Achievement Awards to the Skylab Program Offices at msFc, Kennedy Space Center, Johnson Space Center, and NASA Hq. and to special Skylab teams. Dr. Robert A. Parker, NASA astronaut and Skylab program scientist at JSC, received an Outstanding Leadership Medal. Dr. Fletcher also presented 28 individual Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medals to principal investigators for Skylab experiments and to Comet Kohoutek scientific investigators, (msfc Release 74-227; Marshall Star, 27 Nov 74) Questioned about a newspaper article saying the Viking lander might sink deep into Martian surface dust, Dr. Petrone said that tests mentioned in the article had been made some years earlier, not “two weeks ago” as reported. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified that the lander’s footpad area had been increased since the earlier tests and that radar observations had indicated the proposed landing sites for the first mission appeared “well within the capability” of the lander. Sites for the second mission were still being studied. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 20 Nov 74, A3) 22 November-6 January 1975: NASA launched Skynet IIB, a U.K. military communications satellite, for the U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Office as agents for the U.K. Ministry of Defense. The satellite was launched on a three-stage Thor-Delta launch vehicle from Eastern Test Range at 7:28 pm est into an orbit with a 36 965-km apogee, 185km perigee, and 24.6° inclination. The apogee kick motor, fired at 8:10 pm est on 24 Nov., circularized the orbit with an apogee of 36 595 km, perigee of 35 896 km, period of 24 hrs 19.4 min, and inclination of 2.2°. The spacecraft then drifted to its geosynchronous station at 50° E longitude over the Indian Ocean. NASA adjudged the launch a success 6 Jan. 1975. The first-generation Skynet A and B had been developed for the U.K. in the usaf’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) and launched by NASA 21 Nov. 1969 and 18 Aug. 1970. Skynet IIA failed to achieve a satisfactory orbit when launched 18 Jan. 1974 and reentered 25 Jan. The launch of Skynet I IB had been delayed from 19 Nov. by a defective component in the Delta 2nd-stage attitude control system. (nasa mors, 7 Nov, 5 Dec 74; 6 Jan 75; gsfc Wkly SSR, 21-26 Nov 74; NASA Release 74-303; AP, W Post, 12 Nov 74, C5)
Communications Satellite Corp. Laboratories and Telesat Canada had recently completed j oint field tests of the transmission of digital data through Canada’s Anik 1 communications satellite (launched 9 Nov. 1972), ComSatCorp announced. Data were transmitted at 67.2 megabits per sec, believed to be the highest rate ever transmitted by satellite. The high rate allowed two digital TV communications system color channels to be carried through a single transponder. The tests confirmed previous system analyses and proved the ability of satellites to transmit the equivalent of 100 newspaper pages in one minute. (ComSatCorp Release 74-22)
ats-f Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled for a 30 May launch, was “a very unusual nasa satellite,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said at an ats-f press briefing in Washington, D.C. It was an advanced satellite with a huge transmitting antenna and “the first step towards ... a satellite that can broadcast TV directly to your homes.” Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Caspar W. Weinberger said that hew would be using the satellite for career counseling, teacher training, education of medical students, health eduoation, and transmission of medical records to remote areas of Alaska, Appalachia, and the Rocky Mountains. The practical civilian application “justifies fully a continuance of . . . both the space program in its inner-space aspects as well as . . . bringing it down to earth and using it in our own daily lives.” President Henry Loomis of the Corp. for Public Broadcasting said that, for the “first time, we will have current TV programming available in Alaska.” TV videotapes now were sent to Alaska by mail and reaching the most remote 10% of the people cost as much as reaching the remaining 90%. ats-f would greatly reduce that cost. NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications Leonard Jaffe said that the ats-f was “a major step forward” in the amount of radio frequency power that a satellite could generate to earth and focus very precisely on a small area. Because of this capability, very small, simple receiving stations would be adequate. (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 17 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 892-km apogee, 863-km perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite carried equipment to obtain cloud- and snow-cover images on the sunward and shadow sides of the globe as well as data on thermal energy reflected and emitted by the earth and the atmosphere, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 18-24 April 74; Tass, fbis— Sov, 25 April 74, U1; SF, Sept 74,395)
Satellite observations had been used by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists to map the fading—or “recovery phase”—of the mammoth, layered ring of hot charged particles that encircled the earth during magnetic storms and temporarily canceled the earth’s magnetic field, noaa announced. Explorer 45, launched 15 Nov. 1971 into an elliptical orbit with a good view of the ring current, had measured the distribution of protons before, during, and after a major magnetic storm 17 Dec. 1971. The noaa study found that interactions of hot and cold plasmas in the ring changed the pitch angle of the protons in relation to the magnetic lines of force, permitting some to escape. By mapping distributions of proton pitch angles, researchers could predict what would happen during the recovery phase of a magnetic storm, (noaa Release 74-86)
Westinghouse Corp. subsidiary TCom 'Inc. (for Tethered Communications) was testing the aerostat, an inexpensive alternative to earthorbiting satellites, Time reported. Developed from signal-relay balloons used for reaching isolated U.S. outposts in Vietnam, the aerostat was a helium-filled balloon anchored at altitudes of 3000-5000 m. In the Bahamas, an aerostat at a 3500-m altitude picked up signals from Miami 180 km away, trebling the range of Florida stations. With its 1800 kg of electronic equipment, the aerostat could receive and broadcast up to 4 TV channels, 2 command radio stations, and data from 5000 to 10 000 microwave circuits. (Time, 23 Sept 74)
Communications Satellite Corp. filed proposed rates with the Federal Communications Commission for a new medium-speed digital-data satellite service called digisat, to provide digital data channels between the U.S. mainland and Hawaii. The proposed monthly rate to international common carriers would be $2700 for 2.4 kilobits per sec, $3000 for 4.8 kbps, and $3900 for 9.6 kbps. Expansion to European points was expected later in the year. (ComSatCorp Release 74-21; ComSatCorp pao, interview)
NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on applications programs before the Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1975 authorization hearings. In NASA’s weather and climate program, satellites were providing increasingly valuable information for short-range forecasting: day and night cloud-cover images around the globe, temperature profiles (although still cloud-limited) and surface temperature maps, gross moisture profiles, and sea ice mapping. NASA had begun microwave sounding experiments to overcome the cloud problem. Still needed were improved sounding accuracy and coverage, refined moisture profiles, and simpler and less expensive random-access data-collection systems. For one- to two-week prediction, space capabilities were contributing to progress but lacked complete coverage of critical wind and temperature areas around the globe. New measurement approaches and improved cloud tracking were planned. For severe storm and disaster warnings— which contained “the greatest potential payoff’—a long-term effort was studying advances in computer technology and display devices to assimilate and convey the mass of data produced. NASA had begun to develop primitive climate models for farmers that would have “high utility value to the agriculture section of our economy.” Remote sensing from space and research in a laboratory carried on the space shuttle could give data on weather modification possibilities and results. (Transcript)
Plans almost to double spending for the European Space Research Organization’s Ariane launch vehicle program in 1975 were made at ah Ariane Program Board meeting in Paris. Spending authority would exceed $71 million, up from 1974’s $37-million budget, and obligational authority was proposed at about $110 million instead of $71 million proposed earlier, in authorizations expected to be approved at the 26 Nov. Board meeting. The Board—made up of officials from esro and 10 European countries financing Ariane development—met to review budget and development following France’s confirmation that she would continue to contribute 62.5% of the financing. The development schedule would still call for flight trials of the launcher in 1979 and 1980. The Board also was informed that the Societe Europeene de Propulsion (sep) had sold a production license for the Ariane’s Viking rocket motors to the Indian Space Research Organization for ISRo’s SLV—3 vehicle, under development for launching future educational broadcast satellites. (Av Wk, 28 Oct 74,19)
NASA reactivated the main telemetry system on Explorer 46 Meteoroid Technology Satellite (launched 13 Aug. 1972), to gain additional data on the impact flux of small meteoroids. The telemetry system had been shut down 22 Aug. 1972 after the spacecraft battery had overheated, and a solar-powered backup had since transmitted only primary experiment data. Data received before shutdown had indicated that sensors flown on previous missions had overestimated the micrometeoroid population, but variation in the impact flux necessitated additional data. Data transmission would continue through February 1975. (nasa Release 74-321; NASA oast pio, interview, 3 Sept 75)
Plans for an Arab communications satellite network were presented by Arab League engineer Salah ’Amir during a meeting with League Secretary General Mahmud Riyad in Cairo. The plans—prepared -with the assistance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (unesco) and the International Communications Union—had been completed in 1972. The network would establish radio, TV, and news agency links among the Arab states to transmit standard educational, cultural, and development programs. Fifty ground stations would be established with the costs of each—between $500 000 and $1 000 000—defrayed by the country of its location. The costs of the satellites and launch facilities would be paid by member states. (Cairo MENA, FBis-Inter-Arab, 17 Jan 74, A6)
Dr. William 0. Davis, Chief of the Upper Atmosphere and Space Services Office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and a leading rocket and space expert, died in Washington, D.C., at the age of 54. Dr. Davis was a member of the interagency team that planned and coordinated NASA’s Earth Resources Satellite program. As Assistant Director of Laboratories at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 1957-1958, he had directed Project Far Side, the earliest attempt to obtain radiation and magnetic data from outer space by launching a multistage rocket from a high-altitude balloon. {W Post, 15 May 74)
The number of Federal scientists and engineers had increased to 166 700 by October 1972, an increase of 6% from 1967 and 1% from 1971, the National Science Foundation reported. The Depts. of Defense and Agriculture had continued to employ the largest number, although both agencies had. decreased since October 1971, by less than 0.05% and by 2%. NASA’s scientists and engineers decreased 3% from 1971. Nonprofessional scientific and technical personnel grew 1% Government-wide from 1967 to 1972. The yearly rate of salary increase for Federal scientists and engineers decreased from 9% for 1967-1970 to 5% for 1970-1972. (NSF Highlights, 28 Feb 74) During February: The European Space Research Organization awarded study and advance procurement contracts totaling $2.8 million for its maritime satellite marots. GEc/Marconi of the United Kingdom received a six-month $1.16-million contract for Phase B detailed design and definition work on the communications payload. Thomson-csF of France was awarded $100 000 to continue critical development of an L-band transistor amplifier. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., also of U.K., was awarded a six-month $1.13-million contract for a Phase B detailed design study to adapt the Orbital Test Satellite platform to a maritime mission and for associated advance procurement. MAROTS would be launched into geostationary orbit in August 1977 to acquire experimental data and preoperational experience, (esro Newsletter, June 74, 4) March 1974
Ninety-three research teams in the U.S. and foreign countries had been selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, NASA announced. The studies, selected from 669 proposals, included work in agriculture, forestry, environment, interpretive techniques, land use, marine resources, meteorology, mineral resources, oil, civil works, hazards, and water resources. The investigators would use data from Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, and Erts-B, scheduled for early 1975 launch. NASA would fund the domestic studies at a cost of nearly $5.9 million. (NASA Release 74—193)
Johnson Space Center and the Mexican National Commission for Outer Space had begun a remote-sensing test project to assist in eradicating the screwworm from Mexico, NASA announced. The experimental phase vas under way and was expected to continue for a year. Sensor data provided by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) and orbiting meteorological satellites including Noaa 2 and 3 (launched 15 Oct. 1972 and 6 Nov. 1973) would be combined with data from a Mexican remote-sensing aircraft on soil temperature, moisture, and vegetation—all of which affected breeding patterns of the screwworm fly. Sterile flies could then be distributed to potential breeding grounds of the fly, which frequently caused $200 million annual losses to cattle, poultry, and wildlife. (NASA Release 74-60)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) introduced an amendment to S. 2350 that would continue experimentation with earth resources remote-sensing satellite systems through 1 Jan. 1980 unless a permanent system was established before that date. The amendment was a substitute for S. 2350, the earth resources survey bill to develop an operational erts system and to establish an Office of Earth Resources Survey Systems within NASA and an Earth Resources Observation Administration within the Dept, of the Interior [see 18 Sept.]. Other provisions of the amendment would require the President, through nasa and doi, to ensure continuity of satellite data during the experimental period and furnish Congress with any necessary budget amendments. (CR, 25 Nov 74, SI9948)
The U.S.S.R. proposed that the United Nations establish a center for collection and distribution of data from earth-orbiting satellites. The proposal was made in response to a U.S. offer to supply the U.N. with a master copy of all information obtained from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched 23 July 1972, if a facility would be available to process the data. The Soviet proposal suggested a single international center, under the U.N. or another international organization and financed by voluntary contributions. The U.S.S.R. previously had been unwilling to bring in any international authority. U.S. space experts later suggested the new proposal was a significant development in closer Soviet-U.S. cooperation, reached by the scientific exchanges between the two countries. Another view was that the U.S.S.R. was trying to head off a possibility that the U.S. might turn over its expertise to private enterprise. Brazil had earlier proposed a treaty that would obligate space powers to obtain consent of governments for remote-sensing activities over their countries and for release of the data obtained. (UN Doc A/AC.105/C.1/ WG.4/L.6/Add 3; NYT, 10 Feb 74,20)
The Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) Memorandum of Understanding was signed in Paris hy Acting Director General Roy Gibson of the European Space Research Organization and Canadian Ambassador Leo Cadieux. U.S. Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield had signed the Memorandum 9 May. The joint Aerosat program would test, evaluate, and demonstrate the system in preparation for a worldwide operational system of air traffic control in the mid-1980s. The first of two geostationary satellites over the Atlantic Ocean was to be launched in 1977. (esro Release, 1 Aug 74; FAA Satellite Div, interview, 21 July 75) ... .
An automated blood pressure monitoring system developed for the NASA integrated medical and behavioral laboratory measurement system (nyiBLMs) program was being evaluated for use in studies on control of high blood pressure, Johnson Space Center announced. Using Skylab technology, the system combined a blood pressure cuff with a pressure ramp programmer for continuous monitoring and a numerical display. Dr. Ted Andrechuk of Texas Tech Univ. was evaluating the system, which was providing hypertensive subjects with biosensory data for a biofeedback conditioning program. The conditioning would allow the patient to lower his blood pressure permanently, (jsc Release 74184) 6, 8, 9 August: The Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee conducted hearings on S. 2350 and S. 3484, bills to establish an Office of Earth Resources Survey Systems within NASA and an Earth Resources Observation Administration within the Dept, of the Interior. Both proposals were designed to move the Earth Resources Technology Satellite system from an experimental to an operational phase. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, opposed the organizational changes proposed by the bills. He argued that S. 2350 would erect barriers in NASA between the erts system and related programs in NASA’s Office of Applications; keeping these programs together would facilitate hardware development and data reduction and handling. S. 3484 would limit NASA’s research and development in earth resources to activities supported and funded by the Dept, of the Interior. Citing the need for more spectral channels, more rapid handling of data, and more frequent repetitive coverage with ERTS-class satellites, Dr. Fletcher stated that there was no clear-cut distinction between experimental and operational phases in the earth resources program. What was needed was “a continuous evolutionary approach, in which operationally useful data from space are provided to users for research, for experimental demonstrations, and for routine operations when they are ready, while at the same time and with the same satellites necessary improvements to the system can be developed and used.” Proponents of the bills argued that erts data would be exploited fully only when users could be guaranteed the continuously available data offered by an operational system. Hearings would be continued 18 Sept. (Transcript)
Marshall Space Flight Center held a final review of the Zero-Gravity Atmospheric Cloud Physics Project Phase A Definition Study. The study established the feasibility of atmospheric cloud physics research on Spacelab and recommended preparation of a Phase B study, (msfc Orbital & Space Environmental Br, interview, 6 Aug 75; msfc Release 74-181) 9— 25 October: Johnson Space Center Flight Operations Aircraft Div. completed the first mission of Project Airstream, gathering high-altitude gaseous and particulate samples from the upper atmosphere in the Western Hemisphere with the NASA high-altitude WB-57F aircraft. Sampling missions, flown for the Atomic Energy Commission and the Dept, of Transportation, allowed AEC to determine the global distribution of atmospheric nuclear weapon test debris, both gaseous and particulate. Nine NASA crewmen alternated in the 14 flights of the first mission, logging 51 500 km in all. (JSC Release 74-269) 10— 30 October: NASA launched Westar 2 (Westar-B), the second U.S. commercial domestic communications satellite, for Western Union Telegraph Co. from Eastern Test Range at 6:53 pm edt on a Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The satellite was placed in a close-to-planned transfer orbit with a 36 107-km apogee, 231-km perigee, and 24.76° inclination. The apogee kick motor, fired 13 Oct., circularized the orbit with 35 766km apogee, 35 244-km perigee, 23-hr 42-min period, and 0.5° inclination. By 25 Nov. the comsat was operating normally at its station at about 90° W longitude above the equator. The launch had been twice delayed, once for investigation of the entire Delta program and once for a last minute check of a connector pin. When launched, the vehicle performed as planned with two minor exceptions (both due to human error): the 2nd-stage cold-gas redundant altitude-control system switched from primary to backup nozzles because the guidance system had been programmed with too low a moment threshold and the umbilical end fitting was damaged because a tether had been improperly installed. Neither problem compromised the NASA mission objective: to place the satellite in an orbit of sufficient accuracy for transfer into a stationary synchronous orbit while retaining sufficient stationkeeping propulsion to meet the mission lifetime requirements. The objective was met, and the mission was adjudged successful 30 Oct. Westar 2 joined Westar 1, launched 13 April 1974 and later placed in geosynchronous orbit at 99° W longitude. The Westar Satellite Communications System—consisting of Westar 1 and 2, a third satellite for later launch, and five ground stations—had the potential for general-purpose telecommunications throughout the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Western Union planned to make the system available to all users, largely through leasing the voice, TV, and data transmitting services. NASA would be reimbursed for the launch, (nasa mors, 1, 25 Nov 74; nasa Releases 74-147, 74-265; Westar Release, 12 Sept 74; SBD, 11 Oct 74,214)
The Federal Plan for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research— Fiscal Year 1975, published for presentation to Congress, called for programs totaling $576.7 million, an increase of $5.7 million over 1974. Published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and including proposed activities of all Federal agencies with meteorological programs, the 1975 plan proposed an improved noaa severe weather warning system; use of new technology for more efficient observation, recording, analysis, and warning in the Dept, of Defense and other agencies; and expanded Federal Aviation Administration weather services to aviation. NASA proposed increases for research with the Nimbus satellite series, (noaa Release 74-128)
The experimental satellite was scheduled for launch in early 1977. {Broadcasting, 9 Sept 74, 68) The review, attended by 11 000 persons, included presentations on technology for safer aircraft, supersonic and hypersonic aircraft, energy-efficient flight, low-speed aircraft, quieter airport communities, protection of the marine environment, preservation of the earth’s atmosphere, exploration of the planetary environment, and energy sources and use. (NASA Tech Brief B73-10463; LeRC pio, interviews, 24 June, 24 July 75; Biggins, Newport News, Va, Times-Herald, 11 Sept 74; NASA Activities, Oct 74,11-12)
Computer enhancement of multispectral photographs from Erts 1 satellite (circling the earth since 23 July 1972) had been proved useful for finding mineral and water deposits on the earth. Computer image enhancement, first used at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to improve early spacecraft pictures of the moon and Mars, had identified surface signs of known mineral deposits for JPL and U.S. Geological Survey investigators. Twenty ERTS-identified points had been verified in a test area, exploratory drilling had uncovered water-bearing rock 12 m below an ERTS-indicated water hole, and fractures indicating other drilling sites had been revealed, (nasa 74-27)
Air Force Systems Command announced plans for a global Radio Solar Telescope'Network (rstn), a four-site space-surveillance linkup for 24-hr operation. Solar and space environmental data would be gathered by rstn parabolic antennas monitoring frequencies between 245 and 15 400 mhz. Data would be used to forecast atmospheric responses to solar activity, to compensate for communications blackouts of satellite and warning systems, and to provide real-time solar-alert and analysis data. Operational testing would begin early in 1976, with the network to become fully operational over a three-year period, (afsc Release oip 132.74)
The House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Transportation approved a Federal Aviation Administration budget request of -63 million to begin the Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) system. The two-satellite system, to be built in cooperation with the European Space Research Organization and Canada, would provide over-the-ocean communications for aircraft. In Subcommittee hearings faa Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield said recent changes in the program had eliminated airline opposition. The changes would limit the size and cost of the program, preclude the imposition of user charges on aircraft operators for recovery of r&d costs, eliminate any commitment for a follow-on operational system, include a very-high-frequency capability for evaluation against L-band, and limit the number of earth terminals. Signing of a- Memorandum of Understanding by the participants was pending Senate approval of the faa budget request. (Subcom Staff Off, interview; Av Wk, 8 April 74,21; SBD, 3 April 74,190)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) introduced S. 3175 to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to authorize NASA to contract for tracking and data reply satellite services. (CR, 13 March 74, S3548; nasa LAR, VIII[XIII]/30)
Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, nasa Chief of Solar Physics, testified during NASA FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight that Skylab data had changed the understanding of the solar wind. Scientists had thought the solar wind reached the earth because of an expansion of the sun’s corona, but Skylab data indicated the sun’s magnetic fields confined the corona material and pulled it inward. The corona expanded and escaped in a significant amount only through coronal holes in the magnetic field. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences, testified that the Skylab 2 and Skylab 3 crews (launched 25 May and 28 July 1973) had experienced similar reductions in their blood cell mass, with a red blood cell reduction. However, after the 59-day Skylab 3 mission the compensating response of the blood-forming elements was faster, returning the mass almost to the pr'eflight level within two weeks after splashdown—rather than the six weeks required after the 28-day Sky-lab 2 mission. The Skylab 4 crew (which splashed down Feb. 8 after 16 Nov. 1973 launch) showed much less red blood cell loss and a much faster return to preflight levels after the 84-day mission, indicating adaptive changes to the space environment. The space life sciences program sought to understand the mechanisms of adaptive changes and would “undoubtedly assist our understanding of basic body physiology of man here on earth.” Capt. Chester M. Lee, Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Program Director, said that during Skylah missions the orbital altitude and the limited number of ground stations had permitted communications coverage only 38% of the time. The lower orbital altitude for ASTP would reduce communications coverage to 17%. To alleviate the problem, the Apollo command module was being modified for communications via the ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled for 1974 launch. Communications woxdd move from a manned spacecraft through an unmanned communications satellite to the ground for the first time. Coverage would be increased to 50%. The present configuration of the communications network would furnish minimum real-time data to meet experimental requirements. (Transcript)
nhk Technical Research Laboratory of Japan had developed a TV receiving system that could bring satellite-to-home transmission within five years, Broadcasting journal reported. With General Electric Co., nhk was constructing an experimental 12-ghz broadcast satellite designed to transmit signals within the fm band. An AM—fm converter attached to a standard receiver would transform the image into a standard TV signal.
Dr. George A. Van Biesbroeck, Univ. of Arizona astronomer noted for his work with twin stars, asteroids, and comets, died in Arizona at the age of 94. Dr. Van Biesbroeck had charted the orbit of Neptune’s second satellite, published catalogs of double stars, and discovered 11 asteroids and 2 comets. In the 1930s he had been instrumental in establishing the McDonald Observatory in Fort Davis, Tex. Dr. Van Biesbroeck had won the Franklin L. Burr Award from the National Geographic Society in 1952 for finding new proof of the bending of light from stars in support of the Einstein theory of relativity. (AP, NYT, 26 Feb 74, 36) 24 February-1 March: This would be the age we could contact other civilizations, Dr. Frank D. Drake, Cornell Univ. astronomer, told the annual meeting of the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science in San Francisco. The problem was finding ways to detect them. Analysis of data from a 1973 search of 500 stars by Univ. of Maryland and Univ. of Chicago scientists had failed to reveal radio emissions suggestive of other technological civilizations. Possibly “no one is seeking to make radio transmissions” and eavesdropping would be the only method of detection. Project Cyclops, a NASA-supported study proposing construction of a 16-km-wide field of 1400, 91-m antennas, would have a high probability of success if civilization existed within 200 light years. The ultimate $5-billion cost would be less than the Apollo moon landings and would give man a chance to contact the “galactic community.” {NYT, 14 March 74, 15; Salisbury, CSM, 7 March 74) _
The satellite relay system planned for the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz space mission was tested by Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center communications engineers. Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May) and the Apollo S-band, steerable, high-gain antenna were tested together for the transmission of voice, television, and simulated telemettry data in preparation for the first spacecraft-to-satellite-to-ground routing employed in the manned space flight program. Signals were transmitted between JSC and the ground station in Rosman, N.C., via the Ats 6 in a simulation of mission conditions, (jsc Release 74-264; jsc Roundup, 8 Nov 74)
NASA submitted its report NASA Energy-Related Research and Development to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, at the request of its chairman, Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah), nasa’s FY 1974 budget had included a $2-million authorization for energy r&d for projects in solar energy utilization; energy conversion, transmission, and storage; transportation and propulsion systems; and energy and environmental conservation. Long-range research included studies of satellite systems to collect solar energy, convert it to electricity, and transmit it to the earth by microwave beams. In one study the use of solar cells would be considered, while in another the possibility of a turbogenerator in space would be explored. Near-term projects included demonstration of residential solar heating and cooling at Marshall Space Flight Center, office building tests at Langley Research Center, and component studies at Lewis Research Center. LeRC was also sponsoring a study of crops that could be converted into clean fuels, and a NASA-National Science Foundation study was testing wind-electric generating devices. Projects at Jet Propulsion Laboratory and LeRC sought to design low-polluting but higher efficiency automobile engines, and Flight Research Center was testing configuration changes to reduce aerodynamic drag for trucks. Energy conversion research included an LeRC study, in cooperation with the Dept, of Interior, of technical and economic advantages of a potassium topping cycle to permit higher peak cycle temperatures and produce 40% more electrical power for a given quantity of fuel than could conventional steam systems. (Com Print)
David Baker’s annual review of the NASA budget in Spaceflight concluded that the FY 1975 NASA budget marked “a significant turning point,” because the cuts were not as drastic as they had been in recent years, and, most important, there was a major increase for new programs—from $10.5 million in 1974 to $37.7 million. This led Baker to label “a trifle premature” his prediction of a year earlier that NASA might be relegated indefinitely to the role of serving “as a launch vehicle for satellites and space probes of other agencies, organizations, and nations.” (SF, Oct 74, 362-5) November 1974
Research into automotive propulsion systems was reviewed by NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Environmental Protection Agency officials in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. H.R. 10392 had been introduced 19 Sept. 1973 to authorize nasa research toward development of economical, energy-conserving systems with clean emissions and improved performance. Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified 4 Feb. that Lewis Research Center was testing epa’s experimental engine, under a June 1973 agreement with epa on work toward a low-pollution gas-turbine-powered vehicle. Upgraded engine work would be completed by mid-1975 and vehicle performance evaluation before the end of CY 1975. First results of Jet Propulsion Laboratory investigations of hydrogen injection into fuel to improve efficiency and reduce pollution in conventional automobile engines promised achievement of 1977 Federal emission standards with 25% improvement in fuel economy. LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin testified that, in addition to the gas turbine engine, a broader, longer range, advanced technology program was under way, with 13 industry contracts for such improvements as a low-emission combustor, higher-temperature heat exchangers, lower-cost turbine discs, turbine wheel cooling, and low-cost fuel controls. Dr. William H. Pickering, Jpl Director, reported a test automobile using bottled gas to inject hydrogen into the fuel had already met the carbon monoxide emission standard and had almost met the nitrogen oxide standard, although the hydrocarbon emissions remained a problem. With engine modifications to produce hydrogen from gasoline, instead of using bottled gas, performance per gallon of fuel was expected to improve 25% over the conventional engine. (Transcript) 4- 8 February: The first meeting of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s Assembly of Parties was held in Washington, D.C. Seventy-two of the eighty-four member governments were represented. Raymond J. Waldmann (U.S.) was elected Chairman and Dr. Osama Anani (Jordan) was elected Deputy Chairman. Elected as Vice-chairmen were Ambassador Alejandro Orfila (Argentina), Ambassador Adolfo Alessandrini (Italy), Ambassador Leonard 0. Kibinge (Kenya), and Ambassador Motoo Ogiso (Japan). The Assembly of Parties found that the proposed U.S. Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) and maritime satellite system would not interfere with the intelsat system, goes was technically compatible with the use of the radio-frequency spectrum and orbital space by the existing or planned satellites. The maritime satellite system would not prejudice direct satellite telecommunication links. The Assembly refused a United Nations request for free use of INTELSAT satellites, although a priority access arrangement, for periods not exceeding 90 days during an emergency, would be worked out. (intelsat Release 74-12). 5- 22 February: Mariner 10, launched 3 Nov. 1973, passed within 5800 km of Venus—within 15 km of the planned aim point—at 1:01 pm edt 5 Feb. The encounter sequence was accomplished according to plan and data were transmitted over the 45 million km between the earth and Venus at a rate of 117.6 kilobits per sec. Excellent ultraviolet cloud-structure pictures and new data on particle environment and mass, density, and shape of the planet were returned. Because Mariner 10 approached Venus on the dark side, the TV sequence was not begun until shortly before the encounter, at 12:21 pm edt. The spacecraft flew behind Venus at 1:07 pm edt for 20 min; TV signals were stored on tape and recovered without difficulty after Mariner 10 emerged from the occultation zone. During occultation, the spacecraft’s radio antenna was aimed toward the edge of the planet so that the radio signals were bent around Venus by the extremely dense atmosphere and sent on to the earth. All science instruments functioned normally except the scanning electrostatic analyzer. The TV sequence was completed 13 Feb. after some 4165 pictures were returned to the earth. During the flyby, the 503-kg spacecraft used the gravitational field of Venus to slow its speed and direct the flight path toward a 29 March encounter with Mercury. By 22 Feb. Mariner 10—its speed increasing as it came nearer the sun—was traveling 3 million km per day toward the planet. Preliminary science results were presented at a press briefing 7 Feb. at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Herbert S. Bridge, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist, said the solar wind was interacting with the ionosphere of Venus, producing a magnetic tail that could be detected as a modified plasma flow as far out from the planet as 500 Venus radii. Dr. James A. Dunne, Mariner project scientist, said the magnetic field doubled just before radio occultation but that no evidence of an intrinsic planetary magnetic field was found. Preliminary radio science results indicated that Venus was very round, 100 times less oblate than the earth, and confirmed that Venus had a dayside ionosphere. The mass of the planet was slightly less than that derived from previous data. Hydrogen was a major element of the Venus cloud deck, possibly present in droplets of sulfuric acid as well as water vapor. Manner 10 found no evidence of deuterium on the planet, indicating that the hydrogen had originated from the solar wind. Helium, carbon, and atomic oxygen were found in the atmosphere, with possible traces of argon and neon. Outer atmosphere temperature of 590 K (600°F) was suggested. TV data indicated a uniform main cloud deck with three or four layers and a stratified haze layer. TV pictures in uv showed a classical “Y” feature that originated in the equatorial region and spiraled toward the pole. Clear circulation patterns could be seen at the poles, caused by rising gas transporting excess solar heat from the equatorial zone by convection. The atmosphere was smooth, with no swirling storms, (nasa mor, 11 March 74; Briefing transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 5 Feb. 74, 18; 6 Feb. 74, 1; Miles, LA Times, 6 Feb 74)
The Dept, of Defense announced award of a $29 509 671 cost-plus-award-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. Electronics Div. to develop, produce, and operate the Phase I control and user system segments of the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System [see During August], (dod Release 793-74) 22 October-12 November: The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 690 biological satellite from Plesetsk into an orbit with 366-km apogee, 216-km perigee, 90.3-min period, and 68.8° inclination. The satellite carried white laboratory rats, steppe tortoises, insects, and fungi in a test of the combined effects of weightlessness and radiation. A cesium-137 gamma radiation source within the spacecraft provided an average radiation dose of 32 rads per hr on command from the earth. Beginning on the 10th day of the flight, the rats were exposed to doses of gamma-quantums ranging between 200 and 1000 rads over 24 hrs. After return to the earth 12 Nov., the rats were found to be more pathological and less active than after corresponding control experiments. The change in the hemopoietic and lymphoid organs was more sharply pronounced than in the Cosmos 605 experiments (31 Oct.—22 Nov. 1973). While experiment results were processed, research was continuing on methods of antiradiation protection by deflecting particles with an electric field. Czechoslovak and Romanian specialists cooperated with the U.S.S.R. on the Cosmos 690 project as part of the Intercosmos program, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 17-23, Oct 74; Pravda, FBIS-Sov, 3 Jan 75, Ul-^4)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) introduced H.R. 13961 to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to authorize NASA to contract for Tracking and Data Relay Satellite services. (CR, 3 April 74, H2584; nasa LAR, XIII/43)
Prof. Mikhail Tikhonravov, Soviet rocket pioneer, died in Moscow at the age of 73. Prof. Tikhonravov had worked on the development of the first man-made satellites, pilot-operated spacecraft, and automatic space stations. With Sergey P. Korolev, he had worked on development of early liquicUfuel rockets in the 1930s. He had been an early expert in glider and aircraft engineering. Tikhonravov had been awarded the Orders of Lenin and the Red Banner of Labor, the title of Hero of Socialist Labor, and the Lenin Prize. (NYT, 7 March 74, 40; Av Wk, 11 March 74)
The Air Force launched three satellites on a single Titan HID booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base—including S3-1, launched to measure air density, obtain upper-atmosphere composition data, and provide information on atmospheric effects on spacecraft orbits [see 7 Aug.]. The first satellite entered orbit with a 279-km apogee, 152-km perigee, 88.8-min period, and 96.7° inclination and reentered 19 March 1975. The second entered orbit with a 542-km apogee, 540-km perigee, 95.3-min period, and 96.1° inclination. The third entered orbit with a 3711-km apogee, 147-km perigee, 125.4-min period, and 97.0° inclination; it reentered 26 May 1975. (Pres Rpt 74; afsc pao, interview, 23 March 76; afsc Release oip 137.74)
A Memorandum of Understanding on space cooperation was signed at NASA Hq. by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. Robert M. White, Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; and Prof. Maurice Levy, President of France’s Centre National d’fitudes Spatiales. France agreed to design and build a data-collection system for Tiros-N meteorological satellite scheduled for launch in late 1977 and for the seven noaa operational satellites to follow, (nasa Photo No. 74-H—1170)
NASA and the Maritime Administration demonstrated that satellites could be used for high-quality ship-to-shore communications in L-band frequencies. Test transmissions from the National Maritime Research Center in New York were relayed by NASA’s Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May) to a commercial container ship en route from Virginia to France. Ats 6 could provide two-way communications between ground stations and mobile units operating in a 1080-km-wide area and would permit transmittal of cargo manifests and documentation before ship arrival in port, transmittal of payroll data for shore processing, and remote monitoring of ship machinery performance. (nasa Release 74-255; gsfc pio, interview, 24 June 75)
Stratospheric contamination from supersonic aircraft engines such as those fitted to the Anglo-French Concorde and the Soviet Tu-144 might lower the earth’s mean temperatures, with a catastrophic effect on agriculture, and increase the incidence of skin cancer from overexposure to ultraviolet radiation, according to a Dept, of Transportation study cited by the Washington Post. In a telephone interview with the Post Dr. Alan Grobecker, manager of dot’s climatic impact assessment program, confirmed the existence of the study, which was based on data collected by satellites, balloons, and instrumented aircraft. He emphasized that the pollution by the emission of nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide would have a worldwide impact because of the capacity of the stratosphere to retain the pollutants for nearly a year. A separate Agricultural Research Service study showed that stratospheric contamination could cut temperate climate crops by 60%. The DOT paper would be considered by committees of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering at a special meeting in July. (Wilson, WPost, 14 April 74, A8)
NASA and the Federal Government as a whole were charged with race and sex discrimination in a class action suit filed by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (naacp) Legal Defense Fund in U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C. The suit was initiated by two employees at Johnson Space Center. The naacp Legal Defense Fund labeled as “lame excuses” NASA’s claims that work forces were dropping throughout the agency and that it was difficult to find qualified blacks and women in its specialized areas of work. (AP, NYT, 21 Nov 74; Robinson, W Post, 21 Nov 74) 21 November-20 December: NASA launched Intelsat-IV F-8 for the Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. The 1387-kg satellite was launched from Eastern Test Range at 6:44 pm est on an Atlas-Centaur vehicle into a transfer orbit with a 35 899.2-km apogee, 536.5-km perigee, 10-hr 39.8-min period, and 26.0° inclination. NASA’s primary objectives were to conduct design, performance, and flight readiness reviews for the Federal Communications Commission, to ensure compatibility of Intelsat spacecraft with NASA launch vehicles and launch environmental conditions, and to launch Intelsat-IV F-8 into a transfer orbit that would permit the spacecraft apogee motor to inject the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit for communications service. The apogee kick motor was fired by ComSatCorp at 6:48 pm est on 23 Nov., placing Intelsat-IV F-8 in a near-circular .orbit with a 35 780-km apogee, 35 630-km perigee, 23-hr 51.9-min period, and 1.8° inclination. The spacecraft then drifted to its station at 174° E longitude over the Pacific Ocean, arriving 12 Dec. NASA adjudged the mission a success 20 Dec. Intelsat-IV F-8 joined five operational Intelsat IV commercial com-sats: three over the Atlantic—F—2 launched 25 Jan 1971, F—3 launched 19 Dec. 1971, and F—7 launched 23 Aug. 1973; one over the Pacific— F—4 launched 22 Jan. 1972; and one over the Indian Ocean—F—5 launched 13 June 1972. F-8 replaced F-4, which became a spare, orbiting over 178° E longitude. F-8 was designed to operate seven years and could provide multiple access and simultaneous transmission. It had a capacity for 3000 circuits with transponders in earth mode and 9000 circuits with transponders in spot-beam-coverage mode, or 12 TV channels, or certain combinations, (nasa mors, 22 Nov, 24 Dec 74; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21-26 Nov 74; nasa Release 74-305; intelsat Releases 74-62,74-70; nasa Atlas-Centaur Mgr, interview, 30 July 75)
The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites on a single booster from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters were: Cosmos 641—1483-km apogee, 1387-km perigee, 114.6-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 642—1481-km apogee, 1319-km perigee, 113.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 643—1482-km apogee, 1353-km perigee, 114.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 644—1483-km apogee, 1335-km perigee, 114.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 645—1483-km apogee, 1369-km perigee, 114.4-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 646—1486-km apogee, 1403-km perigee, 114.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 647—1484-km apogee, 1423-km perigee, 115.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 648—1480-km apogee, 1439-km perigee, 115.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. The press reported observers believed the satellites would operate in support of Soviet naval communications, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 18-24 April 74; SBD, 25 April 74,313)
Tentative NASA plans for launching 810 payloads into space in the next two decades were outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. The total, for late 1973 to 1991, included non-NASA payloads for Government agencies (other than the Dept, of Defense), foreign agencies, and private industry. The tentative payload model—presented to Congress in October 1973 to show “what could be done in the 1980s” when the space shuttle was in use—included as many as 10 missions to the outer planets Uranus, Neptune, Jupiter, and Saturn. In 1990 and 1991 two very heavy payloads might be sent to orbit one of Jupiter’s moons and land an instrument package. Tentative missions to the inner planets included five missions to Venus, one of them with a lander, and two spacecraft to orbit Mercury. Tentative Mars missions included one spacecraft to orbit the planet, two landers, and two to return samples from the two moons of Mars. Lunar missions under consideration included a lunar polar orbiter in 1979, two other orbiters in the 1980s, two lunar rovers in the 1980s, a lunar halo satellite to ensure communications with the hidden side of the moon, and two lunar rovers in 1990 and 1991 that could return samples to the earth from any point on the moon. Other plans under consideration were a flyby and rendezvous with Comet Encke and a landing on the nucleus, a flyby of Haley’s Comet in 1985, and two missions to asteroids in 1986. Of the 810 total payloads, 57 were designated for planetary exploration and 753 for earth orbit. Scientific satellites for earth orbit were Large Space Telescopes, High Energy Astronomical Observatories, Large Solar Observatories, Large Radio Astronomy Observatories, and x-ray telescopes. The large spacecraft would be unmanned but visited regularly by space shuttle crews and brought back to earth for refurbishing. In the applications field were large Earth Observatory Satellites. And NASA expected to orbit 120 communications and navigation satellites for other agencies or private industry through 1991, not including those for DOD. Of some 300 payloads to be flown in the Spacelab, most would be NASA payloads in the fields of astronomy, physics, earth observations, earth and ocean physics, communication and navigation, life science, and space technology. Of non-NASA payloads, 10 would be for private industry space processing, beginning in 1985. Some 10% were expected to be flown for foreign users. The large number of contemplated missions, even with the increasing number of U.S.S.R. launches, was expected to have very little impact on the environment. Effects of the major constituents of the solid-fueled rocket booster exhaust—water vapor, carbon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, and aluminum oxide—would be negligible. (Text)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 19 weather satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 904-km apogee, 842-km perigee, 102.4-min period, and 81.2° inclination. Tass reported that the spacecraft carried meteorological equipment to photograph cloud formations and snow cover and to obtain data on the thermal energy reflected and radiated by the earth and the atmosphere, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, Ul; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74,13)
The Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) awarded a $42 847 797 contract to Rockwell International Corp. Space Div. to design, develop, fabricate, launch, and operate three prototype satellites in the Navigation System Using Time and Ranging (navstar) Global Positioning System (gps). With a Naval Research Laboratory navstar technology satellite, the prototypes would provide positioning signals to support development and test of user equipment for all military services,_ Plans called for refurbished Atlas F space boosters to launch the spacecraft into 20 200-km orbits in 1977. (asfc Newsreview, Aug 74,16)
Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, Dept, of Defense Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testified on dod space programs before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1975 NASA authorization hearings: dod would provide an interim, upper, orbit-to-orbit stage (oos) for initial use with NASA’s space shuttle until NASA could develop a permanent space tug. The oos, which would provide the high orbits necessary for about 60% of military payloads, would be a low-cost modification of an existing upper stage and would be phased to coincide with the first operation of the shuttle orbiter in 1980. About $3.0 million would he spent in FY 1975 to select stage configuration and initiate detailed specifications. The oos would have no payload retrieval capability and might not be reusable but could be used by NASA or any other shuttle user during early shuttle operations, dod would install facilities to provide initial shuttle capability at Vandenberg Air Force Base in December 1982. Shuttle hardware, software, operating procedures, and ground equipment would be common and interchangeable to the maximum extent possible between KSC and Vandenberg. During FY 1974 DOD had initiated the development and validation plan for the navstar Global Positioning System, using satellites to provide worldwide precise positioning and navigation, accurate to tens of meters. The system, usable for civilian purposes as well as military, would halt the proliferation of specialized systems. The Navy’s Fleet Satellite Communications System (fltsatcom) , to provide reliable beyond-the-horizon communications for command and control of mobile DOD forces, was “well into development.” Terminal equipment for the fleet would be installed in FY 1975 and FY 1976 and would be operated through minimal leased transponders in Communication Satellite Corp.’s Maritime Communications Satellite System pending full operation of fltsatcom in 1976. Three operational early warning satellites were in geostationary orbit. DOD would seek to improve coverage and mission duration and continue development of a simplified processing station. Two Lincoln Experimental Satellites, comsats les 8 and 9 scheduled for 1975 launch, would use radioisotope thermoelectric generators instead of solar cell arrays. The Space Detection and Tracking System (spadats), which could cover up to 5600 km, would he expanded. DOD was working on detectors, target discrimination, data processing, and other critical optical and radar components, to reach a near-real-time ground-based capability by FY 1978 to detect, track, and identify all objects up to 36 000-km altitude. (Transcript; Av Wk, 1 April 74,20)
International Business Machines Corp. and Communications Satellite Corp. announced plans to enter the domestic satellite communications field. Subject to Federal Communicatitons Commission approval, IBM and ComSatCorp subsidiary COMSAT General Corp. would acquire two-thirds interest in CML Satellite Corp. from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and MCI Communications Corp. for $5 million, comsat General already owned the remaining one third. IBM would own 55% of the joint organization and comsat General 45%; shares would be offered to the public, cml— developing plans for a domestic satellite system to relay specialized voice, image, and data communications—was expected to operate its first satellite system in the late 1970s. (ibm & ComSatCorp Release, 3 July 74)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in his article “Are Skylab and the Space Shuttle Worth the Investment?” in Government Executive that everything done in the Skylab program—with total runout costs of $2.6 billion through FY 1974—had been necessary for future progress in space. He believed the Skylab team had “taken another giant leap for mankind comparable to the first step upon the Moon or the first satellite in Earth orbit.” And even if the shuttle were not expected to save $1 billion a year in launch and payload costs, as it was—after an $8-billion 1972-1991 investment—the U.S. “should still build it. We cannot run Spaceship Earth without it.” We could not “begin to think of obtaining solar power from collectors in space without the Shuttle; we cannot hope to unlock the still hidden energy secrets of the Sun and stars without improved space observatories launched by the Shuttle; we cannot hope to develop the tools for management of natural resources and protection of our environment on a global scale without manned and unmanned Earth observatories launched and serviced by the advantages of a ‘hydrogen economy’ in the future unless we are willing to support such important steps toward that future as a hydrogen-fueled Shuttle. In short, there is no new frontier in space for America and mankind without the Shuttle.” (Govt Exec, Jan 74,38-42) February 1974
The U.S.S.R. had requested permission, during the February visit of a Soviet science delegation to Australia, to establish a jointly controlled satellite tracking station in Australia, the New York Times reported. The U.S. had expressed concern that the Soviet Union might use the scientific station to monitor U.S. messages to bases Li Australia and reportedly believed the proposal would be rejected. (NYT, 2 April 74, 4)
Available geosynchronous orbit “parking space” for communications satellites to serve the continental U.S. was fast approaching saturation with authorized and applied-for comsat systems operating in the 4- to 6-gigacycle band, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. This saturation was expected to provide added incentive for second-generation domestic comsats to shift to the new 11- to 14-gc band, permitting spacecraft to orbit closer to the existing comsats. (Av Wk, 1 April 74, 59)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 20 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with an 896-km apogee, 841-km perigee, 102.3-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite carried instruments to photograph clouds and snow cover on the day and night sides of the earth and collect data on thermal energy reflected and emitted by the earth and its atmosphere, for day-to-day weather service, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 12-18 Dec 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 19 Dec 74, U1; SBD, 19 Dec 74,270)
Results from NASA’s Pioneer 10 mission (launched 2 March 1972 toward a 3 Dec. 1973 encounter with Jupiter) were published in a series of articles in Science. Plasma analyzer data had indicated that Jupiter had a detached bow shock and magnetopause similar to the earth’s but with a much larger spatial extent and with the size highly responsive to changes in solar wind dynamic pressure. The thermal structure of Jupiter was found to he closely related to the visual appearance of the planet, with illuminated and nonilluminated sides having the same brightness temperatures. The net thermal energy of the planet was twice the solar energy input. Magnetic field measurements showed a very strong magnetic field and implied the dipole was inclined at about 15° to Jupiter’s axis of rotation. The satellite Io was found to have an ionosphere extending from near the surface to about 1000 km. A new density of 3.5 g per cc—close to the density of the moon and Mars—was established for Io. Densities of the other satellites of Jupiter were progressively lower in proportion to their distance from the planet. More comprehensive reports of Pioneer 10 experiments were published in the Journal of Geophysical Research of 1 Sept. (Opp, Wolfe, et al., Smith et al., Kliore et al., Science, 25 Jan 74, 302-324; Journ Geophysical Research, Pioneer 10 issue, 1 Sept 74)
John M. Thole had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science effective 1 Sept., NASA announced. Thole would succeed Vincent L. Johnson, who had retired. Former project manager for the Applications Technology Satellite at Goddard Space Flight Center, Thole had joined gsfc in 1960 and had held a variety of project management positions since that time, (nasa Ann, 26 Aug 74) 26 August-20 September: Thirty NASA engineers and technicians met with U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences counterparts in Moscow as joint preparations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s July 1975 flight continued. On 8 Sept, another group of 47 specialists and engineers headed by U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney arrived in Moscow for 2 weeks of meetings with the Soviet group headed by U.S.S.R. Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev. The project directors announced plans for joint prelaunch tests at the U.S. launch site 1-8 Feb. 1975 and at the U.S.S.R. launch area 5-13 May 1975. Flight crews and technical specialists from both countries would participate. Soviet specialists also announced plans to fly a manned Soyuz mission to test ASTP-related systems. NASA would be informed of further details before the flight to permit tracking. Thirteen U.S. flight controllers were also spending two Weeks in Moscow beginning 15 Sept., meeting with Soviet controllers for familiarization and training, including briefings on Soviet Mission Control Center operations, Soyuz spacecraft systems, and the mission flight plan, (jsc astp Press Communique, 20 Sept 74; jsc Roundup, 13 Sept 74; jsc Release 74-250) year in space. Dr. G. D. Whedon of the National Institutes of Health stated that weightlessness could threaten capable musculo-skeletal functions during space flights lasting up to three years unless measures could be developed to prevent significant losses of calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen. Continued loss of calcium could cause astronauts to break their backs or legs and could promote formation of kidney stones. Dr. William E. Thornton, life scientist in the jsc Astronaut Office, reported that by Mission Day 3 all Skylab crewmen had lost more than 2000 cc (2 qts) of extravascular fluid from calf and thigh; at recovery, a sharp reversal was noted. The Thornton team suggested that the reason for the shift was the intrinsic and unopposed lower limb elasticity, which forced venous blood and other fluids toward the head. Other investigators reported that such cardiovascular changes as the heart’s decreased ventricular size and the suppression of red blood cell production was the body’s accommodation to weightlessness. These physiological changes had been the expected response to a lack of exertion; they reversed after the astronauts’ return to earth, (jsc Roundup, 30 Aug 74,1-2; JSC proj off, interview, 12 Aug 75; Altman, NYT, 1 Sept 74,14)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, reporting on almost a year’s investigation of NASA’s tracking and data acquisition program, said the program was effective and efficient and that planned consolidation was progressing well. The consolidation, to be completed by 1976 with a reduction of stations from 25 to 15, would combine the Manned Space Flight Network and the Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network into one Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn). The Subcommittee recommended that the FY 1976 NASA Authorization request include a detailed analysis of the need for an additional subnet of three 64-m antennas for the Deep Space Network and report on the status of relations and agreements with the U.S.S.R. The Subcommittee warned that NASA’s T&DA capabilities were not designed for the workload that future operational systems would require; solutions should be studied by the President’s Science Adviser. NASA was asked to furnish an analysis of lease versus purchase of satellites for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) in its FY 1975 authorization request. (Com Print)
The Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee continued hearings on S. 2350 and S. 3484, bills to develop an operational Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) system and to establish an Office of Earth Resources Survey Systems within NASA and an Earth Resources Observation Administration within the Dept, of the Interior [see 6, 8, 9 Aug.]. Frank G. Zarb, Office of Management and Budget Associate Director for Material Resources, Energy and Science, warned against immediate development of an operational erts system, citing budgeting restraints and marginal value of current erts data. Since an advanced satellite offering higher spatial resolution would increase the usefulness of erts data, Zarb contended that the third satellite, erts-c, should be experimental. His view was supported by S. Benedict Levin, Executive Vice President of Earth Satellite Corp., and by John V. Granger, Acting Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs for the State Dept. (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 672—an unmanned Soyuz spacecraft testing docking systems for the July 1975 Apollc-Soyuz Test Project mission—from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam. The satellite entered an orbit with 277-km apogee, 142-km perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, Soviet chief of cosmonaut training, identified the mission and that of Cosmos 638 (launched 3 April) at a 9 Sept. Johnson Space Center astp press briefing, saying that both had successfully tested the systems. Cosmos 672 reentered 18 Aug. (gsfc SSR, 31 Aug 74; JSC briefing transcript, 9 Sept 74; SF, Feb 75, 76)
Operational utility of satellite communications for maritime service had been demonstrated with Ats 1 and 3 (Applications Technology Satellites launched 6 Dec. 1966 and 5 Nov. 1967), Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Tests had been made by Exxon Corp. in cooperation with NASA from mid-1973 to early 1974 from an Exxon tanker, using a small General Electric Co. ship terminal and GE earth station Exxon had reported at a Minneapolis communications conference that the satellites had transmitted voice, teletypewriter, facsimile, and slow-scan TV rapidly, without the delay often caused on high-frequency radio by spectrum congestion. (Klass, Av Wk, 12 Aug 74, 56-8)
NASA adjudged the mission of Skynet IIA communications satellite, launched 18 Jan. for the United Kingdom, unsuccessful. NASA’s primary objective of launching the comsat into orbit for transfer into a synchronous equatorial orbit permitting the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission had not been achieved. Skynet 11A had been placed in an extremely eccentric orbit when the Thor-Delta launch vehicle’s 2nd-stage attitude control system failed; preliminary analysis had isolated the problem to a failure in the regulator board of the DC-to-DC converter in the 2nd-stage electronics package, (nasa mor, 4 Sept 74)
Manned space spectaculars were gone, at least until the 21st century, Thomas O’Toole said in the Washington Post. The similarities between the air age when men had begun flying and the space age were striking. Aviators had been considered stuntmen until they began to carry the mail. The Apollo flights, with their “vaguely circus air,” had struck many pepple the same way. The space shuttle promised to change all that. The U.S. planned to operate five shuttles, each one carrying more than 27 000 kg of satellites and space machinery into orbit 12 times a year, to “improve the quality of life on earth and to find out if life exists elsewhere in the solar system.” By the end of the 1980s the U.S. would have visited eight of the solar system’s nine planets; the only exception was Pluto. While one part of the space agency looked at the other planets, another would be looking down to learn more about the earth’s health. The next 20 yrs would see an unprecedented use of earth orbit to observe and communicate with the earth. O’Toole quoted Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as saying that the earth orbit might become overcrowded. Not that things would bump into each other but “there will not be enough radio frequencies to communicate back to earth.” (W Post, 24 March 74, Cl)
President Ford signed into law the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (P.L. 93^138), abolishing the Atomic Energy Commission and establishing in its place three new Federal entities: the Energy Research and Development Administration, the Energy Resources Council, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The President also signed Executive Order 11841, activating the Energy Resources Council and appointing the Secretary of the Interior its Chairman. P.L. 93—438 was to become effective not later than 120 days after signature. {PD, 14 Oct 74,1271-3; CR, 8 Oct 74, H10134) Ariel 5—a 132-kg, solar-powered, 16-sided polygon designed by the U.K.—was the fifth satellite launched in a cooperative program between NASA and the U.K. Science Research Council. The mission of its one-year operating life was to study x-ray sources both within and beyond our galaxy, using five experiments from U.K. and one from Goddard Space Flight Center. Instruments were designed to follow up findings of UhuTu (Explorer 42), launched 12 Dec. 1970, and Oao 3, launched 21 Aug. 1971. Uhuru had extended the number of known celestial x-ray sources from about 30 to 200 and found evidence of a black hole companion to Cygnus X-l, later supported by Oao 3, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations. Four Ariel 5 pointing experiments focused on specific x-ray sources, and two scanning experiments swept the entire galaxy with every revolution. The GSFC scanning experiment—first of its kind to fly on an orbiting scientific satellite—consisted of two x-ray pinhole cameras, each with a 90° field of view, providing together a sweep of the entire sky. After evaluation, Ariel 5 results would be available to the world scientific community. Though all experiments obtained data during initial tests, two were drawing excessive current. The problem was resolved by outgassing. A slight delay in shutter closing on Experiment A, a star sensor, had little or no effect on the mission. The U.K.-U.S. cooperative satellite series had begun with Ariel 1 in 1962 and continued through Ariel 4, launched 11 Dec. 1971. Ariel 5 was launched under a 2 Nov. 1970 src-nasa Memorandum of Understanding, with a 27 Dec. 1973 letter modification shifting the launch site from Wallops Flight Center to San Marco to enhance scientific data return. The Memorandum tasked src with spacecraft design, fabrication, and testing, five experiments, primary command and control, and data reduction and analysis, nasa was responsible for one experiment, spacecraft technical support, the Scout launch vehicle, and tracking, command, and data acquisition, src financed all aspects of the Ariel program. The launch by members of the Univ. of Rome’s Aerospace Research Center was the seventh from San Marco, but the first payload for a country other than the U.S. or Italy (nasa mors, 11 Oct 6, Nov 74; nasa Release 74-274)
Dr. Yannevar Bush, who directed the development of the atomic bomb and mobilized U.S. scientific and technical resources during World War II, died in Belmont, Mass., at the age of 84 following a cerebral hemorrhage. Dr. Bush was Dean of Massachusetts Institute of Technology during the 1930s, when he developed the Bush differential analyzer, which led to development of the modern computer. He had been President of Carnegie Institution in Washington 1938-1955 and while there had served as Science Adviser to President Roosevelt. In 1938 he was elected Vice Chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and was naca Chairman 1939-1941. President Roosevelt appointed him Chairman of the National Defense Research Committee in 1940 and Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development in 1941. In that capacity, Dr. Bush organized an unprecedented team of engineers, scientists, industrialists, and military men and oversaw the development of the atomic bomb, radar, proximity fuse, rocketry, and problems of technical warfare. (Washington, W Post, 30 June 74, B8; nae Release, 19 April 66; 24th, 25th, 27th Ann Rpt of the NACA, 1938,1939,1941) 28 fune—1 July: NASA and the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory, in participation with more than 100 U.S. and foreign experimenters, launched 54 sounding rockets from Wallops Flight Center as part of the Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (Project Aladdin, ’74) program. In addition to the 54 rockets launched during a 24-hr period beginning at 1:00 pm edt 29 June, a pre-ALADDiN chemical experiment was launched aboard a Nike-Iroquois 28 June and four post-ALADDiN meteorological rockets were launched 1 July. Chemical releases made yellow to yellowish green fluorescent aurora-like vapor trails visible over the East Coast. The program was studying dynamic and structural conditions of the atmosphere 48-137 km above the earth. Using small meteorological probes, chemical releases, falling spheres, and more sophisticated spectrometer payloads, the rockets tracked and measured winds, wind shears, temperature and diffusion parameters, upper-atmosphere patterns and dynamics, and structure and composition. Data received from the rockets would be compared with data obtained by Explorer 51 (launched 15 Dec. 1973). The data would be used for predicting communications problems and satellite orbits as well as for weather forecasting and pollution studies, (wfc Releases 74-4, 74-5; afsc Release oip 065.74; AP, W Post, 30 June 74, B3)
Evidence of a possible second black hole, from observations by x-ray astronomy satellite TJhuru (Explorer 42, launched 12 Dec. 1970) between January 1971 and February 1973, was reported by Center for Astrophysics astronomers in the Astrophysical Journal. Black holes were believed to be superdense collapsed stars with gravity so great that even light could not escape. Uhuru had detected radiation from the x-ray source Circinus X-l with characteristics similar to those detected in 1972 by TJhuru and in 1973 by Oao 3 for the suspected black hole Cygnus X-l. Varying periods of x-ray intensity had indicated that Circinus X-l was possibly binary; the x-ray energy spectrum had showed changes from 2 to 20 kev. No optical counterpart for the x-ray-source had been found. Black holes might be an answer to two basic problems in cosmology, Walter S. Sullivan had written in the New York Times Magazine 14 July. All visible material accounted for only 2% of the matter necessary to prevent the universe from flying apart in a continuing expansion; some scientists thought black holes might well make up the deficit. Also, black holes might provide the “glue,” the necessary gravity, to keep clusters of galaxies from flying apart. Not all scientists were convinced of the existence of black holes, but the holes’ strange effects—such as the slowing of time, the tight curvature of space, and the influence of gravity on light—had been anticipated by Einstein’s theory of relativity. One major dilemma was what happened within a black hole. Some scientists had proposed that a star drawn into a black hole by its gravity might emerge in some other time and place as a quasar and that quasars—■ exceptionally bright objects of relatively small volume and high density—might be “white holes” into which energy was pouring from somewhere else, perhaps even another universe. (Jones et al., Astro Journ, 15 July 74, L71-4; NYT Magazine, 14 July 74,11-35; A&A 1971,1972, 1973)
The European Space Research Organization announced selection of Communications Satellite Corp. as its U.S. partner in the Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) program [see 9 May]. Aerosat was to deploy two satellites over the Atlantic Ocean for communications between aircraft in transatlantic flight and the ground, (esro Release, 5 Sept 74)
President Nixon sent a $304.4-billion FY 1975 U.S. budget request to Congress, an increase of $29.8 billion over FY 1974- With 90% of the increase mandatory under existing law, the budget included few new programs and few cuts. Federal funds for research and development would increase by 9% from FY 1974, to $19.8 billion total obligations, “reflecting recognition of the larger potential contribution of science and technology to the solution of critical national problems.” A substantial increase- was requested for energy r&d, $2.05 billion in FY 1975 from $942 million in FY 1974. The FY 1975 r&d request proposed investment in priority national needs, but included basic research as well as efforts to speed the use of federally sponsored r&d. The non-Federal investment in r&d was expected to be $16 billion, 45% of a national total of $36 billion. nasa’s total budget request of $3,247 billion was $245 million above the FY 1974 appropriation and $96.2 million above the 1974 budget plan. If approved, the increase would be NASA’s first since 1965, except for a $100-million FY 1973 increase that the agency had not been permitted to spend. Significant budget items are shown in the table. The Dept, of Defense FY 1975 budget request of $85.8 billion included $9.3 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation, an increase NASA FY 1975 Budget Highlights (in thousands; items do not add to program totals because only selected items are listed) Budget Item FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1975 Authorization Request Difference Total budget authority $3 054 500 $3 247 129 +$192 629 (3 002 100 appropriation) (+245 029) Research and development 2 245 500 (2 194 000 2 346 015 +100 515 appropriation) (+152 015) Manned space flight 1 032 000 1 124 800 +92 800 Space shuttle 475 000 800 000 +325 000 Space flight operations 555 500 323 300 -232 200 Skylab 233 800 — -233 800 ASTP 90 000 114 600 +24 600 Development, test & operations 220 200 175 200 -45 800 Space life sciences 21 000 18 000 -3 000 Space sciences 552 000 547 015 -4 985 Physics & astronomy 63 600 140 515 +76 915 OSO (un- 7 630 OAO dis- 2 380 heao (suspended 1974) trib- 40 400 Orbiting Explorers uted) 33 000 Large Space Telescope — 6 200 +6 200 Lunar & planetary 311 000 266 000 -45 000 Viking (un* 89 016 Mariner Jupiter-Saturn 1977 dis* 69 761 Pioneer Venus (new start 1975) trib- 27 100 Helios uted) 1 400 Lunar sample analysis 5 798 Lunar science operations 4 333 Launch vehicle procurement 177 400 140 500 -36 900 Space applications $161 000 $177 500 +$16 500 Weather and climate 51 100 35 000 -16 100 Nimbus 5 & F fun- 7 000 Tiros-N dis- 9 000 SMS-A & -B trib- 1 400 GABP uted) 7 400 Pollution monitoring 13 900 29 800 +15 900 Earth resources'survey 49 600 58 600 +9 000 EHTS-B (on dis- 11 100 Aircraft survey tributed) 17 300 Earth and ocean physics 10 700 18 500 +7 800 SEASAT-A — . 8 000 +8 000 Space processing 3 100 3 500 +400 Energy applications 2 000 2 000 — Communications satellites 22 100 8 300 -13 800 Heat Capacity Mapping Mission — 2 600 +2 600 Aeronautics & space technology 252 000 241 200 -10 800 Aeronautical 180 000 166 400 -13 600 Space & nuclear 72 000 74 800 +2 800 Tracking & data acquisition 244 000 250 000 +6 000 Technology utilization 4 500 5 500 +1 000 Construction of facilities 112 000 151 490 +39 490 (101 100 (+50 390) Infrared telescope facility, Hawaii — 6 040 +6 040 X-ray telescope facility, msfc — 4 060 +4 060 Space shuttle facilities 67 200 86 020 +18 820 Research & program management 707 000 749 624 +42 624 (707 000 (+42 624) DOD FY 1975 KDT&E Budget Highlights (in thousands; items do not add to program totals because only selected items are listed) Budget Item FY 1974 Budget Plan FY 1975 Budget Plan FY 1975 Difference Research, development, test, & evaluation £8 333 009 £9 322 469 +3989 460 Military astronautics 593 926 527 248 -66 678 Aircraft 1 682 381 1 829 318 +146 937 B-l advanced strategic bomber 449 000 499 000 +50 000 A-10 close-air-support aircraft 107 000 268 000 +161 000 AF air combat ighter — 36 000 -36 000 usn vfx fighter prototype — 34 000 -34 000 Tanker/missile-carrier aircraft — 20 000 -20 000 Advanced medium stol transport (amst) 25 000 56 000 -31 000 F-14 interceptor aircraft 737 000 756 000 -19 000 F—15 air superiority fighter 1 129 000 1 076 000 -53 000 Missiles 2 124 762 2,352 993 +228 231 Trident missile 528 000 649 000 +121 000 Air-launched cruise missile 11 000 80 000 +69 000 Submarine-launched cruise missile 3 000 45 000 +42 000 Advanced icbm technology 4 000 37 000 +33 000 Minuteman-site-defense prototype development 110 000 160 000 +50 000 Terminally guided maneuvering reentry vehicle (marv) — 20 000 +20 000 of $989.5 million from the FY 1974 budget plan. Increases in military astronautics would improve the satellite warning system and the Air Force Satellite Communications System (afsatcom). navstar Global Positioning System development would continue. The planning effort toward use of the NASA shuttle for military payloads would increase. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s FY 1975 budget request of $467.1 million, a $77.8-million increase, included space and environmental programs. The Federal Aviation Administration requested $845.4 million within a Department of Transportation total of $2.2 billion. Although the dot total was a decrease from FY 1974, it included an increase for r&d. The Atomic Energy Commission’s $3.06-billion request included a 30% increase in energy activities and more funds for civilian efforts than for defense for the first time. NOAA FY 1975 Budget Highlights (in thousands) Budget Item no A A total budget authority Environmental satellite services (including polar orbiting & geosynchronous systems; nest generation polar-orbiting model) Public forecast & warning services Global monitoring of climate International projects (inclncling Global Atmospheric Research Program’s gate) FY 1974 Estimate FY 1975 Request FY 1975 Difference £389 308 $467 096 +£77 788 62 356 61 475 —881 45 620 47 875 +2 255 594 1 112 +518 9 723 9 148 -575 DOT FY 1975 R&D Budget Highlights (in thousands) Budget Item FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1975 Estimate Estimate Difference dot total budget authority Research & development $5 520 477 $2 195 656 -$3 324 821 390 000 417 000 +27 000 faa budget authority 1 311 820 845 383 Engineering & development (aircraft safety, environ- ment, aviation medicine, noise reduction, stol, vtol) 11 500 11 241 -466 437 -259 AEC FY 1975 Energy and Space Budget Highlights (in thousands) Budget Item FY 1974 Estimate FY 1975 Estimate FY 1975 Difference AEC total budget authority $2 388 914 $3 057 648 +*668 734 Space nuclear systems 26 100 27 000 +900 (radioisotope thermoelectric generators for NASA &. dod missions, especially Viking, Mariner, Jupiter-Saturn, z.es; also technology improvements & extension to energy applications) Enriched uranium production 331 615 426 970 K95 355 Civilian reactor r&d (including fast-breeder reactor) 290 390 349 750 ■59 360 Fusion research 53 000 82 000 |-29 000 The National Science Foundation’s $672.1-million request included increases in every energy-related category; national and special research program funding decreased slightly. And the Environmental Protection Agency’s $695.2 million would increase funding for r&d and pollution control. NSF FY 1975 R&D Budget Highlights (in thousands) Budget Item 1974 Estimate 1975 Estimate 1975 Difference nsf total budget authority $579 260 $672 100 +$92 840 National & special research programs (including troposphere & atmosphere research in gasp; also science & energy r&d policy support to Presidential Adviser) Research Applied to National Needs (rann) National research centers (including very-largc-array radio astronomy facility) 91 600 75 100 42 500 82 300 84 000 52 500 -9 300 +8 900 +10 000 EPA FY 1975 Budget Highlights (in thousands) Budget Item 1974 Estimate 1975 Estimate 1975 Difference EPA total budget authority $4 628 864 $695 200 —$3 933 664 Research & development Pollution abatement & control 168 916 356 094 171 068 407 976 +2 152 +51 882 (nasa Release, FY 75 Budget Briefing, Background Material; NASA, FY 75 Budget Chronological History; omb, Budget of US Govt, FY 75; OMB Special Analyses, FY 75; NASA, Extracts Budget US Govt, FY 75; dod Release 43-74; Annual DOD Rpt, FY 75; W Post, 5 Feb 74, Al, A10-12)
An electric rocket engine that short-circuited aboard Sert II Space Electric Rocket Test satellite in 1970 had been restarted in space and successfully operated for six weeks, scientists at Lewis Research Center reported. Launched 3 Feb. 1970 to demonstrate that electric propulsion could be used for future space missions, Sert II was to have operated an ion engine for six months in space. Engine thruster 2 shut down after less than three months of operation; thruster 1 performed for five months. Both failures were attributed to a small chip apparently eroded from a molybdenum grid and lodged between two grids at the back of the engine. William R. Kerslake, Sert II experiment manager, believed the chip was jarred loose in summer 1974 when the spacecraft was spun up by its cold-gas thruster system to obtain a better sun angle for solar arrays. Since then, the thruster had been operated successfully on 17 occasions for short periods, obtaining up to 80% of its maximum thrust. Electrical Propulsion Branch Chief Robert C. Finke said operation after 4% years proved “the long term storability of this thruster design” and indicated that the system could be “confidently incorporated into future missions requiring several years of thruster operation.” (LeRC Release 74—60)
The U.S.S.R.’s Cosmonautics Day and 13th anniversary of the first manned space flight, made by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin in 1961, was marked by articles in the Soviet press. “Cosmonautics is one of the most important testing ranges of science in which many directions of science and technology are being synthesized into a single constantly perfecting system,” Soviet Academician Valentin Glushko wrote in Pravda. The successes of cosmonautics in the preceding 15 to 20 yrs had given a powerful impetus to various branches of knowledge. The initial accumulation of facts by spacecraft had been completed. On the agenda now was the detailed study of dynamic processes, the interconnection of phenomena, and the verification of hypotheses and models. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, acknowledged in an interview with Sovietskaya Rossiya the importance of orbital stations for future space experiments. He also acknowledged that Soviet designers had not yet been able to develop a satisfactory space shuttle. He said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned landing on the moon. His impassioned defense of the Soviet space program suggested that it, like the U.S. program, was under fire by domestic critics; “many millions of rubles” had been saved because of the use of meteorological satellites. In Trud, Academician Boris N. Petrov, head of the Council of International Cooperation in Space Exploration and Use under the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that manned flights “must become more frequent and more extended” to produce “really creative work for specialists of many branches of science.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 16 April 74, Ul-2; Wren, NYT, 13 April 74) to meet mission lifetime requirements—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 23 April. Westar 1 was acquired by a mobile ground station at 9:38 pm edt and control was turned over to Western Union. The satellite apogee motor was successfully fired at 5:21 pm edt 16 April and Westar 1 was placed in geosynchronous orbit with a 35 592-km apogee, 35 166-km perigee, 23-hr 35-min period, and 0.6° inclination. An onboard hydrazine reaction control system was moving the satellite toward its final position above the equator at 99° W longitude. Each of 12 transponders aboard Westar 1 could relay 1200 voice circuits, 1 color TV channel with program audio, or data at 50 megabits per sec. The Westar system-including one satellite to be launched in June, one satellite to be held in reserve, and five earth stations—would greatly increase Western Union’s capacity for commercial and personal communications. Expected to be operational in August, the system would be the first to interconnect, under one company, satellites and an existing continent-wide, computer-switched, multipurpose terrestrial network. (nasa mors, 19 March 74,24 April 74; gsfc Wkly SSR, 11-17 April 74; nasa Release 74-77; McElheny, NYT, 15 April 74, 1; AP, CSM, 18 April 74; SBD, 26 April 74, 322; gsfc proj off, interview, 7 Nov 75)
Kennedy Space Center had awarded a $382 000 contract to General Electric Co. for a multispectral-image-analysis system for data from the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (in orhit since 23 July 1972), from Skylab’s earth resources experiment package (carried on the Orbital Workshop in 1973), and from remote-sensing aircraft, (ksc Release 80-74)
Japan successfully launched Tansei 2 experimental MS-T2 satellite from Kagoshima Space Center, Uchinoura, on a three-stage MU—3C booster at 2:00 pm local time (1:00 am edt) after a two-day postponement because of bad weather. A thrust-vector-control system had been installed on the 2nd stage of the booster to stabilize its flight. The improved version of the four-stage MU-4S was the first guided booster Japan had used. The satellite entered orbit with a 3229-km apogee, 283-km perigee, 121.7-min period, and 31.2° inclination, kyodo news service reported the objective was “to test the control devices and not for scientific observation.” Tansei 2, named “Light Blue” for the Univ. of Tokyo colors, was Japan’s fifth satellite and third test satellite. Ohsumi (launched 11 Feb. 1970) and Tansei 1 (launched 16 Feb. 1971) were test satellites returning performance data. Shinsei (launched 28 Sept. 1971) had carried instruments to study cosmic rays and electric waves, and Denpa (Radio Explorer Satellite launched 19 Aug. 1972) had carried instruments to probe the ionosphere, (gsfc SSR, 28 Feb 74; FBis-Japan, 22 Feb 74, 13-14; A&A 1971) The Italian-built 170-kg San Marco 4 carried three experiments: an Italian density-drag accelerometer to measure atmospheric drag, a U.S. omegatyon to measure the temperature and density of thermosphere molecular nitrogen, and a U.S. neutral mass spectrometer to measure primary constituents of the neutral atmosphere. Data gathered by San Marco 4 in the equatorial zone and Explorer 51 in the auroral zone would provide a good picture of the effects of magnetic storms on the thermosphere and differences in the thermosphere’s response to energy coming from the sun to the poles and the equator. The omegatron experiment was activated 19 Feb. and the neutral mass spectrometer 22 Feb. By 26 Feb. both instruments were acquiring worthwhile scientific data. The Italian density-drag accelerometer, activated shortly after launch but not performing properly, was being investigated. All spacecraft systems were functioning as planned. San Marco 4 was the fourth satellite launched under cooperative agreements between NASA and the Italian Space Commission. San Marco 1 was launched 15 Dec. 1964; San Marco 2, 26 April 1967; and San Marco 3, 24 April 1971. Under the latest agreement, signed 6 Aug. 1973, Italy had designed and built the spacecraft, provided one experiment, and conducted launch operations. The U.S. provided the Scout booster, two experiments, technical consultation, launch crew training, and spacecraft tracking and data acquisition, (nasa mors, 15, 26 Feb 74; NASA Releases 74-30,74-39) 18 February—6 March: Thomas L. Gatch ’was lost at sea while attempting the first transatlantic balloon flight. Gatch lifted off from Harrisburg, Pa., 18 Feb. in a two-meter sealed gondola, the Light Heart, suspended from 10 helium-filled balloons. He hoped to reach 12 000-m altitude and ride the jet-stream winds across the Atlantic to Europe, but changes in air currents pushed him south of his planned course. Radio contact was made with Gatch 19 Feb. by an airliner 1600 km east northeast of Puerto Rico. He was spotted at 305-m altitude 21 Feb. by a Liberian ship 1670 km off the coast of Africa. Further inconsistent and unconfirmed radio contacts and sightings made tracking Gatch’s balloon difficult. After reports of a sighting on the Spanish Sahara, the Spanish Foreign Legion searched the 480-km Moroccan-Spanish Sahara border for two days, while U.S. military aircraft and ships were put on lookout. The Dept, of Defense ordered an intensive visual radar and radio search 1 March of the Atlantic Ocean 1530 km west of Africa, but the search was given up 6 March after exploration of 578 000 sq km of ocean. (W Star-News, 18, 22, 26 Feb. 74; W Post, 25 Feb, 2, 7 March 74; B Sim, 21,25 Feb 74) _
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 11-10 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 724-km apogee, 603-km perigee, 12-hr 18min period, and 62.9° inclination. The comsat would help provide longdistance telephone and telegraph radio communications and transmit U.S.S.R. TV programs to stations of the Orbita network, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 18-24 July 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 23 July 74, Ul; SF, 1 Jan 75, 35)
NASA announced selection of General Electric Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., and TRW Systems Group to negotiate three six-month, $600 000, fixed-price contracts to make parallel system definition studies for the Earth Observatory Satellite (eos) mission. The studies were to design a low-cost modularized spacecraft with a space platform for testing sensors and collecting remotely sensed data for a variety of applications missions, eos would be designed for launch by both conventional boosters and the space shuttle. (NASA Release 74-80)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 18 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with an 891-km apogee, 863-km perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite would photograph clouds and their underlying surface and study the distribution of precipitation and ice zones and the influence of corpuscular flows on upper layers of the atmosphere for rapid weather data supply, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 3-10 July 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 11 July 74, U1; SF, 1 Jan 75,35)
Iran signed an agreement to build a ground station to receive data directly from nasa’s experimental earth resources satellites. Under the Memorandum of Understanding signed with NASA in Tehran, the new site would join six others already in the system—three in the U.S. and" one each in Canada, Brazil, and Italy, Iran would bear the full cost of building the facility and would make its data and tapes available to NASA in return for free access to the first two Earth Resources Technology Satellites. Thereafter, NASA had the option to establish a cost-sharing arrangement, (nasa Release 74-289)
The Dept, of Defense had officially approved development of the navstar Global Positioning System (gps), the Air Force announced. The first phase of the three-phase joint armed services program called for five Rockwell International Corp. spacecraft to join a Navy Navigational Technology Satellite (nts) in two-plane orbital constallations in 1977 to test the system. The five-meter, 635-kg spacecraft would be launched on Atlas F boosters by the Air Force Systems Command’s Space Missile Test Center. Phase two would bring the number of satellites to nine in three orbital planes. The operational third phase—with 24 satellites orbiting at an 18 520-km altitude, providing three-dimensional location to air, sea, and surface vehicles in all kinds of weather—would be complete in the mid-1980s, (afsc Release oip 274.74)
The first system to use solar energy to heat a U.S. school began operation in Timonium, Md. The $568 000 project, jointly sponsored by the National Science Foundation and AAl Corp. [see 2 Feb.], was rushed into operation in six weeks to use the remainder of the winter’s chilly days to gather experimental data for future solar heating systems. (Richards, W Post, 8 March 74, C2) 7, 12-14 March: Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on NASA’s space science program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1975 authorization hearings: A Solar Maximum Mission (smm) satellite was proposed for FY 1975 design study and launch in the next period of maximum solar activity, 19781979. smm would investigate solar flares and related phenomena and their effects on the solar-terrestrial system, making, for the first time, simultaneous measurements of flares across the electromagnetic spectrum—within a national program of satellite, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations of the sun during maximum activity. The spacecraft would be shuttle-retrievable for refurbishment and reflight with advanced solar physics experiments in the 1980s. Requested funding for the Large Space Telescope (Ls’r) for FY 1975 was $6.2 million, to proceed with design of telescope optics, detectors, and support systems. NASA had originally planned to spend about $10 million in FY 1975 on the lst—to be launched on the space shuttle in 1980—but reduced the request to reflect the four- to six-month delay in shuttle development. NASA—in cooperation with the Naval Research Laboratory, Sandia Laboratories, and West Germany—was developing an Aries sounding rocket to support the physics and astronomy program. Aries, which used the 2nd stage of surplus Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missiles, would provide a greater lift and longer flight time than possible at the price of rockets now in use. Cost overruns on the 1975 two-spacecraft Viking mission to Mars could total 10% of the original $838-million estimate for the program because of hardware development problems. Major problems with the biology instrument included packing the sophisticated instruments into a small volume, development of very small valves to inject sufficiently small amounts of nutrients into Martian samples, and thermal control. The instrument was running $21.2 million over the budgeted cost. Difficulties also had been encountered in producing enough 0.005-cm plated magnetic wire of uniform characteristics for the onboard computer. Dr. Naugle said that, although the overall coniplexity of the spacecraft had been underestimated, “we expect these problems to be solved and to launch both Viking spacecraft on schedule in 1975.” (Transcript) Experiments were designed to demonstrate an attitude control accuracy of better than three arc minutes using a gas jet system, measure the performance in orbit of operational infrared sensor components, demonstrate an inexpensive Canopus sensor of high reliability, measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft, determine interference generated by the propane gas control system, demonstrate a basic sensing element with application in digital sun and earth albedo sensors, and measure degradation of silicone solar cells in orbit. NASA’s objective of placing the satellite in an earth orbit that would permit achievement of the scientific objectives was met, and the mission was adjudged a success 19 March. Under a December 1972 Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the U.K.’s Dept, of Trade and Industry, NASA would be reimbursed for launch vehicle and services. Developed for the U.K. by Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., the 83.5-by 66.5-cm, 92-kg spacecraft was powered by a four-panel 250-cm-long solar array of 1800 solar cells. Miranda was deployed in a fully sunlit polar orbit with a yo-yo despin system and its attitude control system acquired the sun through three sun sensors. The eighth NASA launch of a U.K. satellite and the fourth on a Scout vehicle—Miranda carried the names of 80000 Boy Scouts from nine U.S. states on a microdot. (NASA MOR, 21 March 74; NASA Releases 74-36, 74-53; UN Reg;- Newport News, Va, Daily Press, 22 Feb 74; SBD, 12 March 74,59)
nasa launched three satellites—Noaa 4 (itos-g) meteorological satellite for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Intasat ionospheric satellite for Spain, and Amsat Oscar 7 amateur radio communications satellite—from Western Test Range at 9:11 am pst on one Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The three spacecraft entered almost identical, near-to-planned, polar orbits. It was the first triple launch for a Thor-Delta. Noaa 4 entered orbit with a 1458-km apogee, 1444-km perigee, 115min period, and 101.7° inclination, as the fourth operational Improved Tiros Operational Satellite in the joint NASA and Dept, of Commerce program to provide global cloud-cover observations. Delayed 29 Oct. by faulty electrical connectors on the Thor-Delta and again 13 Nov. when a 2nd-stage hydraulic pump posed a problem, the launch went smoothly on 15 Nov. Noaa 4 joined Noaa 2, launched 15 Oct. 1972, and Noaa 3, launched 6 Nov. 1973. The 345-kg, three-axis-stabilized, earth-oriented satellite moved in a circular, near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit. Day and night coverage of the earth’s cloud cover was provided by two very-high-resolution radiometer instruments and by two scanning radiometer sensors. Two vertical-temperature-profile radiometers made continuous radiance measurements for determination of the atmospheric vertical temperature profile over every part of the earth’s surface at least twice daily. One secondary sensor, the solar proton monitor, studied solar activity and its effects on the earth’s environment. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for design, development, launch, and in-orbit checkout of the spacecraft. noaa’s National Environmental Satellite Service (ness) would take over operation of the satellite after checkout. NASA mission objectives—to launch the spacecraft into sun-synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy for operational mission requirements and to conduct an in-orbit evaluation and checkout of the spacecraft—were accomplished and the mission was adjudged successful 24 Jan. 1976. Intasat, the first Spanish satellite, separated from the Delta 2nd stage 24 min after launch and entered orbit with a 1468-km apogee and perigee, 115-min period, and 101.7° inclination. The 20-kg, 12-sided, magnetically oriented, spin-stabilized spacecraft would measure ionospheric electron content, irregularities, and scintillations in a joint space research program of NASA and the Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial. inta provided the spacecraft and would acquire experiment data. NASA provided pickaback launch and tracking. Amsat Oscar 7—the Radio Amateur Satellite Corp.’s Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio—separated from the Delta 2nd stage 77 min after liftoff and entered orbit with a 1458-km apogee, 1454-km perigee, 115-min period, and 101.7° inclination. The seventh in a series begun with Oscar 1 in 1961, the solar-powered, octahedral, 29.5-kg Oscar 7 joined Oscar 6, launched 15 Oct. 1972, to serve as a space communications relay station for radio amateurs and as a teaching aid, giving firsthand experience in space science for U.S. schools. Oscar 7 was built and prepared for launch by the Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. (nasa mors, 18 Oct 74; 19, 20, 29 Nov 74; 26 Jan 76; NASA Release 7«22; Goddard News, Dec 74; SBD, 30 Oct 74, 301; 14 Nov 74, 79)
Siegbert B. Poritzky, Special Assistant for Systems and Research for the Air Transport Association, presented U.S. scheduled airlines’ views on nasa’s role and responsibility to the aircraft industry, before a House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science-Veterans hearing on FY 1975 appropriations. Poritzky said it was NASA’s responsibility to build a technology base for aeronautics through innovative independent research in addition to undertaking directed research in response to specific problems. Also vitally important was NASA’s responsiveness to the needs of other agencies. Airlines recommended a $24.5-million increase in funding for NASA’s aeronautical programs— for propulsion environment-impact minimization, aircraft operations, alternative fuels, wake-vortex minimization, and noise research. James J. Hartford, Executive Secretary of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, testified that some cuts in the NASA budget were “penny wise and pound foolish.” Additional but “relatively modest” funding would prevent the High Energy Astronomical Observatory (heao) program—which was to investigate the scientifically exciting black holes in space—from “limping along.” Scientists had been skeptical of the usefulness of the space shuttle to science, but the Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount discoveries had so far exceeded expectations that astronomers “could hardly wait” for the Large Space Telescope, planned for launch on the shuttle. “That project unified the space science community” as “nothing ever did in the past.” Other “logical follow-ons” to the approved program were urged: Mariner Jupiter-Uranus 1979 mission, Jupiter orbiter, Venus atmospheric probe, and a follow-on to the Viking Mars 1975 with a rover capability. Hartford also suggested that NASA and other Government agencies were not doing enough work in space applications. Cuts in NASA’s communications satellite research and development program had been based on the incorrect assumption that private industry could take on full comsat r&d with no further Government stimulus. Early commercial exploitation of communications R&D had been rapid only because Government research had reduced risks to an acceptable level. Competition was now coming from Canadian, Japanese, and European organizations with “a lot of government backing” who had developed a technical capability approaching that of the U.S. and were willing to take high risks. (Transcript)
The European Space Research Organization marked the 10th anniversary of the convention which established esro. The organization—which included member countries Belgium, Denmark, West Germany, France, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom—had successfully launched 7 satellites and 180 sounding rockets. In the 10 yrs of esro’s'existence, the budget had increased from $101.4 million for 1964-1966 to $405.6 million for 1972-1974. Employment had risen from 450 in 1964 to 1200 in 1974. The anniversary would be the last for esro, which was to he incorporated within the new European Space Organization. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, wrote Dr. Alexander Hocker, esro Director General: “We on the ‘working level’ of NASA who are now working very closely with this organization add our congratulations to those officially transmitted and look forward with pleasure to the continued association in bringing Spacelah into being.” (esro newsletter, 74-3; esro Release).
Photographs from the Skylab missions, Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, and a NASA U—2 aircraft had helped end a legal confrontation between land developers and the State of Florida, Kennedy Space Center reported. Proposed heavy development of a section of the Green Swamp had threatened to endanger a subsurface rock formation, the Florida Acquifer, which provided 90% of the state’s water. In conflict were the rights of owners to develop their property and the public’ 's right to protect vital water resources. The NASA photos demonstrated the effects of land development and led to a settlement beneficial to both parties, permitting development in large tracts with carefully planned drainage and without chemical control of aquatic weeds, (ksc Release 90-74)
The U.S.S.R. was continuing plans to build an earth station in the Ukraine to operate with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organiza-ion’s comsat system. The project—the second planned Soviet Intelsat link—had been unofficially reported by Russians in discussions with U.S. Government and private representatives over the past few months. (The first station, near Moscow, had been initiated to provide a bilateral communications capability for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Hot Line, via a Molniya and an Intelsat satellite). U.S.S.R. participation in the Intelsat system as a commercial user would fill in a major link in the U.S. goal of a single global comsat system, as stated in the 1962 Communications Satellite Act, Aviation Week & Space Technology commented. (Off US Rep to Intelsat, ComSatCorp, interview, 23 Jan 75; Johnsen, Av Wk, 8 April 74, 24)
The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vanden-berg Air Force Base on a Titan IIIB-Agena vehicle. The satellite entered orbit with a 404-km apogee, 128-km perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.4° inclination. The press later reported the satellite would support the Navy’s surface surveillance program. It reentered 17 March. (Pres Rpt 74; Av Wk, 4 March 74, 24)
The National Academy of Sciences issued Scientific Uses of the Space Shuttle, report of a July 1973 conference in Woods Hole, Mass., sponsored by the nas Space Science Board. The conference, attended by 61 U.S. and European scientists from seven scientific disciplines, concluded the shuttle could be an important asset to scientific research. Increased size, weight, and simplicity permitted for payloads would be of chief importance. But many potential advantages depended on innovative management and clear-cut, efficient, and flexible procedures for flying multipurpose missions. Small experiments could be flown cost-effectively on small standardized pallets with integrated experiments, put on standby and flown when space was available. The projected 28-day sortie mission would be valuable for most disciplines but major programs requiring longer observation times should be carried out on free-flying automated spacecraft launched from a pallet in the shuttle’s payload bay. Cost-effectiveness of recovering and refurbishing payloads in orbit required additional study. A sophisticated Large Space Telescope—proposed for launch on the shuttle—might be worth the cost to revisit and service or return to earth. But visits to less expensive spacecraft in inconvenient orbits might prove too costly. Limits on recoverable payload weight might also restrict recovery. Scientists expressed concern that weight requirements for men in addition to a crew might limit scientific payloads. A manned Spacelab module was considered essential for biomedical research but other disciplines could often use a smaller module housing a payload specialist and his console. Because of weight penalties, real-time control and evaluation might be best supplied by a ground-based control using a shuttle-to-ground communications system, such as the proposed Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , giving continuous global coverage with a high rate of data interchange. (Text) July 1974
A new method using tiny electronic body sensors, developed by Ames Research Center for remotely recording physical responses during space flight training and research programs, was being used to measure the precise walking patterns of children with cerebral palsy, NASA announced. Patients could be free of cumbersome equipment that had hindered obtaining accurate gait measurements. (NASA Release 74-131) 17—24 May: Sms 1 (sms-a Synchronous Meteorological Satellite)—first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit—was launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration from Eastern Test Range at 5:31 am edt. The lst-stage propulsion of the three-stage Thor-Delta launch vehicle was less than normal. The 2nd stage burned to near propellant completion, compensating for the deficiency but leaving insufficient propellant to complete the planned second burn. The spacecraft entered a lower-than-planned transfer orbit with a 32 895km apogee, 180-km perigee, 9-hr 37-min period, and 24.5° inclination. The apogee boost motor boosted the spacecraft into a near-geostationary orbit with a 32 828.3-km apogee, 30 747-km perigee, 20-hr 39-min period, and 2.0° inclination, with an eastward drift of approximately 56° per day. The auxiliary propulsion system was fired at 3:00 am EDT 19 May to place the spacecraft in operational attitude. A planned series of aps firings between 19 and 24 May increased the orbit to geosynchronous altitude, eliminated orbital drift, and stopped the satellite at 45° west longitude. An early post-launch review of flight data revealed no spacecraft anomalies, and the first photos were transmitted 24 May. NASA objectives—to launch the spacecraft into a geosynchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to accomplish operational mission requirements and evaluate and check out the spacecraft—were met and the mission was adjudged successful 17 Dec. Operational control was turned over to NOAA10 Dec. after checkout. The 272-kg satellite (628 kg at launch) would, for the first time, provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean. Its data-collection systems would be key elements in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment to be conducted during the summer, collecting meteorological, hydrological, oceanographic, seismic, and tsunami data. In addition, Sms 1 would monitor solar flare activity for future manned spacecraft and supersonic aircraft flights. Sms 1 was the first in a series which would include two operational prototypes and one operational spacecraft (sms-c, to become Goes 1 on launch), developed and funded by NASA to meet the requirements of the Dept, of Commerce for its Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) system. The sms project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications. GSFC also had responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASA mors, 10 May, 20 May, 18 Dec. 74; NASA, Mgr Small Launch Vehicles & Inti Prog, interview, 31 Jan. 75; gsfc, sms Proj Mgr, interview, 4 Feb 75)
Methods developed to analyze images of the earth taken by the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) had been adapted to enhance x-rays for medical use, NASA announced. The new technique, developed by a NASA cooperative student at Kennedy Space Center, included a microdensitometer that scanned the film and separated the grey shades into various densities. The untrained eye could detect 8 to 10 shades and the trained eye 32, but the microdensitometer could pick out 256 shades. Breaking down the image into more grey levels showed detail not perceived by the human eye. (ksc Release 81-74) - _
President Nixon established the Committee on Energy. The Cabinet-level advisory body would coordinate development of energy policy within the Executive Branch. (PD, 17 June 74,607-8) 15 June-23 September: The Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate) was conducted over a 51-million-sq-km area of tropical land and sea to collect data on the behavior of the tropical atmosphere and its ultimate effects on global weather. Sponsored by the United Nations’ World Meteorological Organization, more than 4000 scientists, technicians, and support personnel from 72 countries—including the U.S., Brazil, France, East and West Germany, Mexico, The Netherlands, United Kingdom, and U.S.S.R.—used 38 ships, 65 instrumented buoys, 13 aircraft, 6 kinds of satellites, and nearly 1000 land stations to observe and record phenomena from the top of the atmosphere to 1500 m below the sea surface. Objectives of gate were to extend the time range and scope of weather predictions, develop means to assess pollution, determine feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration coordinated U.S. participation, which included NASA, Dept, of Defense, Dept, of State, Dept, of Transportation, National Academy of Sciences, National Science Foundation, and National Center for Atmospheric Research, as well as the private sector of the scientific community. Instrumented aircraft, including NASA’s Convair 990, flew at altitudes between 90 and 9150 m to probe the cores of tropical cloud clusters and investigate the intertropical convergence zone, ocean waves and surface temperatures, radiation, tropical disturbances and dust layers moving off the African continent, and day-night weather changes in the coastal areas. Ships from 10 countries, including NASA’s Vanguard tracking ship and eight other U.S. vessels, investigated tropical cumulus cloud clusters, uppermost layers of ocean affected by local atmospheric conditions, and the broad systems of ocean currents near the equator. Satellites-—including Sms 1, Ats 3, Noaa 2 and 3, Nimbus 5, and dmsp Defense Meteorological Satellites from the U.S. and polar orbiting Meteor-class satellites from the U.S.S.R.—furnished day and night information on cloudtop heights and temperatures, cloud liquid-water content, wind speed and direction, temperature and moisture in the atmosphere, and sea surface temperatures. Land stations provided surface and upper-air data; instrumented buoys collected data from the sea surface to 10-m altitude. Each nation contributing vehicles would process and validate the collected data. By March 1976 all data would be sent to two World Data Centers, operated by the U.S. and U.S.S.R., where they would become available to scientists, (noaa, gate News Press Kit, 9 May 74; gate Release NI 74-45; FBis-Poland, 25 June 74, G6; noaa Release 74-1541
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—27 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 705-km apogee, 623-km perigee, 12-hr 17.6-min period, and 62.9° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of" long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (csfc Wkly SSR, 18-24 April 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 22 April 74, U1; SF, Sept 74,394)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center since its establishment in 1962, announced his retirement. Born in Germany, Dr. Debus had begun his career in U.S. military and NASA space programs in 1945, when with Dr. Wernher von Braun he had joined the Army’s ballistic missile program. He had supervised the launch of the first Redstone ballistic missile in 1953 and the flight-testing of Jupiter and Pershing missiles and Jupiter C and Juno launch vehicles until the Army team was transferred to NASA in 1960. He had directed the launch of the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, on 31 Jan. 1958, and NASA launch programs from the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1961 to preparations for space shuttle operations. Dr. Debus had received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award from the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics as well as the Army’s highest civilian decoration, the Exceptional Civilian Service Medal, and NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal. (ksc Release 135-74; Debus letter to ksc employees)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization announced it had contracted with Hughes Aircraft Co. for three Intelsat IVA satellites in addition to three ordered in 1973. The amendment to the 1973 contract totaled more than $40 million, including launch support services but not possible performance incentive payments. The -first of the additional satellites, with twice the communications capability of the Intelsat IV series, was to be delivered in 1977. (intelsat Release 74-67)
Dr. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on manned space systems in development, before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Dr. Culbertson said 986 payloads were projected for the 12-yr period beginning in 1980, with one third each for applications, science, and the Dept, of Defense. Duplication of the accomplishments expected from the space shuttle sortie (Spacelab) program would require automated spacecraft, sounding rockets, a manned space station, and a system for manned transport. The shuttle, with effective integration of payloads and the ability to service in-orbit spacecraft, offered a potential savings of $14 billion over expendable systems from 1980 to 1991. Studies had shown that 725 flights were required to fly the projected 986 payloads, an average of 60 flights a year. At a 10% rate of discount and a 10% rate of return, the space transportation system would break even if the shuttle were flown only 25 times a year. (Transcript) industry unwillingness to risk capital on advanced communications research and development. Private industry could meet short-term commercial needs but “continued NASA activity is essential to identify and meet long term national needs.” The investment level in advanced communications r&d would increase from $1.0 million in FY 1974 to $1.4 million in FY 1975. R&d included investigations into advanced antenna techniques to define radiation pattern contours to fit geographical boundaries and eliminate unwanted spillover; technology to open near-and far-infrared wavelengths for communications; new techniques in solid-state, high-power devices to replace traveling wave tubes; and use of millimeter-wave regions to expand the spectrum for satellite communications. The ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite scheduled for 1974 launch would conduct health and education telecommunications and radio beacon experiments and measure charged particles and magnetic fields over the U.S. for one year. The satellite would then be moved over India to beam educational TV to 4000 villages, ats-f (to he Ats 6 after launch) also would be used to extend coverage during the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission. Following completion of the Indian experiments, ats-f would he moved back over to the U.S. to continue experiments there. (Transcript)
Controversy over the parking position of Western Union Telegraph Co.’s second satellite—Westar-B, scheduled for June launch—was growing, the Wall Street Journal reported. Western Union had requested that the Federal Communications Commission assign the satellite a 119° west longitude position, but American Telephone & Telegraph Co. had petitioned the FCC to deny the request. AT&T would like to use that position for one of three comsats it planned to have in operation by early 1976. Positions were limited; communications satellites occupied orbits 35 500-35 900 km above the equator, and positions between 119° and 138° west longitude served the continental U.S., Hawaii, and Alaska best. In addition, comsats had to be spaced about 5° apart to avoid interference with each other. (Jacobs, WSJ, 2 May 74)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya III—l communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 683-km apogee, 628-km perigee, 12-hr 17.3-min period, and 62.8° inclination. The spacecraft was intended for long-distance telephone and cable radio communications in the Soviet Union, for transmission of color TV programs within the Orbita network, and for international cooperation. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 22 Nov 74, U1; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21-26 Nov 74; LC Science Policy Research Div, interview, 9 Sept 75)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May) and Sms 1 Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (launched 17 May) had caused substantial interference for radio telescopes in the U.S., Canada, and Great Britain, the Washington Post reported. Stars in the southwest sky with radio frequencies near those of the satellites could not be studied. Dr. Frank Kerr, spokesman for the National Academy of Sciences Committee on Radio Frequencies, described failed communications between NASA and radio astronomers. The astronomers had learned that Ats 6 would interfere with study of the sun, pulsars, and quasars only when it was too late to change the satellite’s transmitter and that Sms 1 would overlap radio telescope signals only after the satellite had begun sending back weather pictures 17 May. (O’Toole, W Post, 27 Sept 74)
The Air Force was developing a new series of global meteorological satellites for the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (dmsp) , Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The new Block 5D spacecraft would be twice the weight of its predecessors, have a payload capacity about four times greater, and carry a broader mix of meteorological sensors to provide uniformly high-resolution photos. Block 5D satellites would employ “selective redundancy”—redundancy in certain critical, rather than all, spacecraft systems. This redundancy would increase probable mission lifetime to two years, more than twice the 9- or 10-mo lifetime of most earlier USAF weather satellites. Rather than choosing a single contractor, the USAF had awarded a series of fixed-price contracts: to RCA Corp. for the spacecraft, Westinghouse Electric Corp. for the primary sensor, Barnes Engineering Co. for the supplementary sensors, and Radiation, Inc., for ground terminals. (Av Wk, 15 July 74, 41-47)
Comsat General Corp. announced the award of a cohtract to ScientificAtlanta, Inc., for 100 shipboard antennas and associated terminal equipment as part of the maritime communications satellite (Marisat) system to provide improved communications to commercial 'ships at sea. The contract was expected to exceed $2 million and included options to purchase up to 300 additional terminals, (comsat Gen Corp Release 74r-31) 6, 11 June: Hearings on converting solar energy into electricity by photovoltaic devices were held by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy as part of a continuing series of hearings on solar energy. John V. Goldsmith, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist, said the total annual U.S. production of photovoltaic solar cells was 50 to 75 kw, mostly for spacecraft systems. In space, solarcell systems were without parallel but large-scale applications on the earth could not be achieved until systems could be produced in adequate volume at commercially competitive prices. Goldsmith recommended a large-scale photovoltaic technology development program and said that a terrestrial photovoltaic system, with advantages of an inexhaustible energy source and minimal environmental impact, could be reduced in cost from its current $30 per watt to an economically feasible $0.50 per watt by 1985 but would require Federal funding of more than $250 million. Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs, said NASA was continuing investigations of orbiting satellite power stations. A microwave energy project was studying problems of processing large amounts of power. However, an orbiting power station would weigh 11 million kg and require a second-generation shuttle in addition to a nuclear-powered shuttle to put it into synchronous orbit. (Transcript)
NASA announced it had awarded RCA Astro Electronics Div. a fixed-price $15 282 143 NASA contract, with an additional incentive amount of $692 638 for performance in orbit, to provide two operational meteorological spacecraft—Improved Tiros Operational Satellite H and I—and parts for itos-J. The work, to be performed in Hightstown, N.J., would extend through 15 Feb. 1977. The satellites would support the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s National Operational Meteorological Satellite System through 1978. The noncompetitive procurement was a follow-on to an existing contract. (NASA Release 74-218)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications Leonard Jaffe—U.S. Representative to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Working Group and Task Force on Remote Sensing— reviewed U.S. environmental and earth resources programs before the Working Group and Task Force. The U.S. had designed tape recorders and studies on Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) for foreign use of the data, but the “extent and vigor of foreign interest was perhaps greater than we expected.” Brazil and Canada had built ground stations to receive data directly and, by agreement with the U.S., were disseminating data. Italy also would establish a ground station, and nine other countries had expressed interest. Erts 1 performance had shown that data collection with a spatial resolution of 100 m was economical and adequate for a wide range of significant applications. Although total discontinuance of photographic imagery was not planned, the speed, reliability, and flexibility found in computer analysis indicated that future systems would increasingly use automated methods. The mapping accuracy of the satellite’s instruments was adequate for 1:1 000 000 and even 1:250 000 scale when system errors were removed by computer processing. Processing and disseminating data was a key factor in the cost of an earth observation program. No one data-processing and dissemination facility would ever be able to meet the needs of the world efficiently. Estimates put the cost of an additional system similar to the Erts 1 data-collection system—aside from spacecraft costs—at $11 million for the facility and $9.9 million for five years of data processing. A minimal system with only multispectral scanner and real-time observations would cost $2.5 million for the facility and $3.6 million for five years of data processing. (Text; NASA OA, interview)
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and GTE Satellite Corp. filed a proposal with the Federal Communications Commission to operate a joint domestic satellite system. The system would serve the contiguous 48 states and Hawaii and could serve Alaska and Puerto Rico through earth stations owned by other companies. A joint system would improve network efficiency and reduce the number of earth stations to 7, from the 10 required for two separate systems. Three satellites operated by comsat General Corp. and provided to AT&T would serve the joint system and could handle 28 800 simultaneous telephone conversations. The FCC had approved separate domestic satellite systems for the two companies 12 Sept. 1973, directing them to work together to integrate the systems and negotiate agreements for handling communications traffic and equitable division of revenues from jointly rendered services. (Smith, NYT, 19 April 74,49) Twenty-six individuals and four groups received awards in ceremonies at Johnson Space Center. Twenty-six individuals and five groups at Kennedy Space Center and thirty-four individuals and six groups at Marshall Space Flight Center received awards in ceremonies 19 April. (NASA Ann; NASA Release 74-90; Program)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 2 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1975 NASA budget plan for new authorization of $3,247 billion and spending of $3,273 billion, although a “constrained budget,” would carry forward the programs planned in FY 1974. Goals and major programs were the same, with three new projects in space science and applications, but the space shuttle had been slipped four to six months. NASA’s FY 1974 budget had “reflected a sharp temporary reduction, because of Government-wide fiscal problems . . . , below the $3.4 billion level previously planned as the long-term level.” Increases in FY 1975 and later years were therefore “in order to approach again the level required to maintain . . . advances in space and aeronautics for the rest of the decade.” The FY 1975 increase of “about $100 million,” however, was less than required to return to NASA’s complete program as planned, and adjustments had been necessary. Principally, the first manned orbital flight of the shuttle was rescheduled to the second quarter of 1979, instead of the end of 1978, but NASA had a “firm commitment now” that there would be no more slips for budgetary reasons, and none was expected for technical reasons. NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly said at the briefing the stretchout was expected to increase shuttle costs about $50 million “in 1971 dollars.” The $800 million requested for the shuttle was $89 million less than NASA had submitted to the Office of Management and Budget. In the three new space flight projects, Pioneer Venus had top scientific priority as the next step in planetary exploration. Two missions launched in 1978 would study the Venus atmosphere for a better understanding of that planet and of the earth’s atmosphere, meteorology, and climatology. In the second new start, seasat, an experimental applications satellite, would measure ocean characteristics to aid scientific understanding of ocean dynamics and determine if a forecasting system could be developed, seasat-a was to be launched in 1978. The third start, the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm), would launch an Explorer satellite in 1977 to make thermal measurements of the earth’s surface to help find mineral resources and potential geothermal energy sources and to discriminate rock structures for planning civil works such as highways. NASA was asking $6 million to build the world’s first large infrared telescope, on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for planetary research to complement planetary space flights, especially to provide data for the 1977 launch of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn probe. Another new thrust, still in the planning stage, was the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , to return the large amounts of data expected from the shuttle in the 1980s and permit phase-out of some tracking stations. NASA would not develop the spacecraft for the TDRSS but would lease satellite services from a private organization, beginning in CY1979. Analysis of data from the Skylab missions that were ending with the 8 Feb. splashdown of Skylab 4 would continue for many years. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joint engineering and training activities with the U.S.S.R. were on schedule. All shuttle hardware prime contractors and most subcontractors had been selected, and the Dept, of Defense tentatively planned to modify an existing upper stage for use as an interim space tug with, the shuttle. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, was still working well, exceeding its design life by more than six months. ERTS-b, previously planned for 1976 launch, had been moved to 1975. A number of nasa and 11 commercial applications launches were scheduled during the year. A nominal communications satellite research program would be continued. In space astronomy, oso-i was scheduled for 1975 and the heAo series would be resumed, with launches planned for 1977, 1978, and 1979. Astronautics programs would continue to develop technology to improve fuel economy, reduce noise, and improve performance of U.S.-built civil transport aircraft. nasa’s Civil Service employment was to be stabilized at the end of FY 1974 levels except for a further reduction of 354 persons at Marshall Space Flight Center following completion of Skylab. NASA’s FY 1975 total would be 24 616, about 2200 less than in FY 1973 and 354 less than in FY 1974. Support service contractors at the Centers had reductions planned at about the same level, the 25 000 FY 1973 total dropping to 24 000 in FY 1974 and to 22 000 in FY 1975. (Text; NASA, FY 75 Budget Briefing transcript & background material)
The channeled scabland of eastern Washington had been formed 20 000 yrs ago by the greatest flood known to have occurred, the New York Times quoted U.S. Geological Survey as reporting. From ground scars and photographs from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972), scientists had traced the flood for 885 km. An ice dam blocking drainage of western Montana into Idaho had collapsed, pouring 2000 cubic km of water down the valley of the Spokane River. Scars visible in satellite photographs were formed by erosion of surface soil and underlying basalt. As water drained, gravel ridges 6 to 9 m high and 3 km long had been formed. The largest channel was the Grand Coulee, 80 km long and 270 m deep. (Sullivan, NYT, 17 Sept. 74; uses pio, interview, 12 June 75)
Italy would build a ground station to receive data from NASA’s Earth Resources Technology Satellites, NASA announced. Under a Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and Italy’s communications satellite organization Societa per Azioni per le Comunicazioni Spaziali (Tele-spazio), the station, at Fucino, would complement existing stations in Fairbanks, Alaska; Goldstone, Calif.; Greenbelt, Md.; Prince Albert, Canada; and Cuiaba, Brazil. NASA’s Erts 1 had been transmitting data since 23 July 1972 launch; erts-b was scheduled for spring 1975 launch. (nasa Release 74-142)
NASA officials testified on the proposal to lease a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System and on the closing of Plum Brook Station, during FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley said NASA recommended lease instead of Government ownership and operation for four reasons. First, contracting for services would be as cost-effective as a conventional network of ground stations. Second, expenditures would be deferred to years when resulting savings could be realized. Funding required to procure a NASA-owned TDRSS would reduce the resources that could be applied to important mainline programs. Third, industrial technology was ready to provide the needed services. Fourth, the proposed arrangement was consistent with long-standing policies and practice of the Government to rely on industry for communications services. Acting Associate Administrator Edwin C. Kilgore of NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology testified that Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station, which was to be closed by June 1974 because of FY 1974 Civil Service work force cuts, would keep its Space Power Facility on standby. The Air Force, Navy, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and other agencies were considering using the facility—the world’s largest space environment facility, which included a unique solar simulation system. Also, NASA’s cooperative program with the National Science Foundation to study wind-driven energy devices was based at Plum Brook. LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin reported that reduction-in-force notices had been sent to 177 Civil Service employees 11 March, following 180 in the past year, out of LeRc’s 400 separations. Dr. Kilgore said 50 engineers and technicians would be retained for the Space Power Facility at Plum Brook, which once employed 600 workers. (Transcript)
Aerospace companies that had succeeded in using the system approach to develop advanced technology for use in space were encountering difficulties in the field of urban mass transportation, a New York Times article said. Boeing Co. Aerospace Div. faced losses of up to $6 million on an automated “people mover” shuttle system in Morgantown, W. Va. Cost of the project, chosen four years ago as a pilot application of aerospace management techniques, had jumped from the original estimate of S13.4 million to $115 million. Rohr Industries, Inc., had lost more than $10 million on a project to build 450 commuter cars for the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit System, which had threatened to sue Rohr over late deliveries and alleged unreliability of some cars. Observers had noted that aerospace technologists tended to “overengineer” transit systems, increasing costs, aggravating maintenance, and marring reliability. In addition there were problems in converting prototypes to hardware that could withstand the rigors of carrying throngs of people. But, despite the frustrations, more companies were entering the competition. A significant test of how the aerospace industry would fare in the next era of transit development would be the performance of Boeing’s Vertol Div. in two projects to produce 230 streetcars for Boston and San Francisco and 100 cars for Chicago’s rapid transit system. (Lindsey, AFT1,21 April 74, 3:1) Dr. Alastair G. W. Cameron, Harvard College Observatory scientist, said that an enormous spherical cloud of comets with a combined mass 20 times that of Jupiter might lie beyond the planets and form a far more massive part of the universe than the planets. This cloud, the Oort cloud, might be a repository for heavy elements formed since the infancy of the Milky Way. Dr. R. W. Klebesadel of the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory said that satellites, placed in a 100 000-km orbit as part of the Air Force Vela series developed to monitor the 1963 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, has monitored 27 high-intensity explosions in space over four years. The explosions, which had produced unusually large amounts of gamma and x-ray energy, might be in the Orion arm of the galaxy, where the earth was. Dr. Philip Morrison of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology said nine current theories of the origin of the explosions included exploding stars, or supernovas; objects falling into neutron stars; and unusually large solar flares or sunstorms on distant stars. (Sullivan, NYT, 24 April 74, 13; Shurkin, P Inq, 26 April 74, 12)
The congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy issued the panel report Transportation of Radioactive Material by Passenger Aircraft. The panel recommended that the transport index (the level of radiation in millirem per hour one meter from the surface of packages of radioactive material) be reduced from 10 to 1 and that the maximum permissible radiation at the package surface be lowered by one fourth to one half. Total maximum permissible quantities of curies of radionuclides per package should be at least 10 times lower. Improved packaging, installation of high-level radiation monitors in baggage compartments, and Federal monitoring of packages in transit from supplier to loading were also recommended. (Joint Com Print) Three HEAO satellites were scheduled for launch into earth orbit 1977-1979 Jo study celestial x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. (NASA Release 74—271; msfc proj off, interview, 12 Nov 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center had negotiated a restructured contract with TRW Inc. for the first of three High Energy Astronomy Observatory spacecraft to be launched between 1977 and 1979, NASA announced. Modifications had increased the original contract value by $9 451139, to a new total of $86 397 579. The contract covered design, development, manufacture, test, checkout, and delivery of the spacecraft. Period of performance was from 1 July 1974 through 15 April 1980. The original heao program, approved in 1971 and suspended in 1973 because of budget cuts, had called for two large unmanned observatories. The new contract called for a series of smaller scale missions using three satellites in circular orbits at an altitude of 416 km to obtain data on high-energy radiation from space—celestial x-rays, gamma-rays, and cosmic rays. Contracts totaling $23 332 700 had also been signed for five experiments to be carried by the second spacecraft, heao-b. The awards included $1 350 000 to American Science and Engineering, Inc., to design and build the x-ray telescope, (nasa Release 74-240; m§fc Release 74179)
A prototype direct-readout ground station, designed by Goddard Space Flight Center to receive high-resolution weather photos from satellites, left gsfc for Dakar, Senegal. It was to play a key role in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate) to study tropical weather patterns. Using the ground station, planners could quickly advise scientists aboard participating ships to focus attention on specific weather conditions and could route aircraft into regions where cloud development was detected. The prototype unit, which produced real-time images as large negative or positive transparencies with a resolution four to eight times greater than units already in use, consisted of four vans weighing a total of 12 000 kg. Future models would weigh 270 kg and could he built at modest cost by other countries. (NASA Release 74-129)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998 was reported to the Senate by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The Committee authorization of $3,267 billion was $8,145 million higher than that passed by the House 25 April. It was equal to 1% of the total FY 1975 Federal budget and was $0.5 billion below the constant-level NASA budget endorsed by Congress two years earlier. The Committee had added $16 million to NASA’s 4 Feb. budget request, to fund procurement and launch of a third Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-c) for continuity of remote-sensing data. The Committee also had added $6 million to support activities under way and the initiation and application of new ideas in energy and environmental areas. It refused to concur in $20 million added by the House to the space shuttle program. (SRpt 93-818)
A declassified feasibility study by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. had indicated that reflector satellites 200-900 m in diameter could illuminate ground areas continuously at night, the Huntsville Times reported. Pointing out commercial uses, an official from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had managed the Project Able study, told the Times that potential applications included reflecting microwaves from space for conversion to electrical power, beaming rays on Florida’s orange groves should frost threaten the fruit crop, and lighting Alaska during its extended darkness. Launched on a Saturn V booster or on the space shuttle, a 640-m-dia, 20 000-kg reflector satellite could provide twice the light of the full moon and raise the temperature of the area covered by several degrees, (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 11 Sept 74)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya II-9 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 700-km apogee, 599-km perigee, 12-hr 17.0-min period, and 62.9° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 25 April-1 May 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 30 April 74; U1; SF, Sept. 74,395)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced it had signed a contract to provide technical and operational management for the global commercial satellite system owned by the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Under the contract, to run through 11 Feb. 1979, ComSatCorp would recommend and implement research and development programs; advise on procuring space segment facilities; negotiate, place, and administer all contracts for space segments; arrange for satellite launch services and support; prepare and coordinate system operations plans; and prepare and coordinate frequency plans for earth stations. (ComSatCorp Release 74-44) 30 Augusta-14 September: NASA launched Ans 1 Netherlands Astronomical Satellite from Western Test Range on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle at 7:08 am PDT (10:08 am edt). The satellite entered an elliptical polar orbit with a 1167-km apogee, 254-km perigee, 99.0-min period, and 98.1° inclination—significantly different from the planned circular orbit—because of a malfunction in the 1st stage of the Scout. Changes in the spacecraft program and scientific instrument operations program were made to accommodate to the actual orbit. Although the orbit hindered the observation program, the primary objective—to increase the scientific knowledge of stellar ultraviolet and x-ray sources—could be achieved. The spacecraft was pointed at the sun, the solar panels were deployed, and fine pointing in a three-axis stabilized condition was established. All three experiments—a hard x-ray experiment provided by the U.S. and a uv telescope and soft x-ray experiment provided by The Netherlands— were turned on by 8 Sept. In-orbit checkout of experiments and spacecraft was completed 13 Sept, and the operational phase of the mission began 14 Sept. Principal effect of the orbit on the scientific program was the loss of observing time. The higher apogee placed the spacecraft in the Van Allen radiation belts longer than planned, creating a more intense radiation background than anticipated. The uv telescope could operate effectively for 70% of each orbit and observe lOth-magnitude stars only when the spacecraft was below 500 km. Only 5th-magnitude or brighter stars were observable most of the time. The U.S. x-ray experiment could make effective observations about 25% of the total possible observing time; the experiment could operate below 700 km but not over the poles or the South Atlantic Anomaly. The soft x-ray experiment consisted of a large-area detector, which was operating similarly to the U.S. experiment, and a grazing-incidence telescope, which was seriously affected by the radiation background. Although much of the acquired data was not usable, most future data might be recovered through improved analysis techniques. Despite the problems, the orbit would provide nine months of full sunlight, rather than the six months expected, permitting reobservations of objects observed during the first three months. In addition, aerodynamic drag would lower the apogee over a period of time, decreasing the passage time through the Van Allen belts. Ans 1 was launched under a Memorandum of Understanding signed 5 June 1970 by NASA and the Astronomical Netherlands Satellite Program Authority (anspa) . NASA provided the x-ray experiment, spacecraft technical support, the Scout launch vehicle and services, and limited tracking and data acquisition. The Netherlands was responsible for the spacecraft design, fabrication, and testing; two experiments; and primary spacecraft command, control, and tracking and data acquisition. Ans 1 was the first satellite to be controlled completely from the European Space Research Organization’s operations center at Darmstadt, Germany. The ans program was managed for NASA by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Space Science. Langley Research Center had responsibility for the Scout launch vehicle, (nasa mors, 21 Aug, 6 Nov 74; gsfc SSR, 31 Aug 74; gsfc proj mgr, interview, 15 July 75; esro Release, 23 Aug 74)
Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified on the proposed Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) in FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology: tdrss essentially would be two tracking network stations in synchronous orbit to support all low-earth-orbit satellites, giving real-time control and data with a significant increase in reliability. The system would provide close to six times the coverage given by ground networks because supported satellites would be visible to the orbital stations during 85% of the orbits rather than the 15% from ground stations. Close to continuous visibility would also provide greater flexibility in programming satellite use and would simplify operations. Number of ground tracking stations could be reduced from the 1974 total of 18, plus one ship and two aircraft, to 8 by 1981. (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 16 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk to collect information for weather forecasts. Orbital parameters were 892-km apogee, 830-km perigee, 102.2-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite carried instruments to photograph the clouds and snow cover on day and night sides of the globe and to collect data on the heat reflected by the earth and its atmosphere, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 28 Feb-6 March 74; Tass. fbis-Sov, 6 March 74, Ul; SF, Sept 74, 355)
President Nixon transmitted World Weather Program, Plan for Fiscal Year 1975 to Congress. The plan outlined 1975 U.S. participation in the program seeking to give man “the understanding, tools and techniques necessary to cope with his atmosphere.” Goals were to extend the time, range, and scope of weather predictions; assess the impact of atmospheric pollution on environment; study the feasibility and consequences of weather modification; and encourage international cooperation in meeting meteorological needs. He said the U.S. would soon begin continuous viewing of storms over much of the earth’s surface with two geostationary satellites and that five more such satellites would he made operational in cooperation with other nations. (PD, 5 Aug 74, 1001)
The first prototype B-l intercontinental strategic bomber was unveiled at Palmdale, Calif., by the Air Force and Rockwell International Corp. Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger told on-lookers that the new aircraft was needed to complement the U.S. arsenal of land-based and submarine-based missiles. Although smaller and lighter than the B-52 it was meant to replace, the B-l could fly farther and faster, carry almost twice the payload, and use a shorter runway. Powered by four 133.4-kilonewton-thrust (30 000-lb) turbofan engines and lifted by variable geometry, or “swing” wings, the bomber could fly efficiently at speeds in excess of mach 2. The projected cost of production models— $76.4 million each—made the future of the aircraft controversial and uncertain, (dod Release 505-74; Getler, W Post, 27 Oct 74, A6; Wright, NYT, 27 Oct 74,43) 26 October—4 November: An agreement for NASA to submit life sciences experiments for flight aboard the next available Soviet biological satellite was negotiated during the fifth joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine in Tashkent, U.S.S.R. The first U.S. experiments would be passive specimen modules, completely autonomous from spacecraft power, life support, and data-recording systems, and would require no operational commands from the ground during flight. NASA would prepare descriptions of the proposed experiments in December and deliver flight hardware by 15 Aug. 1975. U.S. investigators would also participate in pre- and postflight studies of blood and tissue samples from animals flown aboard the next Soviet biological satellite. The protocol was confirmed by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences 4 Dec. Representatives also discussed preparations for the joint July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission; exchanged results from Apollo, Skylab, Cosmos, Salyut, and Soyuz programs; and discussed pre- and postflight examinations, vestibular training, and crew reaction to flight. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 16 Dec 74, 42-3; NASA Release 74-237; NASA Int Aff, interview, 17 Oct 75; Moscow Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, BIO; 8 Nov 74, U1) 27 October-2 November: The 67th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) convened in Sidney, Australia. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was presented the 1973 fai Gold Space Medal for his role as Skylab 2 commander, and Astronaut Alan L. Bean was presented the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for his role as Skylab 3 mission commander. Both men also received the De la Vaulx Medal for their successive space duration records. (naa News. Oct 74, Dec 74,1) 28 October-9 November: Luna 23, second Soviet lunar mission of 1974, was launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tvuratam into a parking orbit with 246-km apogee, 183-km perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.5° inclination, where the “automatic station” was separated and launched on a near-to-planned trajectory to the moon. After a 31 Oct. flight path correction, the spacecraft on 2 Nov. entered a, lunar orbit with 104-km apogee, 94-km perigee, 117-min period, and 138° inclination. On 4 and 5 Nov. the orbit was changed to 105-km apogee and 17-km perigee. The spacecraft landed in the southern part of the moon’s Sea of Crisis 6 Nov., but rugged terrain damaged a device designed to take rock samples from a 2.5-m depth. The planned drilling and collection of lunar soil had to be abandoned for a reduced equipment-testing program. Work with the station was discontinued 9 Nov. (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, Ul-2; 10 Nov 74, Ul; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4 Nov 74, Ul; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74, 13; SF, April 75,152) _
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications held hearings on the FY 1975 NASA authorization. Dr. William Nordberg, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory for Meteorology and Earth Sciences, said data from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) had demonstrated savings in land use planning and regulation of 10 to 100 times conventional costs in both dollars and personnel. Every cloud-free photo taken by the satellite had been sold to the general public at least once. One photo of an Alaskan naval petroleum reserve showed a striking alignment of lakes indicating that the deposits might extend the known petroleum area. Dr. Warren A. Hovis, gsfc scientist, testified that the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm) satellite to be launched in 1977 would use a thermal mapper, with a resolution of 0.5 km in optimum orbit, to determine maximum daily temperature variations and thermal inertia of surface material, identify mineral resources, map natural and man-made thermal effluent, and investigate geothermal source location by remote sensing. . Data from the seasat-a satellite to be launched in 1978-^-or from one of its follow-on systems—-would provide optimum, minimum-time ship routing around storms and away from adverse wind, waves, currents, and ice conditions, Dr. John R. Apel, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorologist, testified 6 March. The savings from a one-day decrease in transatlantic crossing time could amount to millions of dollars each year for shipping interests. (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya I—S—the first Molniya communications satellite in synchronous orbit—from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into transfer orbit and then into synchronous orbit with a 35 790-km apogee, 35 787-km perigee, 23-hr 56-min period, and 0.0° inclination. Molniya I—S was the second Soviet satellite in synchronous orbit. The first, Cosmos 637, was launched 29 March. Tass announced the purpose of the satellite as “further perfection of communication systems with the use of artificial earth satellites.” (gsfc SSR, 31 Aug 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 31 July 74, Ul; SF, 1 Jan 75, 35; SBD, 5 Aug 74,100)
Explorer 46 Meteoroid Technolpgy Satellite, launched 13 Aug. 1972, was officially adjudged a success. The primary objective of measuring meteoroid penetration rates on a bumper-protected target in the near-earth environment was achieved despite the failure of half of the bumper panels to deploy fully. Because of die anomaly, the spacecraft batteries had overheated and data collection from the main telemetry system had been discontinued; since 22 Aug. 1972, data from the primary experiment had been transmitted through the backup system, which operated on solar cells only. Flight data showed that the bumper concept was six times more effective than a single-wall structure, twice the anticipated effectiveness. Because the secondary experiments had been powered only by the spacecraft batteries, no data were received from these experiments after 22 Aug. 1972. One secondary experiment—to measure impact flux of small mass meteoroids—had recorded 1850 penetrations, however, enough to show conclusively that the microphone meteoroid sensors flown on early Explorer and Discoverer satellites had greatly overestimated the population of small meteoroids. (NASA mor, 11 March 74)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization marked its 10th anniversary. Membership, originally at 14, had grown to 86 countries, which j ointly owned the four Intelsat IV satellites and three spare Intelsat III satellites in the global communications system. The system provided more than 5000 international telephone circuits plus telegraph, telex, data, and TV services; charges had progressively dropped from the initial $32 000 per year for a half circuit to $9000. The permanent intelsat Organization had come into being 12 Feb 1973, replacing the interim Consortium that had operated since 20 Aug. 1964. (intelsat Release 74-2)
The U.S.S.R. was believed to have orbited between 8 and 10 radar-carrying satellites in the last four years that could monitor surface shin traffic around the globe, Thomas O’Toole said in a Washington Post article. Intelligence sources believed the satellites were still experimental and part of an effort to monitor submerged Polaris submarines. One radar satellite, Cosmos 626, launched 27 Dec. 1973 into an orbit 264-km high, separated into two parts 11 Feb. One part moved to a higher 382-km orbit and was thought to be the power supply for the orbital radar, using polonium 210, a “hot” source of radioactive heat that could generate as much as 2000 kw of electricity by thermoelectricity. (W Post, 26 April 74, Al) 27 April-5 May: Two full-scale models of the Spacelab manned orbital laboratory, to be developed by the European Space Research Organization for use with the shuttle, were shown to the international press and public for the first time at the 1974 German Aerospace Show in Hanover, West Germany. Visitors were able to see interior as well as the exterior equipment of the pallet and pressurized laboratory. A 1:50 scale model of the-space shuttle was also on display, (esro Release, 22 April 74)
The European Space Research Organization was investigating systems for all-weather earth resources observations, Aviation Weqjc & Space Technology reported. Thomson-CSF and British Aircraft Corp. had completed a nine-month study of a synthetic-aperture radar satellite with a 50-m-resolution imaging sensor. (Av Wk, 15 April 74, 11)
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)
Indonesia would build a domestic communications satellite system including two satellites and 50 earth stations, the Indonesian Post and Telecommunications Directorate General announced to the press. Each satellite could serve as backup for the other and would have 12 transponders. Each transponder would be able to serve 12 telephone lines or 1 color TV channel. The press later reported that Malaysia and the Philippines were planning to join the Indonesian system. The satellites would be put into orbits that would allow point-to-point telephohe connections within each country and among the three countries. Construction of the system was expected to cost $90 million and take two years. (Jakarta Domestic Service and Hong Kong AFP, FBIS-Indonesia, 18 April 74, Nl-2)
A photograph of the U.S.S.R.’s space launching complex at Baykonur Cosmodrome taken by NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) from 900 km altitude was published in the Washington newsletter Defense/Space Business Daily. The photo, taken 16 March 1973, showed that the complex stretched 60 km east and west, 24 km north of Tyuratam. The newsletter published a closer, 5 Oct. 1972 photo on 17 Jan. (SBD, 9,10,17 Jan 74, 41—42, 49—50, 89; NASA photos 74-H-6,74-H-ll, 74-H-12,74r-H-13)
Pages of the Wall Street Journal were being printed via satellite in a joint test program, Dow Jones & Co., Inc., and Communications Satellite Corp. announced. A Dow Jones composition plant in Massachusetts transmitted high-resolution facsimile pages to Intelsat-IV F—7 communications satellite in synchronous orbit 35 900 km above the Atlantic Ocean. The satellite relayed the data to the Dow Jones production facility in New Jersey for production of press plates. The test program was the first time the entire process from composition to printing had been conducted via satellite transmission. (Dow Jones-ComSatCorp Joint Release 74-45; ComSatCorp pio, interview, 1 Aug 75)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 637 from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam, into orbit with 35 604-km apogee, 35 595-km perigee, 23-hr 46.6-min period, and 0.2° inclination—the first Soviet satellite in geosynchronous orbit. The press later quoted American analysts as suggesting that Cosmos 637, which was stationed above the Indian Ocean, might be an engineering test for a full-fledged stationary communications satellite long planned by the Soviets to improve communications with the southern part of the U.S.S.R. and the Warsaw Pact countries. (gsfc Wkly SSR, 21-27 March 74; Shabad, NYT, 28 March 74, 20; SBD, 28 March 74,153; Av Wk, 1 April 74)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences held hearings on S. 3542, a bill introduced 29 May to authorize $41 700 000 for NASA to launch a seventh Applications Technology Satellite. Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) said experimenters using Ats 6, launched 30 May, had urged another launch because more than the planned one year of operation over the U.S. was needed to complete experiments. Two satellites in orbit at the same time would “greatly improve the experimental information necessary for further decisions on the use of advanced communications satellites.” Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said that ats satellites held “the promise of improved health care at reduced costs” for people in remote regions of the U.S. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified that Ats 6 was in excellent condition and had a life expectancy of three additional years over the U.S. following its return from the planned year of operation over India. In addition, use of the U.S.-Canada Communications Technology Satellite scheduled for a mid-December launch could provide experimenters additional experiment time and continuity. Dr. Fletcher expressed NASA opposition to the bill, saying it would cost $4 million more than the bill provided, to cover the cost of the Titan IIIC launch vehicle. To avoid further costs, a decision to launch another spacecraft would have to be made by September, when the NASA and industry ATS team were to be disbanded. A seventh ats satellite could be considered a potential operational vehicle and the user community might consider bearing the costs. (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—28 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 39 707-km apogee, 645-km perigee, 717.7min period, and 62.8° inclination. Tass reported that the satellite carried equipment to relay TV programs and to establish remote multichannel radio communications, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Av Wh, 4 Nov 74,13; Tass, fbis-Sov, 25 Oct 74, Ul)
The first domestic communications satellite service, connecting East and West Coasts, was officially inaugurated by RCA Corp. from New York City at 2:40 pm edt. Within minutes, conversations were relayed by Canada’s Anik 2 satellite (launched by NASA 20 April 1973) on a circuit leased from Telesat Canada. Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R-N.Y.) in New York, Federal Communications Chairman Dean Burch in Washington, D.C., Alaska Gov. William A. Egan in Juneau, Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) in Anchorage, and Sen. Ted Stevens (R-Alaska) in Nome exchanged congratulations. Operated by RCA Global Communications, Inc., and RCA Alaska Communications, Inc., for the parent RCA Corp., the system used earth relay stations near New York, San Francisco, Juneau, and Anchorage. These were to be joined by others in 1976, when RCA hoped to have three satellites of its own. Transmission charges for coast-to-coast messages were less via satellite than by earthbound systems; a telephone circuit rented for $1700 a month rather than the $2298 charged by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. for a similar land-based private circuit. Quality also was better because a connection could be completed with fewer relay points, one relay to the satellite and smother from the satellite to the ground, (rca Release, 8 Jan 74; W Star-News, 9 Jan 74; WSJ, 9 Jan 74,34)
An agreement to establish an Aerosat (Aeronautical Satellite) Space Segment Program was signed in Washington by the European Space Research Organization, comsat General Corp., and the Government of Canada. Under the agreement—provided for in the Memorandum of Understanding signed 2 Aug.—esro, comsat General, and Canada would furnish the space segment capability for the intergovernmental program. comsat General would lease its share of the space segment capability to the Federal Aviation Administration, (esro Release, 3 Dec 74)
The U.S.S.R. launched Intercosmos 12 from Plesetsk into an orbit with 697-km apogee, 241-km perigee, 94.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Tass reported that the satellite, intended to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere and the flow of micrometeorites, carried equipment made by specialists from Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Romania, and Czechoslovakia, as well as the U.S.S.R. The spacecraft reentered 11 July 1975. (LC Science Policy Research Div., interview, 6 Aug 75; gsfc Wkly SSR, 31 Oct-6 Nov 74, 10-16 July 75; Tass, fbis-Sov, 1 Nov 74, Ul) During October: The Space Shuttle Operational Management Assessment Team was formed to make “an appraisal of the technical aspects of the program and an assessment of the ability of management to complete the development of the shuttle within the cost and performance targets.” Composed primarily of industry representatives and named for its chairman, Willis M. Hawkins of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., the Hawkins Committee was to prepare a formal briefing no later than 1 Nov. Inflation levels of 8—9%, well over the 5% on which FY 1975 funding was based, had increased costs throughout the shuttle program and compromised the ability of NASA and the prime contractors to reach their program milestones. (Team charter; Covault, Av Wk, 23 Sept 74, 20-2)
Three Intelsat IV communications satellites transmitted the Muhammad Ali-Joe. Frazier boxing match in New York City to 17 countries. The three-hour match, won by Ali by a decision, was transmitted to Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nicaragua, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Thailand, United Kingdom, Venezuela, and Zaire. (ComSatCorp Release 74-6; W Star-News Library) 28 January-1 February: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 10th Annual Meeting and Technical Display 28—30 Jan. and 12th Aerospace Sciences Meeting 30 Jan.-l Feb. in Washington, D.C. “Spaceship Earth—A New Perspective” was the theme of the meeting, chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President of Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning. At the honors banquet 30 Jan. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for 1973 for scientific, engineering, and organizational contributions to manned and unmanned space missions, beginning with the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958. Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Space Physics Branch, was given the aiaa Space Science Award for 1973 for his leading role in the Pioneer missions and his contribution to man’s understanding of interplanetary space. The Goddard Award was shared by Paul D. Castenholtz, Rockwell International Corp.; Richard C. Mulready, United Aircraft Corp.; and John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology—for significant contributions to the development of the practical liquid oxygen and hydrogen rocket engine. Winner of the aiaa History Manuscript Award for 1973 was Dr. William M. Leary, Jr., Univ. of Georgia historian, for “The Dragon’s Wings: The China National Aviation Corporation and the Development of Commercial Aviation in China.” Carroll H. Woodling, Chief of Johnson Space Center Crew Training and Simulation Div., received the de Florez Training Award for advancing development of space flight simulators and for flight training programs. The G. Edward Pendray Award was awarded to Frederick I. Ord-way III, Univ. of Alabama, for his contributions to the literature recording the history and benefits of the space program. Willis H. Hawkins, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., was awarded the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for contributions to the design and development of aerospace vehicles— including vertical take-off, transport, interceptor, and supersonic fighter aircraft-—and to missile and space programs including ramjet and reentry test vehicles. The Lawrence Sperry Award went to Dino A. Lorenzini, Air Force Academy, for developing a modern inertial guidance test facility incorporating computer-control, data-acquisition, sensor-excitation, and seismic-isolation technology. . Dr. Harold A. Rosen, Hughes Aircraft Co., received the Spacecraft Design Award for contributions to the development of satellite communication systems, including the spin-stabilized synchronous-orbit spacecraft concept and commercial systems. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace of the Air Force Systems Command delivered the von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Composites,” pointing to a need for competitive cost and innovative design to realize the advantages of composites in material, fabrication, and configuration. The Dryden Research Lecture was delivered by Herbert F. Hardrath, Langley Research Center, who reviewed the use of fracture mechanics to choose materials, configure safe and efficient structures, specify inspection procedures, predict lives of flawed structures, and develop the reliability ofcurrent and future airframes. Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of the GE Space Div., was installed as 12th president of aiaa. The 19 new Fellows elected included Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director; John P. Campbell and John P. Reeder, LaRc; and Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. Inducted as Honorary Members were Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.). (AdcA, Mar 74; AIAA Bull, Jan 74; aiaa Releases, 21 Dec 73; aiaa History Newsletter, 24 May 74; Ksc Release 14r-74; arc Astrogram, 18 Jan 74, 1; Marshall Star, 30 Jan 74,1)
Roy E. Anderson, General Electric Co. Research and Development Center engineer, demonstrated the potential of geostationary satellites for search-and-rescue missions. Standing on the NASA Hq. steps in Washington, D.C., and using an ordinary walkie-talkie aided by an antenna built on the frame of a golfer’s umbrella, Anderson beamed a message to GE’s Radio-Optical Observatory in Schenectady, N.Y., via NASA’s Ats 3 Applications Technology Satellite. The inexpensive, 1.4-kg antenna increased the normal eight-kilometer range of the walkie-talkie more than 10 000 times. Anderson suggested that a global search-and-rescue system, covering all but the polar regions, would require only six geostationary satellites. The necessary transponder could be attached to any communications satellite and would draw only a small portion of the satellite’s power. (GE Release, 2 Oct 74; AP, B Sun, 3 Oct 74, A3)
Communications Satellite Corp. reported 1973 earnings of $36 299 000, equal to $3.63 per share, an increase from $24 967 000, or $2.50 per share, for 1972. Net operating income for 1973 totaled $29 424 000 and revenues $119 291 000, up from income of $21 428 000 and revenues of $105 965 000 for 1972. Leased full-time half circuits had totaled 3583 on 31 Dec. 1973, 21% more than the 2971 at the end of 1972. (Com-SatCorp Release 74-11) 19 February-1 March: The U.S.S.R. launched a series of test missiles into the north Pacific Ocean, the tests coinciding with resumption of the - Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in Geneva. Pentagon spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim said an SSX-18 carrying several multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (mirvs) was launched from Tyuratam 19 Feb., and the press reported 5550-km flight tests of the SSX-19 and SSX-16 missiles were made before the conclusion of the tests. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 19 Feb 74, VI; 1 March 74, V7; Hoffman, W Post, 21 Feb 74 A3)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 656 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 322-km apogee, 185-km perigee, 89.6-min period, and 51.8° inclination. The press reported that Cosmos 656 was probably a test flight of a Soyuz spacecraft. The spacecraft reentered 29 May. (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, Fbis-Sov, 29 May 74, Ul; O’Toole, W Post, 30 May 74, A18) ' 29 May—19 June: The U.S.S.R. launched Luna 22 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam at 1:57 pm local time (4:57 am edt). The automatic station was separated from a platform rocket system in earth orbit and put into a close-to-planned trajectory for the moon. A flight-path correction maneuver 30 May aimed the spacecraft toward a selected area of near-moon space. Luna 22 went into circular orbit of the moon 2 June, with a 220-km apogee, 220-km perigee, 130.0-min period, and 19.6° inclination. The Soviet press reported 3 June that all instruments aboard the spacecraft were functioning normally and scientific investigation of the moon had begun. Luna 22 was transferred into an elliptical orbit with a 244-km apogee and 25-km perigee 9 June to take detailed TV photos of the lunar surface and to study surface relief using an onboard altimeter. Chemical composition of rocks was obtained by determining the gamma radiation. After completion of the photography program the spacecraft was moved to an orbit with a 299-km apogee and 181-km perigee. By 19 June Luna 22 had completed 187 orbits of the moon; all equipment continued to function normally, (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 30 May 74, Ul; 4 June 74, Ul; 20 June 74, Ul; SF, Nov 74, 434) 30 May—28 June: NASA launched Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite from Eastern Test Range at 9:00 am edt on a Titan TlIC launch vehicle. The booster ejected the transtage and spacecraft into an elliptical parking orbit with a 626-km apogee and 152-km perigee. At the second equatorial crossing the first bum of the transtage placed the spacecraft in a transfer orbit. Launch, parking orbit, and transfer orbit were close to the program plan. At 3:29 pm EDT, Ats 6 was injected into geosynchronous orbit with a 35 845.6-km apogee, 35 774.1-km perigee, 23-hr 57-min period, and 1.8° inclination. The near-perfect orbit eliminated need for corrections, leaving nine kilograms of fuel for operational contingencies. The spacecraft separated from the transtage at 3:33 pm EDT. An orbital correction 7 June changed the 0.27°-per-day westward drift to a 0.05° eastward drift. Checkout of spacecraft systems and onboard experiments was completed 28 June with no significant anomalies. The mission was adjudged a success 26 Sept Primary objectives of the mission were to inject the spacecraft into near-geostationary orbit, erect and evaluate a nine-meter antenna to provide a good-quality signal to small inexpensive ground receivers, stabilize the spacecraft using a three-axis control system, and support user-oriented applications experiments. Secondary objectives were to demonstrate new technology in aircraft and maritime traffic control and infrared earth observations; acquire system data for communications applications in space, including spacecraft-to-spacecraft relay; test spacecraft control; and measure particles and radiation. The 20 experiments included a health-education telecommunications experiment to broadcast programs in several languages simultaneously to citizens in remote areas of the country. The satellite also would aid in remote medical telediagnosis and teleconsultation, transmitting patients’ medical records to faraway hospital centers for emergency assistance. One year after launch Ats 6 would be moved over Lake Victoria in Central Africa. India would then use the satellite to broadcast programs teaching agricultural techniques, family planning and hygjene, school courses and teacher education, and occupational skills to 5000 villages. The $600 ground receiving terminals each consisted of a receiver, converter, and three-meter chicken-wire antenna. Ats 6 was the sixth in a series of ATS satellites developed to advance technology in design, propulsion, and stabilization systems; meteorological concepts; applications; space environmental studies and measurement systems; and communications. Ats 1 (launched 6 Dec. 1966), Ats 3 (5 Nov. 1967), and Ats 5 (12 Aug. 1969) were still transmitting useful data. The ATS program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications. (NASA mors, 24 May, 3 June, 8 July, 2 Oct. 74; NASA prog off, interview, 5 Feb. 74; NASA Release 74-111)
President Nixon issued Executive Order 11760 designating the European Space Research Organization (esro) a public international organization entitled to. privileges, exemptions, and immunities provided for by the International Organizations Immunities Act. (PD, 21 Jan 74, 40) On 23 Jan. the satellite was found by the Air Force Satellite Control Facility and attempts were made 24 Jan. to raise the orbit by firing the spacecraft’s onboard thrusters. Although the firing was succcessful, the orbital attitude was not raised enough to extend the life of the satellite. Skynet IIA reentered the earth’s atmosphere and burned up 25 Jan, over the southwestern Pacific Ocean. The Skynet II communications satellite program was being carried out under a U.K.-U.S. agreement signed 1 April 1970 and a usaf-nasa agreement 1 May 1972 to provide the U.K. in-orbit, X-band military communications between designated earth stations and replace Skynet A and B, launched by NASA 21 Nov. 1969 and 18 Aug. 1970. nasa responsibilities included integration of the U.K.-built spacecraft with the launch vehicle and provision of the vehicle and related services including network tracking communications and telemetry during ascent and transfer orbit phase. Another Skynet II satellite was to be launched in the fall. (nasa mors, 8 Jan 74, 4 Sept 74; AP, NYT, 30 Jan 74; AP, W Star-News, 19 Jan 74, A4)
Communications Satellite Corp. submitted its 11th annual report to the President and Congress. FY 1974 had included the launch of Intelsat-IV F—7 (23 Aug. 1973) and the Comsat General Corp. award of a $65 900 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for four high-capacity satellites to be used by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. for domestic communications early in 1976. By 30 June, the number of communications satellite pathways had increased by about 60 to a total of 325, with earth stations in 55 countries. With the addition of 10 more users, the number of countries, territories, and possessions leasing satellite services had exceeded 100. Half circuits leased full time in the global satellite system had increased from 8434 in 1973 to 9627 by 30 June 1974, a gain of about 14%. This voice and record traffic had accounted for the majority of all intercontinental long-distance communications. Net income had risen to $36.3 million, a 45% increase over FY 1973. (ComSatCorp, 1974 Report to the President and the Congress)
Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield signed in London a Memorandum of Understanding for a joint program to test, evaluate, and demonstrate the Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) system, for improved communications and air traffic services over the North Atlantic. Other participants included Canada and European Space Research Organization members Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. The space segment would include two synchronous-orbit satellites to be launched in late 1977 or early 1978 and would be jointly owned by ESRO, Canada, and a U.S. private sector coowner to be named later. FAA would lease use of the satellites from the U.S. coowner, (faa Release 74-70)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified in FY 1975 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that Orbiting Solar Observatory oso-i, scheduled for 1975 launch into orbit, was expected to acquire ultraviolet solar spectra of the most detailed resolution ever obtained. Spacecraft and experiment assembly was to be complete by mid-1974. A cooperative program with the European Space Research Organization, called International Sun-Earth Explorers (isee), planned three satellites to make simultaneous measurements. Two spacecraft, “Mother” built by the U.S. and “Daughter” built by ESRO, would travel close together in the same highly elliptical orbit, measuring magnetic and electric fields, energetic particles, and plasma properties. The third spacecraft, called “Heliocentric” and built by the U.S., would be placed near one of the unique points in space where the earth’s and sun’s gravity balance each other. The spacecraft would travel around the sun and close to the earth to learn what radiation was impinging on the earth’s magnetosphere. Data from the three satellites would help to untangle spatial from temporal changes in radiation fields around the earth. A cooperative effort with esro and the United Kingdom would be the International Ultraviolet Explorer (iue) scheduled for launch into geosynchronous orbit in 1976 to observe high-resolution spectra in the uv with a telescope controllable from the ground in real time. Techniques gained would be applied later to NASA’s Large Space Telescope. Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski reported deactivation of NASA’s transportable tracking station in Newfoundland and closing of Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network stations at Corpus Christi, Tex., and Carnarvon, Australia. The Newfoundland station, placed in caretaker status after the Skylab missions, would be reactivated for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission and then permanently closed. The Deep Space Network portion of the Johannesburg station was being phased out beginning June 1974; the stdn facility would be phased out following the near-earth phase of the Viking mission. The closings would leave 15 stations, adequate to handle the projected workload for the next five years and consistent with long-range planning. (Transcript)
