NASA launched Cos-B scientific satellite for the European Space Agency at 3:48 pm PDT from Western Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Launch had been delayed for 2 days because a telemetry aircraft was grounded with hydraulic-valve failure. The satellite entered the planned highly elliptical polar orbit with a 99 886-km apogee, 344-km perigee, 36.7-hr period, and 90.13° inclination. NASA’s objective for the launch was to place Cos-B into a highly elliptical near-polar orbit with sufficient accuracy to allow the satellite to conduct its planned scientific experiments. Purpose of the Cos-B mission was to study extraterrestrial gamma radiation in the energy range 25 mev to 1 gev in order to establish the intensity of the average gamma-ray flux; examine large-scale anisotropy of the radiation over angular regions corresponding to galactic features; study quasars, x-ray, and radio sources of small angular size in supernova remnants; measure energy spectra of various galactic radiations; and study time variations of radiation from pulsars, x-ray, and radio sources. On 11 August, ground controllers sent low-voltage commands from ESA’s space operations center (ESOC) in West Germany to check out spacecraft and experiment performance. After a second switch-on at high voltage, a series of inflight tests further validated all onboard systems and experiment performance. On 15 Aug. a complete review of spacecraft operational status showed all air and ground systems were operating normally; by 19 Aug., the first data had been returned to earth. Cos-B, first satellite launched for the newly organized ESA, was the eighth developed by ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization [see 30—31 May]. Under the direction of the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC) and prime contractor Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH, Cos-B had been designed and built by organizations in 7 of the 10 ESA member countries. The single experiment—a 115-kg spark chamber—had been assembled from five primary and two subsidiary experiment units supplied by six institutes in four European countries. After separating from the launch vehicle, Cos-B transmitted data in real time to ground stations of the European Space Tracking Network with central control at the European Space Research Operations Center in West Germany. For NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center had the responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle under the direction of the Office of Space Science. GSFC also had responsibility for limited tracking support. (NASA MOR S-492 -301 -75 -01, 22 July 75, 10 Sept. 75; NASA Release 75—214; Releases 7—19 Aug 75)
Sea Satellite (SEASAT)—a new program, approved in the FY 1975 NASA authorization, to monitor the oceans and provide continuous weather and sea condition reports—was announced by NASA. SEASAT-A, a proof-of-concept mission scheduled for 1978 launch, would carry sensors to measure wave heights, current directions, surface wind directions, and surface temperatures. Objectives of the initial mission were to disseminate these data to users concerned about weather predictions; to route shipping to avoid storms, adverse currents, and ice fields; and to provide coastal disaster warnings. SEASAT—A would also accumulate scientific data on the curvature of the oceans; ocean circulation; transport of mass, heat, and nutrients by surface currents; and the interaction between air and sea. SEASAT would be managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory with Langley Research Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Center, and JPL each having responsibility for one of the four sensors-off-the-shelf NASA or Air Force spacecraft to which a sensor module would be attached. Existing tracking facilities and support hardware would also be used. Cost of the SEASAT—A mission, as currently planned, was $58.2 million. (NASA Release 75—1)
European Space Agency announced a postponement in the launch of COS-B, scheduled for a 6 Aug. 6:56 pm PDT launch from Western Test Range, because of hydraulic-valve failure in a telemetry aircraft needed to monitor third-stage ignition of the launch vehicle. The launch had been rescheduled to 8 Aug. at 6:48 pm PDT. COS-B would be ESA’s first satellite launch since the new agency’s establishment on 30 May. (ESA Release, 7 Aug 75)
People’s Republic of China launched its third satellite into an earth orbit with a 455-km apogee, 182-km perigee, 90.9-min period, and 69.0° inclination. PRC’s Hsinhua news agency reported 27 July that the satellite had been launched “under the guidance of Chairman Mao’s [Tse-tung] proletarian revolutionary line . . . promoting production and other work and preparedness against war.” Hsinhua also reported that the instruments on board the satellite were operating normally. The satellite was PRC’s first in 4 yr. Baltimore Sun correspondent Edward K. Wu attributed the apparent slowdown in the PRC space program to an estimated 25% cutback in military spending. PRC’s first two satellites had been successfully launched 24 April 1970 and 2 March 1971. (Wkly SSR, 25-30 July 1975; FBIS-PRC, 28 July 75, El; Wu, B Sun, 28 July 75, A4; W Post, 28 July 75, A14; A&A 70; A&A 71)
Equipment aboard U.S. reconnaissance satellites could photograph a pack of cigarettes or monitor a radio conversation between foreign pilots from an orbit of 130 km, the Philadelphia Inquirer reported. Satellites could also instantly detect the launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile and determine where it was going. Early reconnaissance satellites were of two types: SAMOS (satellite and missile observation system) satellites carried wide-area cameras to determine ground targets of interest; film was processed on board and imagery radioed to ground. Discoverer satellites from lower orbits used high-resolution cameras for closeups; the satellite ejected its film, which parachuted down for midair recovery by Air Force aircraft. These satellites were replaced, in the 1970s, by the 11 340-kg “Big Bird” spacecraft. The Inquirer reported that technical experts believed that Big Birds carried TV cameras which allowed human monitors to maintain continuous watch on ground; if they saw something of interest, they could order immediate photographs by the satellite’s high-resolution cameras. The experts also believed that Big Bird carried side-looking radar to penetrate cloudcover and equipment sensitive enough to distinguish between old and new grass. Resolution was no longer measured in meters but in centimeters. The Inquirer also reported that other satellites carrying infrared and other detectors were used to monitor missile launches, detect hidden heat sources such as underground powerplants, and spot the warmth of buried missile silos. (Coughlin, P Inq, 18 May 75, 5E)
NASA signed a contract with Italy’s Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (National Research Council) to launch the SIRIO experimental communications satellite. The contract—signed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Prof. Alessandro Faedo, CNR President—provided for the launch of the microwave propagation satellite aboard a Thor-Delta launch vehicle in the fall of 1976. (NASA Release 75— 67)
More than 1000 instrumented platforms—either floating buoys or balloons—were being used to provide information on tropical and polar weather and ocean and ice conditions, NASA announced. The platforms would transmit data from their sites to NASA’s Nimbus 6 meteorological research satellite, launched 12 June 1975, which would record and play back the data on command to ground stations around the world. The stations would then disseminate the information to investigators in Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Norway, South Africa, and the U.S. Platforms would be located in such remote areas as the South Pole, Indian Ocean, Africa, Samoa, and the Arctic. The National Center for Atmospheric Research was releasing more than 400 balloons to altitudes up to 14 km from American Samoa, Ghana, and Ascension I. to study the atmosphere in the tropics. About 50 low-level balloons were being released to an altitude of 750 m from the Seychelles island group, just north of the Malagasy Republic, by the Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique in Paris to study the air-sea interface to determine its effect on monsoons in India. About 30 ice buoys were being placed in the Arctic and Antarctic, one only 45 m from the South Pole, as part of a major U.S. government project to understand ice packs, icebergs, and weather patterns near the poles. Scientists from the Norsk Polarinstitut in Norway were deploying four drifting buoys to help chart ice drift in the Greenland area. (NASA Release 75—271)
Calculation of crop acreage from satellite images had proven “generally adequate” in NASA tests involving wheat acreage in nine Great Plains states during the past year, NASA Associate Administrator Charles W. Mathews told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Reporting on the 9.9% error rate in the LACIE (large area crop inventory experiment) test using Landsat data, Mathews said that the U.S. had demonstrated the feasibility of an operational global forecasting system for wheat. Mathews mentioned other Landsat data applications: The Geological Survey and NOAA had developed computer techniques for processing multispectral Landsat data that made oil slicks clearly visible. Other computer techniques using the data had detected subtle differences in surface soils and rocks that revealed mineralization and potential ore deposits. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 931, 938, 939)
Boeing Co. scientists were studying a way to cut aircraft fuel consumption as much as 40%, according to the Baltimore Sun. The technique involved cutting many tiny holes in the aircraft wings and applying suction from within. This would control the laminar flow of the airstream, preventing drag-producing turbulence from being created by the change in pressure as the air flows over the wing surface. In the 1960s Northrop Corp. had built the Air Force a plane incorporating the concept but technical problems had discouraged further development. Rising fuel costs and recent improvements in structural materials and manufacturing techniques had sparked new interest in the method. (AP, B Sun, 31 March 75, A7) During March: NASA’s Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974) was the means for coordinating long-distance emergency operations of ships near the Azores Islands during search and rescue tests conducted by Goddard Space Flight Center. The tests evaluated the effectiveness of Ats 6 functioning as a communications relay between a ship in distress and a coordination center thousands of kilometers away. In the tests, a “stricken” ship dropped a buoy equipped with a position-indicating radio beacon into the ocean. Ats 6 picked up the signals and transmitted the ship’s identification and position to a NASA ground station, which relayed them to the Coast Guard’s New York Rescue Coordination Center. The rescue center then sent the information to rescue aircraft and ships. As they neared the area, they could home in on the buoy’s signals. Within 2 hr of the time the buoy was dropped, the ship and the buoy were located. The search and rescue communications tests were part of continuing joint L-band experiments using Ats 6 and conducted by GSFC and the Depts. of Commerce and Transportation, as well as by the European Space Agency and the Canadian Dept, of Communications and Ministry of Transport. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 3)
NASA announced the award of a $334 100 contract for the design, fabrication, delivery, installation, and checkout of an optical bench and alignment system for an x-ray telescope test facility at Marshall Space Flight Center. The facility would be used to test x-ray verification and to calibrate x-ray mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program. The HEAO program was to launch between 1977 and 1979 three unmanned scientific satellites into low circular earth orbit to study black holes, neutron stars, quasars, and supernovae. (MSFC Release 75— 50)
Scientist Herbert F. Wischnia was using Oao 3 (Copernicus, Orbiting Astronomical Observatory launched 21 Aug. 1972) satellite and its onboard optical telescope to look for possible flashes of an ultraviolet laser from another world, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Although radio signals would be a better way to communicate once contact was established, Wischnia believed that an optical telescope could pick up a whole spectrum of frequencies at a glance. A radio telescope required years to cover a significant band of frequencies because of the complex data processing necessary; an optical signal, once detected, would probably indicate which radio frequency would provide further information. The biggest difficulty was making the initial contact. CSM reported that Wischnia was looking at three stars likely to have planets, all older than the sun and about 11 light yr distant. (Cowen, CSM, 18 June 75, 25)
NASA launched Nimbus 6 on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster from the Western Test Range at 1:12 am PDT after a 6-min delay to clear a ship from the jettison trajectory of the Delta’s solid rockets. The spacecraft entered sun-synchronous polar orbit with a 1103-km apogee, 1094-km perigee, 107-min period, and 99.96° inclination. Separation of the spacecraft from the launch vehicle was normal, at 59 min into the flight. The solar panels were deployed and the attitude-control system quickly acquired earth. A wheel control provided three-axis stabilization. Checkout of the power system, telemetry, command links, and tape recorder was completed on the first day of operation. At 7 hr after launch, a cryogenic vent valve associated with the limb-radiance inversion radiometer was pyrotechnically actuated as planned. This caused unexpected high torques and excessive control-gas usage. Nimbus 6 was put into a safe wideband gravity-gradient mode to conserve gas, and an investigation was begun to find the cause of the problem and determine possible remedies. By 24 June the 9 experiments and all spacecraft systems had been checked out and all instrumentation, except for 2 tape recorders, was working normally. The primary objective of the Nimbus 6 mission was to contribute to the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) by refining and extending the capability of vertically sounding the temperature and moisture of the atmosphere, with particular regard to altitude resolution and interference effects of clouds. GARP, a cooperative worldwide weather program, was established to improve understanding of meteorological atmospheric processes in the tropics and to improve observation and computing systems for weather prediction and analysis. Nimbus 6 would also monitor environmental conditions such as sea ice and rainfall and would measure the earth’s radiation budget with a precision never before attained. Secondary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the ability to track and relay data from a low-altitude polar-orbiting spacecraft using a geosynchronous satellite as a communications relay. Ats 6, the Applications Technology Satellite launched on 30 May 1974, would be the relay comsat. A data-collection, processing, and relay-to-earth system was also on board to collect data from approximately 300 balloon-borne platforms, designed to float at an altitude of 20 km, and a large number of earth- and sea-based data platforms. Nimbus 6, unlike previous spacecraft, could receive and process up to eight incoming signals at a time. The satellite carried nine new instruments to extend measurements of atmospheric parameters to significantly higher altitudes than had previously been possible: the tracking and data-relay (T&DR) experiment; a high-resolution temperature sounder (HIRS) and a scanning microwave spectrometer (SCAMS) to take temperature soundings in the atmosphere outside the tropics; a tropical wind-energy conversion and reference level experiment (TWERLE) to provide data on tropical areas; a limb-radiance inversion radiometer (LRIR) and a pressure-modulated radiometer (PMR) to provide high-altitude temperature soundings; an earth radiation budget (ERR) experiment to establish the earth’s atmospheric radiation balance; an electrically scanning microwave radiometer (ESMR) to map the liquid-water content of the clouds, ocean rainfall,, and distribution and variation of sea-ice cover; and a temperature/humidity infrared radiometer (THIR) to provide data on cloud cover, ground temperatures, and water-vapor distribution. Nimbus 6 was next to last in a planned series of seven experimental meteorological satellites. Nimbus 1 (launched 28 Aug. 1964) and Nimbus 2 (launched 15 May 1966) achieved all their objectives. Launch of the third Nimbus, on 19 May 1968, failed when the launch vehicle malfunctioned; an identical spacecraft launched 14 April 1969 successfully functioned as Nimbus 3. Nimbus 4 and 5 (launched 8 April 1970 and 10 Dec. 1972) had both completed all mission objectives and were still operating. General Electric Co. was the prime contractor responsible for Nimbus 6 integration and test, stabilization control, control-subsystem integration, and spacecraft structures and antennas. Seven U.S. and two British companies, in addition to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, provided the nine instruments. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the Nimbus program under the direction of the NASA Office of Applications and was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs 21 May 74,12 June 75, 24 June 75; NASA Release 75-145)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics presented its Haley Astronautics Award to Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue at the AIAA-American Geophysical Union Conference on the Exploration of the Outer Planets, in St. Louis, Missouri. The award was presented “for demonstrated outstanding courage and skill during the recordbreaking 84-day Skylab mission.” During the mission, which had begun 16 Nov. 1973, the crew had successfully completed 56 experiments, 26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed subsystem objectives, and 13 student investigations. They also collected extensive earth-resources data and logged 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount data, making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 3 Sept 75, 4) 20 September—5 October: Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton and their families visited the U.S.S.R., joining Soviet ASTP cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov and their families for a goodwill tour of the Soviet Union. The two crews had not met since they said goodbye in space during their historic mission [see 15—24 July]. After greetings at the Moscow airport with wide grins, bear hugs, and back slaps, Stafford told the airport crowd in Russian, “We are very pleased to be back in the Soviet Union again. Now we can say our joint work has been fulfilled successfully. I am confident that our flight will serve progress and peace on earth.” During the welcoming ceremonies Boris Petrov, U.S.S.R. Chairman of the Intercosmos Council, told the Americans, “The Soviet people were glad to see your success and are eager to welcome you on earth and in the Soviet Union.” The astronauts, cosmonauts, and their families visited Star City on 21 Sept, to thank the Soviet space community for its work on the ASTP mission. “For 2 years Star City was a second home to us,” Stafford told the crowd of Soviet space workers. “Thank you for all your work.” The astronauts’ families laid flowers at the memorial to Yuri Gagarin, first man to fly in space. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton presented Star City with a plaque bearing the Soviet and American flags and exchanged other gifts with the Soviets. On 22 September Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee, met the ASTP astronauts and cosmonauts at the Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each as “hero” and congratulating them on their historic mission, saying it would “pave the way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the 35min reception he told the crews of his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear arms. “Both sides—the United States and the Soviet side—should make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations, really good, in all aspects, from every point of view,” he said. On 23 Sept, the two crews and their families began a six-city tour of the Soviet Union that took them to Leningrad, Kiev, Volgograd, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tbilisi. Everywhere the crews were swamped by enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of up to 3000 persons waiting on comers and at airports for hours to cheer the spacemen. “The hospitality is fantastic,” Stafford remarked at Volgograd. The New York Times reported that each appearance of the spacemen was greeted with applause and cheering and they responded with waves and autographs. The astronauts ended their Russian tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell press conference back in Moscow. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton praised the “enthusiastic people with warm hearts” they had met during their tour. During the press conference—held exactly 18 yr after the U.S.S.R. had launched the first manmade satellite, Sputnik 7, on 4 Oct. 1957—Stafford encouraged continued cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. in such areas as lunar and planetary exploration, space medicine, space meteorology, and earth environment. The three U.S. astronauts and their families flew to London for an overnight stay before flying back to Houston on 5 Oct. (B Sun, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75; NYT, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75)
Establishment of manufacturing facilities in space might be feasible within this century, Dr. Gerard K. O’Neill wrote in the December issue of Science magazine. Construction of satellite solar power stations (SSPSs) from lunar materials, for example, could be shown more economical than building such stations on earth and lifting them into orbit. The space manufacturing facility (SMF) that had been envisioned by Dr. O’Neill and others would be a self-sustaining habitat for a large number of people whose energy needs could be met by solar power used directly for agriculture, as process heat for industry when concentrated by mirrors, or indirectly as electricity. Dr. O’Neill had assembled tables and figures from the literature to accompany his argument for the SSPS as a means of meeting increased demands for electricity on earth in a time of shortage of fuels and concern about use of nuclear energy. (,Science, Vol 190, 4218)
The Univ. of Chile would build and operate a ground station to receive earth-resources data directly from NASA’s Landsatsl and 2 spacecraft launched 23 July 1972 and 22 Jan. 1975, NASA announced. A memorandum of understanding between NASA and the university provided for Chile’s use of the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network station at Santiago until the ground station becomes operational. The station would aid South American investigators conducting research in cooperation with NASA and the United Nations. The Univ. of Chile station would be the tenth Landsat station worldwide. Three stations were located in the U.S. Brazil, Canada, and Italy each had stations in operation, and Iran and Zaire were constructing facilities for data acquisition. In addition, Canada was planning a second station. The Univ. of Chile station would be able to acquire data directly from the satellite as it passed over Bolivia, Uruguay, Argentina, Chile, and sections of Peru and Brazil. (NASA Release 75-265)
Ground was broken for Marshall Space Flight Center’s x-ray telescope test facility for the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program. The facility, which would cost $4 million including equipment, would be used to test instruments for the HEAO program as well as to calibrate rocket payloads for x-ray stellar studies and make advance telescope calibrations. The HEAO program included three unmanned scientific satellites to be launched into low earth orbit between 1977 and 1979 to study the invisible light of x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. (Marshall Star, 29 Jan 75, 4)
Vanguard 1, oldest satellite still in orbit, completed its 17th year in space. The 1.5-kg 16.5-cm solar-powered spacecraft, which had revealed that the earth was slightly pear-shaped, had circled the earth more than 67 000 times since its launch in 1958. The satellite, fourth to orbit earth following two Soviet sputniks and Explorer 1, was one of 3304 man-made objects tracked by the North American Air Defense Command. (A&A 1915-1960; A&A 1968; Miles, LA Times, 18 March 75)
The fierce rivalry between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was not confined to ground, air, and sea, but extended to space, the People’s Republic of China’s The People’s Daily said in an article entitled “Competition in Space and Hardship on Earth.” Both superpowers had invested huge amounts of money, manpower, and materials to turn cosmic space into an arena for arms expansion and war preparations as well as espionage. U.S. and U.S.S.R. military satellites, which accounted for most satellite launchings, were used mostly to spy on each other. In recent years their rivalry in space had become more and more acute, disturbing tranquillity in space. (Peking NCNA, FBIS-PRC, 21 July 75, Al)
Western Union Telegraph Co. and RCA Global Communications, Inc., had been selected for negotiations leading to phase-one contracts to provide detailed systems-design proposals for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), NASA announced. TDRSS, to be developed and operated by industry to meet NASA service requirements, would consist of three or more specialized satellites in synchronous orbit to continuously relay tracking information and data and voice commands to and from NASA satellites. Western Union and RCA would both provide a technical, cost, and business proposal for leased services to be provided in the phase-two operational period. The proposals would be evaluated and a single contract for phase two would be awarded. The selected contractor would provide tracking, command, and data-acquisition services for essentially all spacecraft orbiting below 5000 km, including the Space Shuttle and Spacelab, as well as automated spacecraft to be orbited by the Space Shuttle, for a 1- to 10-yr period beginning in 1979. TDRSS spacecraft and ground stations would be the property and responsibility of the selected contractor. (NASA Release 75—176)
A fleet satellite communications-system simulator developed for the Air Force by TRW Systems Group had been delivered for testing, Air Force Systems Command announced. The simulator would be a low-cost means of testing compatibility between FLTSATC'OM—an operational near-global satellite communications system for Air Force and Navy Communications—and preproduction terminals for the Air Force Satellite Communications (AFSATCOM) system, which provided reliable worldwide satellite communications for command and control of all DOD forces. The simulator contained all the communications channels that the actual satellites would have, but used cheaper off-the-shelf components instead of high-reliability electronic parts. (AFSC Release OIP 022.75)
Twenty-five spacecraft on twenty-four vehicles were scheduled for launch by NASA during 1975, NASA announced. The 25 spacecraft included 14 for NASA programs, 10 for other organizations, and 1 as a cooperative program with a foreign government. Highlighting the year would be the 15 July launch of an Apollo spacecraft carrying Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton as the U.S. contribution to the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Apollo would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19—launched 7 hr earlier than Apollo and carrying Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov—allowing both crews to exchange visits and perform joint scientific experiments. The two sets of Viking spacecraft, scheduled for 11 and 21 August launches, would journey through space for a year before arriving in the vicinity of Mars. There each set of spacecraft would separate into an orbiter and a lander to make orbital and surface investigations of the Martian environment. Other NASA spacecraft would include ERTS-B Earth Resources Technology Satellite and SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, in January; GOES-C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite, in March; OSO-I Orbiting Solar Observatory, Nimbus-F experimental meteorological satellite, and Explorer 53 (SAS-C Small Astronomy Satellite), in May; GOES-A Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, in June; Explorers 56 and 57 Dual Air Density Explorers, on a single booster in July or August; Explorer 54 (AE-D Atmospheric Explorer), in September; and Explorer 55 (AE-E), in December. The 10 spacecraft to be launched by NASA for other organizations included 5 comsats for Communications Satellite Corp.: IntelsatIV F—1 in February, Intelsat-IVA F—1 and F—2 in July and October, and Marisat A and B in April and July. Other reimbursable launches would include Telesat—C (Anik 3) for Canada in March, COS-B Celestial Observation Satellite in July for the European Space Agency, Symphonie—B experimental comsat in September for France and West Germany, RCA-A (RCA —Satcom 1, in orbit) comsat in December for RCA Corp., and ITOSE-2 Improved TIROS Operational Satellite in late 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Helios— B would be launched late in 1975 as a cooperative effort with West Germany. The schedule called for 18 of the 24 launches to be made from Kennedy Space Center, 5 from Western Test Range, and 1 from San Marco. For the launches NASA would use a Saturn IB, 3 Titan-Centaurs, 5 Atlas-Centaurs, and 15 Thor-Delta launch vehicles. (NASA Release 75—5; KSC Release 180—74)
A scientific conference of Soviet scientists and officials was being held in Zvenigorod, near Moscow, to discuss the study of the earth from outer space, Tass reported. Tass quoted Academician Roald Sagdeyev, Director of the Space Research Institute, as saying that the main task of the conference was to work out unified scientific principles and methods for exploring earth resources from outer space and for organizing a systematic control over the environment with the help of artificial earth satellites. To date, scientists had made progress in certain lines of research such as meteorology, but in other areas had received only bits of information. The task was to move from individual discoveries to a qualitative geological study of the planet as a whole. The task called for combined effort by geologists, soil scientists, foresters, and hydrologists. Sagdeyev said that the study of earth from space was becoming an important aspect of international relations because man’s active influences on the environment went beyond national boundaries. (Tass FBIS— Sov, 18 March 75, Ul)
A new satellite-fed printing plant that would speed delivery of the Wall Street Journal to its readers in the southeastern United States had been introduced to Orlando, Fla., area business leaders and dedicated by the Journal’s publishers, Dow Jones and Co. The $2-million plant could print 70 000 copies of the newspaper per hour, and would serve readers in Ga. and Fla. at first, with distribution into five other southeastern states coming later. The paper would be printed in Orlando on the date of publication in Chicopee, Mass., by the use of Westar 1 facilities provided by American Satellite Corp. Fullsize facsimiles of pages would be put under a high-intensity scanner that would convert the images to electronic impulses beamed to Westar 1. The satellite would relay the impulses to the Orlando plant where they would be received on page-size photo film; sending and receipt of data for a full page had been clocked at 3.5 min. The film would be used to make photolithographic plates for the Orlando press. The Orlando plant would be the tenth regional printing plant for the Journal. The eastern edition previously delivered to 60 000 subscribers in Fla. and Ga. had been airmailed from Silver Spring, Md., arriving a day late. (Orlando Sentinel-Star, 20 Nov 75, 20A)
The Communications Satellite Corporation filed with the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia a petition for review of the Federal Communications Commission decision of 4 Dec. on the allowed rate base, rate of return, and rate structure for ComSat’s international satellite services. ComSat intended to apply to the FCC—and to the court—for a stay of the FCC order that new tariffs be filed by 5 Jan. 1976. The corporation had prepared a letter to its stockholders on the FCC decision. (ComSat Release 75—61)
An Italian launch crew launched Explorer 53 (SAS—C) Small Astronomy Satellite for NASA from San Marco launch platform, located in the Indian Ocean off the coast of Kenya, at 6:45 pm EDT (1:45 am local time 8 May) on a Scout launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered near-equatorial orbit with a 523.35-km apogee, 502.18-km perigee, 94.88-min period, and 2.995° inclination. Primary objectives of the Explorer 53 mission were to measure the x-ray emission of discrete extragalactic sources, to monitor the intensity and spectra of galactic x-ray sources from 1.0 kev to 50 kev, and to monitor the x-ray intensity of the star Sco X— 1. During a preliminary in-orbit checkout, controllers noticed that a stuck nutation damper was causing the spacecraft nutation, or coning, angle to be 4° rather than the planned 0.2°. Energizing the z-axis coil reduced the coning angle to 0.5°. Although the damper could not be freed despite repeated attempts, the nutation could be kept within reasonable limits so that scientific objectives could be achieved. A committee would evaluate the problem. Other spacecraft anomalies included intermittent operation of the spinning digital solar-aspect detector, and irregular and noisy operation of the spacecraft star sensor. Neither problem was expected to seriously degrade the mission. The 195-kg satellite was designed to extend and complement the capabilities of Explorer 42 (Uhuru, launched 12 Dec. 1970 as the first satellite dedicated entirely to the study of x-ray sources in space) and Explorer 48 (launched 16 Nov. 1970 to study galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation). Explorer 53, with its broad spectral range, provided higher energy resolution than previous satellites and permitted a study of physical conditions near an x-ray source. The spacecraft’s quasi-three-axis stabilization system allowed much longer continuous observation of sources. Data from Explorer 53 would provide the basis for the more detailed x-ray studies to be made by High Energy Astronomy Observatories A and B scheduled for launch in 1977 and 1978. The experiment aboard Explorer 53 was designed and built by the Center for Space Research of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The spacecraft control section was designed by the Applied Physics Laboratory of the Johns Hopkins Univ. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program for the Office of Space Science. Langley Research Center was responsible for the Scout launch vehicle. Italy was responsible for the assembly, checkout, and launch of the Scout on a cost-reimbursable basis. (NASAMORs 6 May 75, 15 May 75; NASA Releases 75—101, 75—121)
Launch of the Dual Air Density (DAD) spacecraft from the Western Test Range failed when a catastrophic event during third-stage burn caused loss of vehicle control and failure to achieve orbit. The destruct signal was transmitted 341 sec after ignition. The four-stage Scout-D launch was to have placed into orbit two satellites—a small rigid sphere of aluminum and a large inflatable sphere of mylar—similarly instrumented with a mass spectrometer and associated electronics. The satellites were to have been in 9(F polar orbits intersecting periodically, to measure atmospheric densities at two differing altitudes but at the same latitudes at the same local-hour angle of the sun. The measurements would show effects on upper atmosphere readings of changes in solar heat input and the relationships between upper and lower atmospheres. The launch, scheduled for 3 Dec., had been delayed because of a malfunction in the ignition system of the Scout launch vehicle. (NASA Release 75—300; MOR S—863—75—05, 6 Jan 76; HQ memo, Goozh, 9 Dec 75; SBD, 5 Dec 75, 186)
Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard News reported that the John C. Lindsay Memorial Award, given annually to a GSFC employee in recognition of an outstanding contribution to science and technology, had been presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness. Dr. Ness had received the award for his pioneering work in the investigation of magnetic fields of planetary bodies and the interaction of the solar wind with these magnetic fields. Dr. Ness, who had been a participating scientist on the Explorer Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP) satellites and Mariner 10, and Pioneer satellites, spearheaded the first measurements of the earth’s distant magnetic fields and magnetic tail. He was also the first to explore the moon’s magnetic field. On the Mariner 10 flybys of Jupiter, Dr. Ness made the surprising discovery of a small, but measurable, intrinsic magnetic field. (Goddard News, June 75,1)
A group of 28 scientists, engineers, sociologists, and economists concluded a 10-wk (16 June— 22 Aug.) NASA— Stanford University study at Ames Research Center by recommending that the U.S. adopt a space colonization program using available technology. The “city in space” envisioned by the study group could be a 1.5-km-wide wheel-shaped habitat for 10 000 persons positioned on the moon’s orbit at a point 385 000 km from both earth and moon. Costing an estimated $100 billion, the 454-million-kg wheel, or torus, would rotate around its hub at 1 rpm to simulate earth’s gravity. The rim would house inhabitants as well as shops, schools, light industry, and closed-loop agriculture; heavy industry could be located outside to take advantage of weightlessness and high vacuum in space. A major commercial activity of the first colony would be to construct solar-power satellites. Placed in geosynchronous orbit above the earth, the satellites would collect and convert sunlight into energy and beam it to earth as low-density microwaves. The space colony would have several advantages that might make it self-supporting: weightlessness for manufacturing and transportation, massive use of lunar minerals, and continuous natural sunlight for increased agricultural productivity. The study group had considered social, cultural, safety, and ecological difficulties of a space colony, but had found “no unsurmountable problems that would prevent humans from living in space.” (NASA Releases 75—229, 75—249; ARC Release 75—41; Dunstan, W Post, 23 Aug 75)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory had awarded a $20-mi]lion contract to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. for design and development of Seasat— A, an ocean survey satellite that would circle the earth 14 times a day and view 95% of the surface every 36 hrs. Scheduled for launch in 1978, Seasat would record radar imagery of waves and ice fields, ocean topography, tides, and currents, and would measure wave height, length, and direction; force and direction of sea-surface winds; and temperatures of the sea surface and the air/sea interface. (IT Star, 21 Nov 75, A2; Av Wk, 8 Dec 75, 6; SBD, 21 Nov 75, 118)
Cosmos 775, believed to be third of a series in the Soviet Union’s Statsionar communications-satellite program, was launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome into a very low near-circular earth orbit. Its predecessors, Cosmos 637 and Molniya IS, had been launched 26 March and 29 July 1974. The satellites were to supply communications, including telephone, telegraph, TV, and phototelegraph transmissions, between the Soviet Union and Europe and between the capital and extreme eastern portions of the U.S.S.R. Once the Statsionar communications system was established, the U.S.S.R. was expected to undertake implementation of a synchronous meteorological satellite system as early as the 1976—77 period. (SBD, 16 Oct 75, 232)
A Baltimore Sun editorial discussed “Distorted Priorities in the R&D Budget.” The President’s R&D budget for FY 1976 had little chance of passage in its existing form because of the hostility of much of the 98th Congress to some of its proposals. Defense-related R&D would be reduced, the energy proposals would be juggled to give more to solar and geothermal energy, and the proposed large cuts in biomedical research would be restored. Congress might be more sympathetic to NASA. Once seen by congressional critics as a quasi-military organization or at least “a space circus that siphoned dollars away from more pressing needs,” NASA was “beginning to prove itself a valuable scientific tool” in such valuable areas as environmental monitoring. That the Office of Management and Budget had not, as once threatened, scrapped funds for the Landsat— C satellite “may reflect an effort to make NASA more attractive by further pushing the agency into the areas that have gained humanist and environmentalist approval.” (BSure, 1 March 75, A18)
Satcom 1, first of three domestic communications satellites to be placed in geostationary orbit around the equator for RCA Corp. to transmit long-distance telephone calls and service data, had Been launched at 8:56 pm EST from Cape Canaveral on a Delta vehicle into a parking orbit with 35 980-km apogee and 182-km perigee. A kick motor was to be fired at 5:41 pm EST 15 Dec. to put the satellite into a synchronous orbit. The RCA Satcom was the second domestic communications satellite to be launched by communications companies; the Western Union Corporation’s Westar system became operational earlier this year. Each Satcom would receive and transmit data on 24 channels. Westar—a two-satellite system—had only 12 message channels per satellite. Each Satcom channel was built to transmit 1000 telephone calls at a time, or one color TV channel, or 64 million bits per sec of computer data. Satcom 1 would be stationed at 119°W, and the two subsequent Satcoms would be located at 99°W and 129°W over the equator to handle television, voice channels, and high-speed data between the contiguous U.S., Hawaii, and Alaska. (NASA Release 75— 302;NYT, 13 Dec 75,37;SBD, 16 Dec 75, 242; KSC Releases 289-75, 295-75)
Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology, announced the appointment of Dr. Bruce C. Murray as Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, succeeding Dr. William H. Pickering who was retiring after 21 yr in the position. Dr. Murray, a Caltech professor of planetary sciences for 15 yr, had also been a researcher on JPL space missions for more than 10 yr. He was completing scientific descriptions of Venus and Mercury from Mariner 10 data, gathered during a February 1974 encounter with the planet, and comparing the surface histories of Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the moon with the history of the earth. Dr. Pickering had been with JPL since 1944 and had served as its Director since 1954. As Director, Dr. Pickering led JPL in designing and building the first orbiting U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (launched 31 Jan. 1958). Also under his leadership, JPL had designed the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner spacecraft that were launched to gather information on the moon and nearby planets. (NASA Release 75—179)
NASA and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had agreed on a joint tour of the U.S. and the Soviet Union by the 5 crew members of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission [see 15—26 July], U.S. astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton would join Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov on 21 Sept, in Moscow for a 2-wk tour of the U.S.S.R. Plans for the U.S. tour were not disclosed. (NASA Release 75—230) In another paper Rango reported that low-resolution meteorological satellite data and high-resolution earth-re sources satellite data had been used to map a snow-covered area over Wyoming mountains. Predictions based on satellite data of the April through June 1972 streamflow were within 3% of the actual total. Also, composite results from 2 yr of data over the mountains indicated that Landsat snowcover observations could be useful in predicting runoff and seasonal streamflow. James C. Barnes of Environmental Research and Technology, Inc., reported that the earth resources experiment package (EREP) flown aboard the 1973—74 Skylab Orbital Workshop missions had provided the first opportunity to examine reflectance characteristics of snowcover in several spectral bands from the visible to the near infrared. Results indicated that near-infrared methods could distinguish between snow and water droplet clouds and could detect areas of melting snow. (NASA Hq WB, 28 Feb 76, 2; NASA SP—391, text) The evidence was consistent with calculations made in 1971 by Canadian astronomer Dr. Michael W. Ovenden. Dr. Ovenden’s studies of irregularities in the orbits of planets, especially Uranus and Neptune, suggested that a major disruptive event had occurred in the solar system approximately 16 million yrs ago. He had arrived at this time by age-dating carbon-bearing meteorites that had fallen to earth, and theorized that the event could be explained by the explosion of a huge planet 90 times the size of earth. During the meeting Dr. Stuart Bowyer, Univ. of Calif, astronomer, surprised the 740 astronomers attending the meeting by reporting that a Univ. of Calif, telescope flown aboard the Apollo spacecraft during the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [see 15—26 July] had picked up the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation of a star. EUV, a small segment of the spectrum between normal ultraviolet and x-rays, had been considered by astronomers as practically invisible because of probable absorption by interstellar dust and gas. Dr. Bowyer said that the EUV had come from a white dwarf star 300 light yrs away in the constellation Coma Berenices. (NASA Gen Mgmt Review Rpt, 18 Aug 75, 9; Alexander, LA Times, 26 Aug 75)
The Mass. Inst, of Technology Lincoln Laboratory, under contract to the Air Force, was developing an experimental ground electro-optical deep-space surveillance (GEODSS) system to scan nighttime skies for orbiting and geosynchronous satellites. The system was being installed at White Sands Missile Range, first of a proposed five-site GEODSS worldwide surveillance network. The network would augment the Air Force’s Aerospace Defense Command’s spacetrack coverage which maintained a day-by-day count of all satellites and debris circling the earth. GEODSS combined two sophisticated telescopes with electro-optics, a TV camera, and a digital computer, as well as system-related equipment. Mounted at the focal plane of the larger telescope was a TV camera to transmit the signal to the observatory control room for instant screening and analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 14)
NASA had awarded a $1 388 498 firm-fixed-price contract to Goodyear Aerospace Corp. to produce a special-purpose processor to augment existing computing capability for NASA’s Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE), Johnson Space Center announced. The contract included design, fabrication, delivery, and installation of the processor and any associated system software. LACIE, a cooperative program shared by U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and NASA, aimed at improving wheat-production forecasts by use of satellite earth-resources data. (JSC Release 75— 20)
NASA announced that lunar samples would be available to colleges and universities for teaching purposes. Under a new NASA program, a “thin-section educational package,” consisting of several 0.03-mm slices of representative lunar material plus brief descriptions, could be borrowed for several months by institutions offering undergraduate or graduate work in the geosciences. The purpose of the program was to broaden the use of NASA’s lunar sample collection. (NASA Release 75— 76) Addressing a conference dinner 19 March, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “In an age when space research and technology was measured by its immediate value in the marketplace, studies of the planets often are considered little more than an exercise in curiosity. Nothing could be farther from the truth.” When spacecraft were developed to meet the specialized needs of space travel and planetary exploration, technology was advanced. “NASA cannot lay claim to the development of the electronic computer, but it can take a large credit for spurring a revolution in the electronics industry.” The need for lightweight components in spacecraft led to electronic microminiaturization. The Uliac 4 computer, developed at the Univ. of Illinois for DOD and now operated jointly by DOD and NASA, could perform 300 million calculations a second and store 1 trillion bits of information at a time, more than the entire surviving output of the Greek and Roman civilizations. Operational since 1973, Illiac’s speed and refinement allowed scientists to simulate and study global climate changes, study long-range effects of pollution on the atmosphere, distinguish between earth tremors from natural sources and underground nuclear blasts, develop seismic pictures of the earth’s outer shell, and enhance medical x-rays so that tumors could be discovered in earliest stage of development. Illiac 4 has helped solve problems that had eluded scientists for decades. Other space technology was being used effectively to preserve and manage the earth’s resources and enhance the quality of life for all its inhabitants. Communications satellites were making global communications a reality. Meteorological satellites had advanced the science of weather forecasting on land and sea. Sensors, surgical instruments, biological isolation garments, lenses, portable cardiac care systems, and eye switches were just a few examples of space technology used in the medical field. New alloys and materials developed to withstand the rigors of space were being used for longer-lasting automobile and aircraft engines; temperature-resistant lubricants and fireproof materials added to the safety of homes and buildings. “The fast-growing list of things that are and will be as a result of our venture into the cosmos is almost beyond imagination. Everyone who lives will be affected by them. And because of them, the world a decade or so hence will be quite different from the world we now know.” (LeRC Release 75—11; Fletcher speech, text)
Photographs from Landsat 1 (launched 23 July 1972 as Erts 1, Earth Resources Technology Satellite) indicated that a continental collision had been in progress between India and Eurasia, pushing China eastward at the rate of 2.54 centimeters a year, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientists reported in Science. This eastward movement could account for China’s unusual pattern of earthquakes—widespread instead of along narrow fault lines, the MIT geologists suggested. Despite the current theory that the Indian subcontinent was sliding under Eurasia, the MIT scientists had concluded that rigid Indian plates of rock were causing China to be pushed into the Pacific. (Molnar et al., Science, 8 Aug 75, 419 —425; NYT, 10 Aug 75, 49)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 782, a biological satellite carrying 4 U.S. experiments as well as materials from Russia, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, Poland, and Romania, to be recovered in Soviet territory in about 3 wks. Launched from Plesetsk into an orbit with 405 km apogee, 227 km perigee, 62.8° inclination, and 90.5 min period, the satellite provided an opportunity for U.S. scientists to fly biology and weightlessness experiments that would otherwise have had to await flights of the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Last U.S. biology research spacecraft, Biosatellite 3, had been launched in 1969. Cosmos 782 was the first satellite equipped to simulate gravity in space, to compare effects on biological processes with those of weightlessness. A specially constructed centrifuge, consisting of a small disk that would rotate at a constant speed, would create a centrifugal force equal to gravity on earth for packages placed at the right spot on the disk. Comparing the specimens exposed to lack of gravity during orbital flight with similar specimens feeling the pull of gravity would prove any effects had resulted from weightlessness. Results of the experiments should be available in about 90 days, according to the Tass news agency. Ames Research Center managed the U.S. participation in the Cosmos 782 flight. It had had no advance notice of the launch date, place of launch, or mode of orbital operation, although life limitations of the biology materials had dictated a launch near this date. NASA had been invited to participate in a second Soviet biosat mission in 1977, and had planned to fly Russian experiments on its Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (NYT, 27 Nov 75, 62M; NASA Release 75—292; SBD, 28 Nov 75, 145; Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 148)
The first successful air drop of data-collection platforms for use by the Nimbus 6 polar-orbiting weather satellite would lead to another first: successful day-to-day tracking of ice-pack movement in the Arctic Sea north of Alaska’s oil-rich Prudhoe Bay area. Knowledge about the interaction between the winter sea ice and the continental shelf would be important to government and to oil companies; government would use the information in allocating drilling areas and overseeing their use by private industry. Oil companies would need to know whether to locate drilling rigs on the ice or sink them into the sea bed; whether to bury pipelines under the ocean floor, lay them along the bottom, or run them over the ice to loading areas. The exterior sphere of the platforms, built to be dropped on the ice from small aircraft, had been constructed of a tough material to foil the hunger and curiosity of polar bears, which reportedly would attempt to chew on anything appearing different from the usual surroundings. The tracking and data-relay experiment aboard Nimbus 6 had successfully completed its share of a transmission test that sent sensor, telemetry, and ranging signals from its near-polar 1110-km orbit to NASA’s Ats 6 in geostationary orbit 35 900 km above India. The signals, relayed to NASA’s Madrid receiving station, were immediately retransmitted to GSFC. Information gathered in the test would be used to design the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) planned for late 1979. The system would use two geostationary satellites to relay tracking data, commands, and communications between a central ground terminal and a number of spacecraft in low earth orbit; this would increase low-orbit spacecraft access to ground stations from 15 to 85%, reducing NASA requirements for ground-station networks. General Electric’s Space Div., reporting on the success of the test, said the quality of all data received was excellent. (Marshall Star, 26 Nov 75, 4; San Diego Union, 9 Nov 75, 1 ;Aero Daily, 26 Nov 75, 140; SBD, 26 Nov 75, 143)
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)
The government of Indonesia selected Hughes Aircraft Corp. to build a satellite communications system linking 120 million residents of the Indonesian islands. Under the $23.6-million contract signed in Jakarta, Hughes would build two satellites, a master control system, and nine earth stations. Thirty additional stations would be built to Hughes specifications by two other U.S. firms. The satellites were tentatively scheduled for launch in fall 1976. {LA Times, 16 Feb 75) 14 February—17 June: Flight Research Center flew 16 flights using an instrumented B—57 to gather detailed information on jet streams, thermal turbulence, and mountain waves over the western U.S. as part of the Measurement for Atmospheric Turbulence program. Onboard instruments measured velocity and acceleration in the various samples as the B—57 flew through the turbulence for 10 min on a straight-line course at altitudes up to 15 000 m. Langley Research Center, which had been making similar flights over the eastern U.S. since March 1974, would analyze the data for use in making future aircraft safer in turbulent air. (FRC Release 4—75)
NASA launched Sms 2 (SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite) into transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 5:04 pm EST. Launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the three-stage inertially guided Thor-Delta booster placed the satellite in an orbit with a 36 810-km apogee, 197-km perigee, 651.0-min period, and 23.9P inclination. Originally scheduled for 30 Jan., the launch had been delayed to replace the Inertial Measurement Unit of the launch vehicle’s flight-control system with a newer more reliable unit. The spacecraft performed normally during the transfer orbit, and attitude and reorientation maneuvers were performed as planned. The apogee boost motor was fired on second apogee at 9:43 am EST 7 Feb. placing Sms 2 in a synchronous orbit; orbital parameters were 36 685-km apogee,. 35 680-km perigee, 1456.4-min period, and 1.1° inclination. By 10 Feb. the spacecraft was drifting westward at 6° per day toward the final operational station of 115° west longitude. Over several days beginning 10 Feb., the onboard auxiliary propulsion system was fired to place the spacecraft into proper attitude for operational use. First photos were transmitted 11 Feb. NASA objectives—to launch the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to enable the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, conduct an in-orbit evaluation and checkout of the spacecraft, and turn operational control over to NOAA—were met, and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. NASA turned over control of Sms 2 to NOAA 10 March. The 628-kg cylindrical spacecraft carried five instruments to provide high-quality day and night cloudcover data; take radiance temperatures of the earth’s atmosphere; measure proton, electron, and solar x-ray fluxes, and magnetic fields; transmit processed data from central facilities to regional stations; and transmit environmental information to NOAA from the thousands of manned and unmanned data-collection platforms on land, rivers, lakes, and the sea. Sms 2, together with its sister craft Sms 1 (launched 17 May 1974), provided continuous coverage of the Western Hemisphere, transmitting weather photos every 30 min. SMS photos would be made into film loops of clouds moving over oceans and land masses to help meteorologists determine what types of cloud formations and weather conditions might cause the destructive tornadoes and hurricanes that frequently occur over the eastern U.S. Sms 2 was the second in a series of two operational prototypes and one operational spacecraft (SMS-C, to be called Goes 1 in orbit) developed and funded by NASA to meet the requirements of the Dept, of Commerce’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) system. Under a NASA- DOC agreement, NASA was conducting a program to develop improved sensors and techniques—based on technology developed in its Tiros, Nimbus, and Applications Technology Satellite programs—for DOC’s operational program. Follow-on GOES spacecraft were being planned. Goddard Space Flight Center, which managed the SMS program under the direction of NASA’s Office of Applications, also had responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 9 Jan, 10 Feb, 23 April 75; NASA Releases 75- 6, 75- 27; GSFC Wkly SSR, 6-12 Feb 75)
Contracts involving $25 000 or more awarded by Marshall Space Flight Center during the month totaled nearly $200 million. Among them were awards to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Inc., for $67 500 to develop the capability of predicting radiant heating at the base region of the Space Shuttle, and for $49 971 to continue a two-phase study of flow effects on Space Shuttle plume simulation. Lockheed also had received $59 740 to continue analyses of Apollo Telescope Mount data obtained during the Skylab mission. A $29 945 contract had gone to Northrop Services, Inc., to continue studies on Space Tug recovery of a spinning satellite. The U.S.'Army Engineer Div., Ala., had received two contracts. A $2-million contract had been awarded for construction at MSFC of the structural test facility for the Solid Rocket Booster and a $2.93-million contract has been awarded for construction and modifications to the Dynamic Test Facility for vibration testing of the Space Shuttle in the vertical positions. The contracts also included a $152.6-million award to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the Space Shuttle external tank, including six flight units and test hardware. MSFC had awarded the Dept, of Commerce $60 000 for an atmospheric measuring program. Bendix Corp. had received $99 736 for a Skylab control-moment gyro anomaly investigation, and the University of New York had received $36 253 to continue data analysis of a Skylab zodiacal light experiment. (MSFC Release 75— 39) February 1975
An overactive sun and excessively bright moon had caused brief shutdowns of instruments aboard Intelsat (International Telecommunications Satellite) communications satellites, the New York Times reported. Showers of particles during solar flares on 11 March and 13 Oct. 1974 had built up excess electrical charges on satellite surfaces that had not been electrically grounded. Noise from the resulting electrical discharges confused readings of which way onboard antennas were pointing, causing the antennas to point away from the earth and temporarily cut off communications. A similar problem occurred 27 March when a spinning comsat interpreted infrared light from an exceptionally bright moon as coming from earth. Because of this, the satellite’s controls were receiving an earth indication twice as often as usual, thus commanding the pointing system to compensate by despinning at twice its normal rate. Communications were blacked out because the antennas were spinning relative to the earth rather than remaining stationary and pointing toward earth. The NYT quoted Communications Satellite Corp. engineers as saying that these occurrences pointed out the need for more knowledge about the exact behavior of Intelsat satellites in space so that changes could be made in the design of future satellites. The solar-particle problem had led to more thorough electrical grounding aboard the newest Intelsat satellites. (McElheny, NYT, 1 May 75, 83)
NASA management had permitted inflight use of “undesirable components” in the electrical system of the Thor-Delta launch vehicle to preserve the program’s schedule, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. At least two Thor-Deltas had been launched with the same electrical-system contamination failure potential that “probably caused the loss” of the U.K.’s Skynet IIA military communications satellite 18 Jan. 1974. Av Wk reported that, although NASA officials considered the policy undesirable, they had used the components until they could be recycled or replaced, in the belief that the risk had been acceptable. On 18 Dec. 1974 the French—West German Symphonie 1 was almost lost when an apparent electrical contamination problem occurred in the Thor-Delta*s second stage. Av Wk said that Symphonie program management had not been aware of the vehicle’s electrical-system failure potential. (Av Wk, 3 Feb 75, 44)
Goddard Space Flight Center had awarded a $45.8-million contract to RCA Astro-Electronics Division for design and production of eight third-generation Tiros-N spacecraft, the company announced. Scheduled for launch in 1978, the 635-kg spacecraft would forecast weather 2 days in advance with accuracy equal to that of present 1-day predictions. RCA earlier had received a $16.6 million NASA contract for long lead-time items for the Tiros-N series, bringing the total cost of the satellites to $62.4 million. (SBD, 21 Oct 75, 259)
The Space and Missile Systems Organization had announced award of a $2 059 000 contract to Raytheon Co. Equipment Div. for a selfrepairing onboard satellite computer system. The 11-kg computer would carry two or more spares for each of its basic subunits, and a configuration-control unit (CCU) to monitor the computer’s operating subunits and diagnose problems; if a subunit failed, the CCU would diagnose the problem and switch to a spare. The computer would also perform satellite housekeeping including power control, antenna positioning, temperature control, attitude control, and navigation, jobs normally performed by a computer on the ground. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite arrived at its new operating station at 35° east longitude over equatorial East Africa where it would relay communications from the docked Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft during the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Upon completion of ASTP, Ats 6 would be used by India to transmit educational TV programs to several thousand remote villages. The satellite had experienced a malfunction in a drive circuit of one of the three momentum wheels used to control spacecraft attitude. A group of hydrazine gas thrusters was being used as a backup system for stabilization while ground controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center were analyzing the problem and developing remedies. (NASA Release 75 — 194)
Funding in the FY 1976 budget for a third Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS) was in doubt, Walter Sullivan said in a New York Times article. Despite worldwide enthusiasm for continuing the program, which was developing remote-sensing techniques for monitoring and managing earth’s resources, doubts about funding approval were appearing within the Office of Management and Budget. Factors that would influence OMB’s decision included the reported existence of far more detailed information from secretly launched intelligence satellites. Although scientists would probably prefer a system free from intelligence links, some argued that the information needed by agencies such as the Bureau of Census and Dept, of Agriculture could be extracted from imagery from these satellites. Another reason to delay immediate funding was that a more effective system would eventually become feasible. Scientists argued against this reasoning, saying that the lack of fine detail in ERTS images was not a serious impediment but that lack of continuity would be. (Sullivan, NYT, 4 Jan 75, 17)
Rockwell International Corp. announced that its Electronics Research Div., under a contract awarded by NASA on 18 Feb. 1974, had developed a single-chip bubble-domain memory element with a capacity of 102 400 bits, believed to be the largest capacity memory device ever built. The new data recorder—a major milestone in NASA’s continuing program to develop an all-solid-state data recorder for future U. S. spacecraft—was one-third the size and one-half the weight of current equipment. It was expected to use half the power and have 10 times the life expectancy of present recorders. Objective of the effort was to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating high-capacity memory elements with reasonable yield and operating margins. (Rockwell Int’l Release ERD-1; LaRC proj off, interview, 18 Jan 77) 22 May—7 June: The U.S. and Peru launched more than 40 sounding rockets and balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for the Inca god of flight, to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere from Chilca Launch Range in Peru, a location on the magnetic equator where the earth’s magnetic field is horizontal. Instruments aboard the rockets and balloons measured the composition of the neutral and ionized atmosphere, density and temperature, wind shear, and turbulence. The measurements would be compared with data from Explorer 51 (Atmosphere Explorer—C, launched 15 Dec. 1973) and the ground-based Jicamarca and Huancayo Observatories. Tbe overall mission included the launch of 4 Nike-Tomahawks, 8 Nike-Apaches, 7 Super Areas, and 10 Super Lokis, as well as two balloons measuring 36 m in diameter and 12 ozonesonde balloons. Project Antarqui was a continuation of a NASA sounding-rocket program conducted during the 1964— 65 International Quiet Sun Year when 77 sounding rockets had been launched during the first 4 mo of 1965 from a sea-going launch platform, the USNS Croatan. Wallops Flight Center managed the program for NASA; the Instituto Geofisico del Peru arranged for the use of the range, supplied range operation and logistics support in Peru, correlated ground-based measurements from Jicamarca and Huancayo, assisted in recovery operations, and performed some preliminary work at the range. In addition to WFC, Goddard Space Flight Center, Dudley Observatory, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Univ. of 111., Penn. State Univ., Univ. of Denver, and GCA Corp. supplied scientific payloads for the sounding rockets and balloons. (WFC Release 75—6; NASA Activities, June 75, 14; WFC proj mgr, interviews, 11—12 Jan 75) 24 May—26 July: Tne U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 18, carrying cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 7:58 pm local time (10:58 amEDT). According to the Tassnews agency, the spacecraft entered orbit with a 247-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the purpose of the mission was “to conduct further experiments with the orbital research station ‘Salyut—4,’ started on January 12, during the joint flight of the delivery spaceship ‘Soyuz—17’ and the station ‘Salyut—4’ as well as to test individual elements and systems of the spaceship in various modes of flight.” During the first day in orbit Klimuk and Sevastyanov checked out essential spacecraft and life-support systems and prepared for orbital maneuvering. The crew switched on the main engines twice on 25 May to raise the spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and docking with Salyut 4. On 26 May Soyuz 18 approached the station by an automatic control system. At a distance of 100 km the crew took over control and manually docked the spacecraft with the Salyut 4 station in pitch darkness. After docking, the crew switched on the station’s lights and began activation and checkout of the onboard systems. The crew transferred equipment and boarded the station where they found a “Welcome to our common home” sign left by the station’s previous tenants, Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and Georgy Grechko. The cosmonauts reported that all systems were operating normally and that they themselves were in good health. By 28 May the station and spacecraft were in an orbit with a 349-km apogee, 338-km perigee, 91.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. During their 63 days in orbit, the cosmonauts studied the sun, planets, and stars in various bands of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation using several x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; investigated geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, photographing the U.S.S.R. in the medium and southern latitudes; studied physical processes in the earth’s atmosphere and in space; performed medical and biological research with particular emphasis on the impact of weightlessness on the human organism; and tested the station’s design and onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised a garden of onions and peas as a forerunner of providing self-sufficient food supplies in space. Tass reported that, for the first time during a space flight, the polar fights were investigated using integral photography and spectrography methods. Twice during the mission Klimuk and Sevastyanov spoke with cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov who were also in orbit participating in the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project begun 15 July. By 23 July the cosmonauts were preparing the space station for automatic operation. On 26 July at 3:56 pm Baykonur time (6:56 am EDT), Soyuz 18 and its crew undocked from Salyut 4. They softlanded 56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan at 7:18 pm Baykonur time (10:18 am EDT). ' Tass reported that by 27 July the cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood pressure fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned to normal. Decreases in erythrocytes and increases in leucocytes disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and resistance to functional tests had almost reached preflight baselines. Both Klimuk and Sevastyanov had lost some weight—3.8 kilograms and 1.9 kilograms respectively—during the mission. The Soyuz 18 crew’s 62-day 23-hr 40-min mission broke the previous 29-day 13-hr 20-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 17. The current world’s record for time in space was held by the Skylab 4 astronauts for their 84-day 1-hr 16-min mission, 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974. Salyut 4, which had been visited by the two crews of Soyuz 17 and 18, was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station on 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted experiments for 24 days but were killed during a reentry accident. Salyut 2 was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion of wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 and a two-man crew, carried by Soyuz 14, lived and worked aboard the station from 3—19 July 1974. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. 1974, returned to earth in 48 hr after an unsuccessful attempt to dock with the station, which itself reentered the earth’s atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 24 May— 28 July 75; GSFC WklySSR, 22—28 May 75; AP, B Sun, 27 July 75, A3; Lib of Congress, “S&T News Alert,” No 2600, 19 Sept 75) 27 May—14 June: A one-third-scale model of the Space Shuttle Orbiter was tested in Ames Research Center’s 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel, to gather low-speed flight data in support of approach and landing tests of the first full-scale Orbiter at Flight Research Center in 1977. In addition, data were gathered to calibrate the vehicle’s air data probes. The model, built by Shuttle prime contractor Rockwell International Corp., was 13.1 m long and weighed 20 400 kg. Additional wind-tunnel tests were scheduled for November 1975 and February 1976. (4-Strogram, 5 June 75, 1; Young, JSC aerodynamic subsystems mgr, interview, 21 April 77) In a speech, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Union M. Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s intention to play an important role in the peaceful uses of outer space; the programs of ESRO—ESA offered a particularly well chosen range of satellites for research and applications. Y. Demerliac, Secretary General of Eurospace—Groupement In-dustriel Europeen D’Etudes Spatiales—reminded the audience that since 1962 Europe had developed 43 satellites, including four communications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of the 104 ground stations or antennas in the network of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). More than two-thirds of these had been sold to non-European countries. Director General of ESRO Roy Gibson (United Kingdom) said the creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: the convention of the new agency gave it a specific mandate to work toward a rationalization of Europe’s space program which its predecessors ESRO and ELDO (European Launcher Development Organization) did not have. He hoped that the 3-day presentation of ESRO— ESA and other European programs would give the visitors an impression of the total competence and capability of Europe’s up-to-date, rather dispersed space effort. (ESRO Release 28 May 75)
Under a decision of the Federal Communications Commission, the Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) had been making too much money and would have to reduce its rates on international communications services by up to 35%. The order followed a 10-yr FCC investigation of the entire range of ComSat services. Essentially a wholesaler of communications, ComSat had been selling satellite circuits to telephone and telegraph firms that retailed the services to consumers. The FCC order could substantially reduce overseas telephone and telegraph charges; an accompanying order required the international firms that had been dealing with ComSat to pass the reduced rates on to their customers. FCC ruled that ComSat was entitled to a return ranging from 10.8 to 11.8%, but ComSat’s rate of return in 1974 was about 34.6%. (IF Star, 27 Nov 75, A2)
Western Union Telegraph Co. announced that after Westar 1 and 2 (launched 13 April 1974 and 10 Oct. 1974) began video transmission, users would save up to 66% of the cost of land-based transmissions. Rates of the new system, filed with the Federal Communications Commission, were scheduled to go into effect 14 July. The multipoint reception capability of the Westar system would attract a variety of broadcast applications, including independent networks and links to cable systems. Savings by users of the satellite system would depend on the type of service and the route selected: Westar offpeak video service between Los Angeles and New York would cost $715 for the first hour, a savings of 61% over the $1832 charged for a landline transmission. For each additional hour the Westar rate drops to $620, a reduction of 66% over landline transmissions. Initially, cities with earth stations—New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Dallas—would receive the service, which could be extended beyond those cities via connecting carrier. (WU release, 16 June 75)
NASA launched the first geostationary operational environmental satellite, GOES—A, at 6:40 pm EDT for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration aboard the 106th successful Delta from Kennedy Space Center. Transfer orbit elements were: apogee, 36 795 km; perigee, 200 km; inclination, 23.7°; period, 650.9 min. Apogee boost motor fired at 10:51 am EDT 17 Oct. had put the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit at 36 200 km altitude, where it would drift to its scheduled position approximately 5(FN. When the GOES—A had been moved to position and checked out, it would be designated Goes 1 and turned over to NOAA for operational use. GOES was the first operational version of the prototype synchronous meteorological satellites (Sms 1, launched 17 May 74 into geostationary orbit at 75°W, and Sms 2, launched 6 Feb. 75 and positioned at 115°W). Sms 1, originally stationed over the eastern Atlantic in support of the Global Atmospheric Research Program, had provided the first near-continuous daylight coverage of a major hurricane (Carmen) in Sept. 1974. The day-night time-lapse motion pictures produced from Sms 1 images had aided understanding of hurricanes and tropical storms, as well as the total weather pattern in the Atlantic. Sms 2, from its station over the equator, had viewed the western half of the U.S., including Hawaii. Other NOAA satellites in polar orbit (Essa 8, Noaa 3, and Noaa 4) had collected global data for transmission to ground stations in Alaska and eastern U.S. This information has been available worldwide to any individual or agency with equipment that could receive the transmissions. Goes 1 would provide NOAA scientists with images of a quarter of earth’s surface at 30-min intervals, day and night. The satellite would also collect and relay nonvisual environmental data transmitted from thousands of manned and unmanned remote-sensing facilities on land and sea. Its radiation sensors would monitor solar activity and transmit its findings to NOAA’s Environmental Research Laboratories in Boulder, Colo., for use in predicting solar storms that would affect radio communications on earth. Goes 1 would also transmit weather maps and other material from NOAA’s station at Wallops Island, Va., in a format suitable for use by-ground stations at regional forecast centers. (NASA Release 75—270; KSC Release 251 — 75; MORs E—608— 75 —03,22 Sept and 17 Oct 75; KSC Spaceport News, 31 Oct 75,1; NOAA Release 75—188)
Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) was monitoring water resources in Miss. and the effects of pollution on the water system, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. As part of the NASA earth resources program, three data-collection buoys placed in the Pearl River were transmitting water-quality data to Landsat 2, which relayed the data to a tracking station at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) for processing. Processed data on water temperature, dissolved oxygen, acidity/alkalinity, and conductivity were received in the Miss. Air and Water Pollution Control Commission, where state investigators could identify a pollution source within 15 min of a satellite pass over the buoys. A similar experiment was being conducted in Mobile Bay by NASA and the Marine Environmental' Sciences Consortium. Data from the experiments would help evaluate the usefulness of the system and suggest improvements. (MSFC Release 75—97)
At the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory’s 50 mw open-jet wind tunnel, engineers had been able to more precisely measure the material and shape endurance of model nosetips for spacecraft and missiles. Using a newly developed flared nozzle with a smoothly decreasing pressure field, and a new technique for reentry simulation, engineers could gradually bring the sample nosetip up to the nozzle mouth, simulating the transition from moderate to maximum temperature and pressure. Previous techniques could show only variations between distinctly different materials; use of the new nozzle could detect subtle differences between very similar materials. (AFSC Release OIP 172.75) During July: The world’s news media commented on the joint U.S.— U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [see 15—24 July]. A 15 July article in West Germany’s Frankfurter Allgemeine said that “technically the Apollo-Soyuz enterprise will show nothing much.” The reason for the mission had been political since it was agreed upon in 1972. It was “fully in line with the detente and rapprochement policy of the two superpowers.” The astronautic field was particularly useful for propaganda because it could mark the “beginning of an intellectual and scientific exchange of opinion of advantage to both sides.” However, “if one looks. . .at rapprochement in other fields, such as SALT. . . , one must remain skeptical regarding ‘atmospheric’ improvements to be achieved outside the atmosphere of the world.” Milika Sundic, a Yugoslavian commentator, said concerning ASTP, “Nobody doubts its success, or. . .the good intentions and will of the two superpowers.” The technical aspect of the mission was least important, and the political side “constitutes its essence.” The joint undertakings both on earth and in space reflected the superpowers’ belief in a “full equilibrium of forces rather than trust in one another.” This lack of trust was the consequence not only of different systems but different interests which went beyond national borders. The fact that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were leaders of two military alliances could not lead to greater trust between them. But, “without blocs and without ambitions going beyond national borders, the situation would be. . .more favorable both for the superpowers and for the rest of the world.” One hoped that nobody intended to divide up space along bloc lines and that nobody would misuse it for solving this world’s problems. “Third World countries may not be present at today’s rendezvous in space, but they have a claim on the part played by science in the Soviet-American undertaking.” Regarding their rights on the earth, “the Third World has no intention of renouncing them, and even less of abandoning the fate of peace to the big powers, for peace is indivisible both on earth and in space.” Hungary’s 15 July issue of Nepszabadsag said the joint space flight was a scientific undertaking inseparable from “normalization” between the two states and reflecting the advance of peaceful coexistence. The joint cosmic attempt called attention to the vast possibilities inherent in dynamic scientific cooperation between the two countries in other, no less important, areas. Bulgaria’s 15 July Rabotnichesko said in an editorial that ASTP not only would mark “a new stage in the development of space research and will open up new prospects for cooperation between the U.S.S.R. and U.S.A. but will also be a telling example to be followed by all other states and peoples on the earth. . . .” A 26 July commentary by a Peking correspondent in the People’s Republic of China said that the U.S.-U.S.S.R. handshake in space—despite the show and till the money spent to advertise it— could not “cover up their fierce struggle on earth.” In fact, the two superpowers “regard each other as the enemy in space. They have been contending for military superiority in space ever since the first satellite was launched.” The handshake was but a contention with “each trying to cheat and outwit the other.” Finland’s Karjalaimen called the joint mission “historic” from the point of view of both space technology and world politics. The superpowers had found it necessary to begin together to regulate the world’s conflicts to prevent a world conflagration or wars that could endanger the interests of the superpowers. ASTP was one of the public symbols of this policy. (NCNA, FBIS-PRC, 28July 75, Al; FBIS—Bulgaria, 16 July 75, Cl; FBIS—Hungary, 16 July 75, FI; FBIS—Yugoslavia, 16 July 75, II; FBIS—Finland, 16 July 75, PI)
Canada’s Anik 3 (Telesat—3) domestic communications satellite was launched by NASA at 7:35 pmEDTfrom Eastern Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. Originally scheduled for March, the launch had been postponed because of a strike by McDonnell Douglas Corp. workers [see 10 Feb.]. The satellite was placed in the planned highly elliptical transfer orbit with a 35 945-km apogee, 231.4-km perigee, 634.3-min period, and 24.75° inclination. Ground control fired the spacecraft’s apogee kick motor at 1:30 pm EDT on 10 May, circularizing the geosynchronous orbit at 38 000 km; the spacecraft was drifting toward its final operational location at approximately 104° west longitude. Anik (Eskimo word for brother) 3 was third in a series of Canadian domestic comsats; Anik 1 (launched 9 Nov. 1972) and Anik 2 (launched 20 April 1973) were operating at 114° and 109p west longitude, providing TV and telephone service to the most remote areas of Canada. Built by Hughes Aircraft Co., Anik 3 was 1.8 m in diameter and 3.3 m high, weighing 544 kg at launch and 272 kg in orbit. With power from 23 000 solar cells and enough battery capacity to maintain full service during a solar eclipse. Anik had 13 channels that could transmit up to 10 color TV transmissions or 9600 telephone circuits or analog or digital data. The NASA—Telesat Canada contract defined the NASA mission objective as the placement of the satellite in a synchronous transfer orhit of sufficient accuracy to allow onboard propulsion systems to place the spacecraft into a stationary orbit with enough residual stationkeeping propulsion to meet mission-lifetime requirements. This objective was met and the mission was adjudged successful on 20 May. NASA would be reimbursed for launch hardware, services, and DOD range support. The project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA MORs, 25 April 75, 20 May 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 1—7 May 75; NASA Releases 75—113, 75—131)
Communications Satellite Corp. released its 1974 annual report: earnings during 1974 had increased to a record $44 918 000, or $4.49 per share, up from $36 299 000 or $3.63 per share in 1973. In his “Message for the Shareholders,” ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk attributed the growth to the continued increase in communications traffic over ComSatCorp’s global network. Excluding the U.S. mainland-Hawaii service, the number of half-circuits leased by ComSat to U.S. international carriers increased during the year by about 20%, from 2933 at the end of 1973 to 3510 at the end of 1974. Responding to the increased demand for service, ComSatCorp and its partners in the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization had continued to improve and expand the system during 1974. A sixth Intelsat IV satellite, Intelsat IV F8, had been launched 21 Nov. Three higher capacity Intelsat IV—As were scheduled for launch during 1975, and three additional Intelsat IV—As were scheduled for launches beginning in 1977. Even higher capacity Intelsat V satellites were being planned for use in the 1980s. The ground network had been expanded to a year-end total of 104 antennas at 84 earth station sites in 60 countries. Construction of additional antennas was begun at ComSatCorp-operated stations in Maine and West Virginia. (ComSat Release 75—7; ComSatCorp 1974 Annual Rpt, 3 March 75)
France launched Storiette, a passive geodetic satellite, from Kourou, French Guiana, on a Diamant B/P.4 launcher.The satellite entered orbit with a 1137-km apogee, 804-km perigee, 104.5-min period, and 49.8° inclination. Storiette, with an inner core of uranium 238 to give it a high mass and reduce gravitational effects on the spacecraft, would reflect laser emissions directed at it from ground stations to study the earth’s gravitational field, elasticity of the earth, and moments of the earth’s poles. The launch was the first for the Diamant booster developed by the Centre National de Recherches Scientifiques. (GSFC WklySSR, 6—12 Feb 75; Av Wk, 9 Dec 75, 55; 17 Feb 75, 19)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency and NASA signed a contract for launch of three Japanese geosynchronous satellites in 1977 and 1978. NASA would launch the satellites on a Delta launch vehicle on a cost-reimbursable basis. The satellites—GMS, a meteorological satellite; CS, an experimental medium-capacity comsat; and BS, an experimental medium-scale broadcast satellite—would participate in the worldwide Global Atmospheric Research Project (GARP) sponsored by the United Nations World Meteorological Organization. (Kyodo, FBIS—Japan, 22 July 75, C3; NASAMOR M-492-101-77-01, 12 July 77)
Western Union Corp.’s Westar satellite system, which included Westar 1 and 2 (launched 13 Apr. 74 and 10 Oct. 74), began commercial video service with the transmission of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission coverage from Houston to Chicago. TVN Independent Newservice, the first customer, used a transponder on Westar 1 to transmit coverage for 75 clients in the U.S. and Canada. The two satellites, in synchronous orbit; were linked to earth stations near major cities. (WU Release, 15 July 75)
States involved in NASA’s land-use satellite applications had included Ala., Miss., and Tenn., which had organized statewide survey programs, and Mo., which had just begun such a program. The Southern Growth Policies Board, a 15-state group monitoring the South’s development, had investigated application of Landsat capabilities to identify prime farm land, potential commercial sites, and land values. Georgia, working through Ga. Tech., Marshall Space Flight Center, and the U.S. Dept of Agriculture, had begun aerial surveys of Georgia’s peach orchards to study the problem of premature loss of the fruit trees. MSFC aircraft provided multispectral photos and thermal data to be processed through Ga. Tech, computers, detecting stages of decline not visible from the ground. (MSFC Release 75—247, 75—251)
Kuwait’s Communications Minister Sulayman Hammud alKhalid signed a contract with Siemens AG, a West German company, to import and install Kuwait’s second ground station for satellite communications. (AR-RA’Y AL-’AMM, FBIS—Arabian Peninsula, 18 July 75, Cl) . .
Radio astronomers in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had intensified their search for possible civilizations out in space, Walter Sullivan wrote in theNew York Times. Little publicity had been given the search to prevent raising public expectation for “what is likely to be a prolonged effort.” Costs were minimal, because the observations had made use of equipment also used for other research. Dr. Hans Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, had told students at the Polytechnic Inst, of N.Y. that the search for other civilizations would become “one of the major scientific enterprises,” and cited his belief that “communicative civilizations” had been a natural consequence of biological evolution. Dr. Mark pointed out that the U.S. giant antenna at Goldstone, Calif., used for spacecraft communications, could pick up emissions only from the vicinity of the nearest stars. One American search is using the largest antenna on earth—the dish at Arecibo, P.R.—to scan the five nearest galaxies at 1420 mhz, the frequency of radio waves given off by hydrogen atoms, long considered a logical frequency for civilizations trying to make contact. The Arecibo search had been conducted by two Cornell professors, Dr. Frank B. Drake and Dr. Carl Sagan. Another American search had been using the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., to scan 700 stars (resembling earth’s sun) within 80 light years of the solar system for signals at the 1420-mhz wavelength. No obvious signals had been detected, but the recordings had not been subjected to detailed analysis, according to Dr. Patrick Palmer of the Univ. of Chicago and Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of the Univ. of Md. The Soviet program, scanning the entire portion of the celestial sphere visible from the Soviet Union, had been using two networks with a total of eight stations spread across the vast width of the Soviet Union. The November issue of Icarus, international journal of solar-system studies, had carried a prospectus of the Soviet CETI (communication with extraterrestrial intelligence) program divided into two phases. CETI 1* scheduled from 1975 to 1985, included the whole-sky Scan by eight stations plus monitoring by two space stations and a survey of nearby galaxies like the one under way at Arecibo. Only the eight-station project had been initiated, as far as U.S. scientists knew. CETI 2, from 1980 to 1990, had been scheduled to continue satellite monitoring but would also use setnirotatable antennas such as the RAT AN—600 antenna 600 m wide, known to be located high in the Caucasus; the system consisted of numerous plates that had to be aimed individually* calling for hand alignment since no computer had been designed to perform this role. The Soviets also envisioned a monitoring station at the point beyond the moon where the gravitational fields of earth and moon would balance each other; a station at that point would be protected from the earth’s own radio emissions. Identical fluctuations of signal recorded simultaneously at widely separated points would be considered to have extraterrestrial origin rather than to result from a local manmade effect. (NYT, 29 Nov 75, C13) During November: An x-ray telescope assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center for the study of remnants of an exploded star had been shipped from England; where it had undergone payload integration, to the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia for launch. The project, called Skylark for the British sounding rocket on which the telescope would fly, was a joint British-Anierican undertaking to study a supernova remnant known as Puppis A for information on the evolution of stars and perhaps oil the formation of neutron stars. The flight would provide at least 3 min 20 sec for the 346.5-kg payload to make its observations above 120-km altitude. (NASA Release 75—287; MSFC Release 75—238)
A NASA Atlas-Centaur vehicle launched Intelsat-IVA F—l at 8:17 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range into the planned synchronous transfer orbit. The communications satellite had been launched for the Communications Satellite Corp. under a cost-reimbursable contract. At 11:18 pm EDT 26 Sept., ComSatCorp fired the apogee kick motor to put the satellite in a geosynchronous orbit with a 35 821km apogee, 35 294-km perigee, 23-hr 44-min period, and 0.1° inclination. NASA objectives for the mission were to review design, performance, and flight readiness for the Federal Communications Commission and to assure compatibility of the Intelsat spacecraft with NASA launch vehicles and launch environmental conditions, and to launch Intelsat-IVA F—l into a transfer orbit that would enable the spacecraft apogee boost motor to inject the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit. Objectives were completed and the mission adjudged successful 29 Jan. 1976. ComSatCorp objectives were to fire the apogee boost motor, position the satellite into the planned geostationary orbit, and operate and manage the system for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). Intelsat-IVA F—l, built by Hughes Aircraft Co., was 698.5 cm high and 238.2 cm in diameter, with a liftoff weight of 1515 kg and orbital weight of 825.5 kg. The spin-stabilized satellite consisted of two main elements: A rotating section contained the power subsystem, a cylindrical solar array and two nickel-cadmium batteries; the anhydrous hydrazine-powered positioning and orientation system; the solid-fueled apogee motor; and the despin-control system. The despun earth-oriented platform section contained the communications repeater, antennas, and associated elements of the telemetry and command subsystems. All spacecraft antennas were supported by a single tubular mast. For 24 hr after apogee-motor firing, Intelsat-IVA F—l drifted eastward at a rate of Iff per day; then a velocity-correction maneuver slowed the spacecraft drift to 2.9P east per day. While the spacecraft was drifting, the Hawaii earth station checked out the spacecraft systems. Its final operating location, over the Atlantic Ocean at 335° east longitude, would be reached by mid-December. As primary Atlantic satellite in INTELSAT’s global commercial communications satellite system, it would serve more than 40 earth stations, offering users 6250 two-way voice circuits and two TV channels. Intelsat-IVA F—l was the first in the Intelsat IVA series; its communications capacity was two-thirds greater than satellites in the Intelsat IV series, seven of which were still operating. The Intelsat system began with the launch of Intelsat-I F—l (Early Bird, 1) on 6 April 1965; since then NASA had launched 16 successful comsats for ComSatCorp in the Intelsat II, III, and IV series. Although Intelsat IVA satellites had been designed primarily for use over the Atlantic with its heavy communications traffic, INTELSAT planned to launch as many as five additional IVAs, some to provide service for the Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. Intelsat IVAs had a design lifetime of 7 yr and a capacity sufficient to meet international communications requirements through 1979, when the system would be augmented with the even larger capacity Intelsat ^ comsats INTELSAT, created in August 1964 by adoption of the Interim Agreements for the Establishment of a Global Commercial Comsat System, now comprised 91 member nations; a 24-member board of governors exercised overall responsibility for design, development, construction, establishment, operation, and maintenance of the Intelsat space segment. ComSatCorp, a privately owned carrier company operating under a U.S. congressional mandate, had provided technical and operational management services to INTELSAT and the global system under a cost-plus-fixed-fee management services contract. NASA had been responsible for procuring the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle, conducting preflight testing, and launching the spacecraft from the Eastern Test Range into a synchronous transfer orbit. ComSatCorp engineers in the INTELSAT Spacecraft Technical Control Center in Washington, D.C., then assumed responsibility for the mission. Overall management for the NASA portion of the mission was under the direction of the Office of Applications. Lewis Research Center was responsible for Atlas-Centaur development and operation. Kennedy Space Center was responsible for vehicle checkout and for launch. (NASAMORs E—491— 633— 75— 01,25 Sept 75, 30 Jan 76; NASA Release 75—231; INTELSAT Releases, 21 Sept 75, 1 Oct 75; Singer, Today, 26 Sept 75; NASAPIO, interview, 26 Sept 75; GSFC WklySSR, 25 Sept— 1 Oct 75)
Allegations that the Soviet Union had been testing a laser system to blind U.S. spy satellites were discussed in an article in the Christian Science Monitor. A satellite watching Russia from a spot in the sky over the Indian Ocean had set off false alarms of a missile attack 18 Oct. when its sensitive instruments detected heat such as might result from the firing of missiles. The heat had originated from a fire caused by breaks in a natural gas pipeline, as later satellite photographs confirmed, but between the alarm and the photographs U.S. intelligence had speculated that the Soviets had trained lasers on the satellite to prevent detection, in violation of the U.S.-Soviet agreement on arms. The gas fires had set off other warnings after 18 Oct., apparently because the ruptures and fires occurred at different times and places in Russia in both October and November. CSM quoted an article in Aviation Week magazine questioning whether lasers could be used to prevent monitoring of military activity on the ground by satellites, noting that officials at the U.S. Arms Control Agency had discounted the reported incidents. Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were known to be spending large amounts on laser research, and the December issue of the authoritative Jane’s Weapon Systems had discussed the implications of laser research for military uses in both countries. (CSM, 18 Dec 75, 3; Miami Herald, 24 Dec 75, 8A; Ft. Myers News-Press, 28 Dec 75, 1)
The Federal Council for Science and Technology, a committee of officials representing major research and development agencies, released “Report on the Federal R&D Program—FY 1976,” a summary of 17 R&D agencies’ efforts in applying science and technology to national issues. The report stated that the FY 1976 budget included $21 billion for R&D programs, a 15% increase over the FY 1975 R&D budget of $18.8 billion. Of this, approximately $7.4 billion was planned for civilian programs including energy, health, education, agriculture, environment, urban problems, and transportation. Approximately one-fourth the civilian R&D budget was planned for energy, with the largest share of that—$1.55 million—going to the Energy Research and Development Administration. Nine other government agencies would receive increases in R&D budgets, with NASA’s FY 1976 budget estimate increasing to $3,539 billion, up from $3,231 billion in FY 1975, an increase of more than $300 million. Space R&D would continue with projects to explore Mars, Venus, and outer planets, as well as the sun. Satellites would continue to be used for earth resources assessment, weather prediction, and surveys of potential geothermal energy sources. The Federal Aviation Administration would receive increases for air traffic safety, and Dept, of Defense increases would support development of the B—1 manned strategic aircraft, Trident missile systems, and Navy and Air Force air combat fighters. (Text; OMB, Budget of the U.S. Govt., FY 1976)
The U.S.S.R. was planning to flight-test the SLX—14, a launch vehicle larger than the Saturn 5, from Tyuratam during the summer of 1975, Kenneth W. Gatland reported in the Christian Science Monitor. Launch preparations, observed by the Air Force’s Big Bird reconnaissance satellites, had been under way since 1974. Gatland reported that the project had been delayed for more than 5 yr when a previous prototype caught fire and exploded during a 1969 fueling test. Two others had failed in flight, in 1971 and 1972. After considering cancellation of the project, Soviet officials ordered a drastic design review and the program continued with increased emphasis on systems reliability and ground testing. (Gatland, CSM, 16 April 75,1)
Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)
NASA had issued a request for proposals for the procurement of telecommunications services provided by a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) developed and operated by industry to meet NASA requirements, NASA announced. TDRSS, consisting of two specialized relay satellites in synchronous earth orbit and a U.S.-based ground terminal, would relay nearly continuous data and voice commands to and from mission spacecraft and the ground control center. The network could support all earth-orbiting spacecraft below 5000 km, including the Space Shuttle and Spacelab, and provide 85% coverage, compared with the current 15% coverage by the conventional ground tracking system. (NASA Release 75—37)
Plans had been completed for the first U.S. experiments to be flown on a Soviet spacecraft, Dr. David L. Winter, NASA Director of Life Sciences, announced. As a result of joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. working group meetings on space biology and medicine, 4 U.S. life-science experiments and 7 tissue investigations were to fly aboard a Soviet biological satellite scheduled for launch later in the year. The U.S. experiments—all passive and completely autonomous from spacecraft power, telemetry, and data recording—would be housed in 5 Soviet-built containers, each 17.8 cm long by 12.7 cm wide by 11.5 cm high. Maximum weight for each container, including experiments, would be 2.5 kg. Unique to this spacecraft was a Soviet-designed onboard centrifuge. U.S. experiments would be flown both on the centrifuge and on a stationary platform. The 4 flight experiments included a plant tumor-growth experiment to study the effects of weightlessness on sensitive plant systems; a carrot-cell-culture experiment to assess the effects of weightlessness on plant systems and on normal development of embryonic tissues; a heavy-particle radiation experiment to measure high-charge and high-energy particle radiation aboard the spacecraft; and a killifish or mummichog (minnows) embryogenesis experiment to evaluate the effect of weightlessness on development of the vestibular system during embryonic development in a vertebrate animal. Six of the tissue investigations would use rat tissue—and the seventh flies—supplied by the Soviets from their animal experiments. Soviet scientists would prepare the animal tissues for U.S. scientists to use in their investigations and would return the U.S. experiment packages upon completion of the flight. Ames Research Center was managing 3 of the life-science experiments and all tissue investigations. Johnson Space Center would manage the fish-egg development experiment. (NASA Release 75 — 264)
Langley Research Center awarded a $1.5-million 30-mo contract to Rockwell International’s Autonetics Group for a highly reliable solid-state satellite data recorder using bubble-domain technology. The new recorder, with a memory capacity of 100 million bits, would achieve a tenfold improvement in reliability over mechanically driven recorders now in use. The bubble-domain technology would make the recorder about a third the size and half the weight of present recorders and would require only half the power for operation. Dr. R. L. Stermer of LaRC said a NASA decision to define hardware using the bubble-domain technology for use in the late 1970s would be greatly influenced by success of the new recorder. (Rockwell Release AG-9)
The Soviet Union launched a communications satellite called Raduga (Rainbow) into a stationary circular orbit at 35 000 km, with a 23 hr 54 min period and a 0.3°inclination. The satellite had been instrumented to provide continuous round-the-clock telephone and telegraph radio communications with simultaneous transmission of color and black-and-white central- TV programs to the network of Orbita stations. (Tass, on FBIS No. 248, 23 Dec 75)
The communications satellite business was becoming one of the fastest growing businesses on earth, Thomas O’Toole said in a Washington Post article. The huge dish-shaped antennas used as telephone and television links between earth and the dozen or so orbiting comsats had sprouted up in the suburbs of Moscow and Peking, in Brazilian jungles, in the mountains of Iran, and in the deserts of Algeria. In addition, Algeria was building 14 antennas; Indonesia, 60; and Brazil, 2000. More than 90 countries were currently communicating by satellite, most using the seven Intelsat satellites orbited by the 89-country consortium, the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Worldwide Intelsat traffic was growing by 20% a year. In addition to the Intelsat comsats, the Soviet Union, Canada, France, and West Germany, and Western Union already owned their own comsats. Japan would have one by 1977, and Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Indonesia were each planning to orbit their own. Besides making it easier to communicate around the world, satellites were responsible for cutting the cost of overseas conversations. In 1947, a 3-min phone call from New York to London cost $12. The same call in 1975 cost $5.40. (O’Toole, W Post, 12 Jan 75, 1)
A group of 35 representatives from central Fla. planning agencies attended a 1-day workshop at Kennedy Space Center to assess the possibility of using satellite data for land-use planning. Edward J. Hecker of the KSC Office of Earth Resources told the group that the 4-cent-per-sq-mi cost of obtaining satellite data was one-third the cost of aircraft-obtained data. Data collected by “on foot” surveys cost $20 per sq mi, and the cost of using an automobile for this purpose ran about $2 per sq mi. Dr. Garland L. Thomas, coinvestigator for the earth-resources mission of Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) and employee of the Brevard County (Fla.) Planning and Zoning Dept., told the group that, using satellite data and photography, planners could determine which areas were developable and which were not, produce comprehensive land-use planning maps, monitor water quality, and trace the process of eutrophication in central Fla.’s many lakes. (KSC Release 181—75) 8, 9, and 17 September: Data collected by sounding rockets, satellites, instrumented balloons, and high-flying aircraft had supported the hypothesis that fluorocarbons such as those found in aerosol spray cans might be breaking down the earth’s ozone shield, scientists told hearings of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ Subcommittee on the Upper Atmosphere. Ozone in the stratosphere screened the earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation that might increase incidence of cancer and other skin diseases and prove lethal to many life forms as well as damage eyes, crops, and livestock. An increase in atmospheric fluorocarbons could also have a greenhouse effect, permitting sunlight to pass freely but inhibiting the escape of heat in the form of infrared radiation. This would warm the lower atmosphere and the earth, altering aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems and environmental chemicals, and creating climate changes. An extreme greenhouse effect had been blamed for Venus’ oven-hot temperatures. Dr. Warren R. Muir, cochairman of the Interagency Task Force on Inadvertent Modification of the Stratosphere, told the subcommittee, “Based on our preliminary assessment there seems to be a legitimate cause for concern.” If additional government research—with NASA coordinating—had proved more conclusively the danger to the environment, the government should take action for “prompt enactment of toxic substances legislation.” Dr. Wilson K. Talley of the Environmental Protection Agency agreed that fluorocarbons might pose a problem to the stratosphere, and that the total effect of releasing fluorocarbons and other halo carbon compounds into the atmosphere might not become apparent for 10 yrs. But, with evidence of public danger not strong enough to stand up to a court challenge by manufacturers, government regulation of the offending substances would be unenforceable. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 10 Sept 75, 1)
Westar communications satellites would soon be used for communications to and from offshore oil drilling platforms and exploratory vessels in waters adjacent to the continental U.S., Western Union Telegraph Co. announced. The offshore facilities previously had depended for communication on microwave relay networks and cabling, methods that had become increasingly expensive and impractical as the facilities were moved farther and farther off shore. (Westar news release, 4 Aug 75)
DOD announced the award of a $3.6-million contract to Aerojet Electrosystems Co. for design, development, and delivery of one prototype and one flight microwave temperature sounder to be used on military meteorological satellites between 1977—1980. Under the contract, Aerojet would build and test one mechanical-thermal simulator and associated ground equipment for calibration and testing, and would develop a software data package to convert satellite data to temperature profiles. The microwave sounder would be designed to measure atmospheric temperature from the surface of the earth to altitudes above 30 km without regard to cloudcover. (AFSC Release OIP 028.75)
The Soviet Union for the first time had discovered atoms of “natrium”— sodium, as it is known in the U.S.—at an altitude of nearly 100 km, in the lower ionosphere. The experiment was difficult, said Tass, because at that altitude only 1 atom of natrium exists per 1000 million molecules of nitrogen and oxygen. A laser unit had established a relationship between natrium content in the upper atmosphere and meteor showers; the announcement said the discovery would be significant because of the effect of natrium on longdistance television and radio communications. (Tass, in FBIS No. 248, 18 Dec 75) 22 December. A new domestic communications-satellite partnership named Satellite Business Systems filed applications with the Federal Communications Commission seeking authorization to establish an all-digital system to serve large industrial, government, and other users beginning in 1979. The new partnership had been formed by subsidiaries of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General, and IBM, each of which intended to own one-third. The proposed system, using higher frequencies at 12 and 14 gigahertz and advanced technology, would permit customers in geographically dispersed locations to combine voice, data, and image communications into a single integrated private-line network; small automated ground stations would be located at customers’ premises and connected where possible to existing terminals to minimize terrestrial communications costs. The system would use two satellites in geostationary orbit at about 36 000 km altitude, one serving as a backup, to provide coverage of the 48 contiguous states. (Comsat Release 75 —63)
Didier Ratsiraka, President of the Supreme Council of Revolution of the Malagasy Republic, said in a radio broadcast to Malagasy citizens that his government would ask the U.S. to close its satellite tracking station there if the U.S. did not “raise concrete and satisfactory proposals before July 14.” Ratsiraka said that “To avoid possible maneuvers of sabotage, the government has taken necessary measures to place the station under control of the armed forces from this day.” People’s Republic of China’s Hsinhua news agency quoted Ratsiraka as saying that the U.S. was reluctant to fulfill its obligations under the agreement signed in October 1963 by the U.S. and Malagasy governments, being in “flagrant violation of the written engagements.” (FBIS-PRC, 15 July 75, A3)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Aetna Life and Casualty would become the third partner with Comsat General Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. in a venture to establish a domestic satellite system, the three companies jointly announced. In a letter to the Federal Communications Commission, the three companies had proposed a corporate structure of the jointly owned CML Satellite Corp. under which each of the three companies would own a part of the organization. IBM would purchase 42.5% and Aetna would purchase 15% of CML stock, with Comsat holding the remaining 42.5%. Aetna would also purchase a convertible note, bringing its investment to the same level as Comsat and IBM; the three partners would have equal representation on the board of directors. The arrangement would comply with FCC’s requirement that no partner own less than 10% nor more than 49% of CML’s stock [see 23 Jan.]. After FCC approval, the three partners would each invest up to $55 million with additional funding obtained fropi outside financing. CML had been formed in 1972, with other stockholders, to enter the U.S. domestic communications satellite business; Comsat had owned all the stock of CML since July 1975 and, with IBM, had been seeking a third partner.. Both Comsat and IBM had been providing the interim financing. (Aetna-Comsat-IBM Release, 26 Sept 75)
In a letter to Rep. Don Fuqua, chairman of the House of Representatives’ Committee on Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher summarized options for missions that could use the remaining Apollo-Saturn flight hardware. Options included an earth-orbital mission as an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project backup; a Skylab revisit; an Apollo geosynchronous mission; a lunar orbital mission; an earth-orbital mission to visit a Soviet space station; and a manned-satellite inspector. The hardware could also be used to launch a U.S. unmanned space station carrying a large U.S.S.R. payload, a large orbiting reflector, a space solar-power demonstration, a planetary probe, or multiple payloads. Another possibility might be to carry an Apollo spacecraft into space aboard the Space Shuttle to provide a crew-rescue capability or to serve as a habitable module, to demonstrate a Shuttle-serviced free-flying module, or to inspect and service orbiting satellites. Dr. Fletcher’s letter added that he did not foresee that funds would be available to support additional Apollo-Saturn missions in the period preceding the Space Shuttle operation. The subcommittee at a 25 March meeting had asked NASA to summarize the options when the agency had sought permission to dispose of surplus Apollo-Saturn equipment [see 9 April]. (Text, letter from Fletcher to Fuqua and attachment “Conceptual Flight Possibilities for Satum-Apollo Hardware,” 15 Sept 75)
NASA’s Small Astronomy Satellite (Sas 2, launched as Explorer 48 16 Nov. 1972) had observed a pulsar in the Vela constellation that generated two bursts of gamma rays for each burst of radio waves, theAstrophysical Journal reported. No other pulsar had been found to exhibit such properties. The new observation indicated that pulsars— small, dense, rapidly spinning stars thought to be remains of a huge stellar explosion or supernova—were much more complex than had been believed. Detection of gamma rays from Vela meant that pulsars were a likely source of cosmic rays. Many astrophysicists had believed that only very young pulsars could produce cosmic energies, but the Sas 2 observations cast doubt on this conclusion: Scientists believed that the Vela pulsar was more than 10 000 yrs old. (D.J. Thompson et al., Astrophysical Journal, 1 Sept 75; GSFC Release G—75—20)
Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov* one of the Soviet Union’s leading space scientists, died in Moscow at the age of 80. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Commission for Space Research and head of the State Research Institute of Engineering Studies, was one of the key scientists responsible for launching the world’s first satellite, Sputnik 1, 4 Oct. 1957. Blagonravov had begun his career in the military and much of his early work was on the development of automatic infantry weapons. He later turned to the development of spacecraft, making major design contributions to the Soviet Union’s Lunik I, launched 2 June 1959, as the first man-made object to fly by the moon. Blagonravov also represented the U.S.S.R. in many international organizations: He had been vicepresident of the International Space Research Committee, permanent U.S.S.R. representative on the United Nations Scientific and Technical Subcommittee for the Peaceful Use of Space, and permanent deputy Soviet representative on the U.N. Space Committee. In 1962 Blagonravov held discussions with Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, during which details for exchange of satellite data were worked out. (Moscow Domestic News Service, FBIS—Sov, 7 Feb 75, Ul; WPost, 7 Feb 75, C8; McElheny, NYT, 6 Feb 75, 34)
Some “very heavy” influential politicians had been rallying around NASA’s “little known and unglamorous” Earth Resources Technology Satellite [renamed Landsat 14 Jan.] program, inducing President Ford to overrule his budget advisers and provide money for a third spacecraft in 1977, Arlen J. Large said in the Wall Street Journal. It wasn’t only NASA but “the ERTS community—geographers, foresters, pollution fighters and land-use planners” that lobbied for a third satellite to continue the work of Landsat 1 and 2 (launched 23 July 1972 and 22 Jan. 1975). The Office of Management and Budget had wanted to delay funding until NASA developed cameras with better resolution, but the “lobbying blitz” convinced President Ford to overrule OMB; money for the satellite was included in the FY 1976 budget. (Large, WSJ, 20 Feb 75, 44)
The Pentagon, checking out reports of Soviet laser devices that had blinded U.S. reconnaissance satellites, had found the reports to be wrong, said new Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld at his first press conference since taking over from James R. Schlesinger a month ago. Rumsfeld declined to say how it had been determined that intelligence reports were wrong, but said: “After examination, any implication that the activity that was reported. . . did in fact exist was not correct.” He said it was clear there was no violation of any arms control agreement, nor any evidence to support the laser report, which he sought to portray as press speculation. (W Star, 23 Dec 75,6; NY News, 23 Dec 75, 2)
The National Research Council’s Space Applications Board, directed by the National Academy of Sciences and a NASA contract, released a report entitled “Practical Applications of Space Systems,” with particular emphasis on approaches to socioeconomic benefits. The report stated that present institutional arrangements were “not adequate” to encourage future applications of space technology to promising areas such as natural resource exploration and management, telecommunications for education and health care, and long-range weather and climate forecasting. The report added: “There exists at present no institutional mechanism that permits the large body of potential users. . .to express their needs and to have a voice in matters leading to the definition of new systems.” Recommendations by the board included establishment of a national space applications council to direct policies affecting nonmilitary space applications; to set priorities for meeting user needs; to provide for exchanges between users and providers of space technology; and to encourage non-Federal investment in the application of space systems. The council could operate as an interagency group, with representation from state and local governments. To meet the launch needs of future applications satellites, the board recommended that plans for the Space Shuttle provide an early opportunity to orbit payloads in either polar or geosynchronous orbits. The Shuttle-launched payloads would have applications in hazardous weather warnings and long-range weather and climate predictions; land-use planning; agriculture, forest, and range management; exploration for food, water, energy, and mineral resources; and environmental monitoring. Other specific recommendations included lower cost, more accessible ground data-collection and readout stations; long-term observations of climatic factors—such as albedo, heat control of mixed layer in ocean, cloud distribution, and climatically significant changes in vegetation, land use, and snow and ice cover—to help provide a sound basis for long-range weather prediction; a resolution of 3 to 10 m for land-use applications; greater emphasis on Federal research and development programs for spaceborne sensors of water resources; continued development of earth physics techniques, including a system to measure relative displacement of tectonic plates within 3 cm; and vigorous continuation of the SEASAT-Aand Nimbus— C programs. The board had based its findings on the deliberations of 110 potential users of space-derived information and services who had attended a July 1974 study group in Colorado. The participants represented Federal agencies, state and local governments, industrial and business communities, and educational institutions. (“Practical Applications of Space Systems,” NAS publ, July 75)
NASA was considering resuming exploration of the moon in 1980, using a low-cost unmanned satellite to map the entire lunar surface from orbit, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Marius B. Weinreb told United Press International in a telephone interview. The proposed satellite, together with a small communications relay satellite, would gather information needed by scientists to organize the vast amount of data collected during the Apollo lunar landing missions. One mission of the satellite would be to provide a detailed chart of the lunar gravitational field, including field variations, to tell scientists more about the composition of the moon and perhaps about its origin and evolution. Previous lunar orbiters had merely mapped and photographed the lunar surface. Although scientists had learned much from Apollo data about the gravitational field of the moon’s near side, they knew little about the far side. The proposed satellite— equipped with instruments including x-ray and gamma-ray sensors— and its accompanying high-orbiting comsat, which would remain in range of both the satellite and the earth at all times, would send back to earth data on the entire lunar surface. Weinreb told UPI that NASA administrators had considered including the proposed project in the FY 1977 budget. Budget restrictions might prevent NASA from initiating new projects. (UPI, NYT, 11 Sept 75, 11; interview, Weinreb, 13 June 78)
European spending for space programs would rise significantly during 1975 as major projects begun in the past reached a maximum pitch, Aviation Week and, Space Technology reported. Most space spending was reflected in the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) budget which had jumped 50%, from $220 million in 1974 to $350 million in 1975. Two programs—the Ariane launch vehicle and the Spacelab for use on the Space Shuttle—accounted for half the ESRO budget for 1975. Av Wk reported that officials of France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), prime contractor for the Ariane, had estimated that the booster would be used to orbit between 20 and 39 geostationary satellites during the 10-yr period from 1980 to 1990. Other European space programs under way included the Orbital Test Satellite (OTS), a test bed to evaluate equipment and concepts planned for a European comsat to be launched around 1980; Aerosat, a Canadian— ESRO— U.S. comsat program, with the first of two satellites scheduled for launch in 1978; Marots, a maritime comsat planned for launch in 1977; and Exosat, an x-ray astronomy satellite to be launched in 1979. All ESRO programs would be reviewed in the spring to resolve any pending disagreements, and to obtain approval of a 3-yr financial plan that called for a budget of $410 million in 1976 and $415 million in 1977. (Av Wk, 17 March 75, 65- 68)
A meeting at Goddard Space Flight Center of U.S. and U.S.S.R. officials to discuss a cooperative meteorology program recommended that in May—July 1976 each country, within a single 27-day solar rotation, launch two series of sounding rockets—one under quiet magnetic conditions, the other under disturbed magnetic conditions. In 1977 the two countries should hold a rocket-data comparison test in the vicinity of Wallops Island, Va. Both countries should launch more meteorological rockets during atmospheric warming periods. In 1976—1978 both countries should research radiation transfer as a factor in temperature sensing from satellites. From 1975—1978 joint remote-sensing, experiments using microwave were proposed, along with exchange of information on frequencies and data format to be used with direct-broadcast equipment. (NASA Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 March 75)
The Indian Space Research Organization began transmitting instructional programs to inexpensive ground receivers in more than 2400 isolated villages throughout India, using NASA’s Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974. As part of the 1-yr satellite instructional television experiment (SITE), the transmissions would stress improved agricultural techniques, family planning and hygiene, and school courses pertinent to Indian villagers’ needs. After the experiment, Ats 6 would be repositioned over the western hemisphere. During its first year in operation, Ats 6 had transmitted medical and educational programs to remote communities in Alaska, the Rocky Mountains, and Appalachia. During the 15—26 July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the satellite had helped relay communications from the Apollo spacecraft to ground stations, increasing coverage from the usual 17% to 55% for each orbit. (NASA Release 75—221; NASA MOR M—966—75 —01, 7 July 75; Borders, NYT, 3 Aug 75, 10)
Lutz T. Kayser, an aerospace engineer from Stuttgart, Germany, had established a business called Orbital Transport and Raketen A.G. to build and launch rockets on a commercial basis, starting in 1980: if successful, it would be the world’s first private space-launch venture. NASA had been charging at least $25 million to put a $12-million satellite into space; Kayser had designed a “space truck” to put satellites in orbit for half the NASA price. His rockets could not be used for military purposes, he said, as he had no plans to sell equipment, but would do the launches himself and sell only booster services. As the launches could not take place in crowded West Germany, they would have to be done from either a ship at sea or from a base in some sparsely populated country. After ground tests of Kayser’s rocket engines last summer, German scientists had been convinced that his spacecraft would fly. Kayser said that if the Germans would not support him, he would seek backers elsewhere, in South America or Asia. He had hoped more than half the backing would come from private investors, and the rest from banks. The West German government had spent about $2 billion to encourage German and European space projects that could offer an alternative to the NASA monopoly, but such projects had not succeeded. The first “space truck”—now under construction for suborbital test next year—would be 39.62 m high and consist of inexpensive conventionally produced materials. To make mass production possible, all stages would use identical engines; the stages would be placed in concentric rings that would drop off as the craft climbed. (ATT, 28 Dec 75, 18)
The Bangui Anomaly—a massive magnetic disturbance in the earth along the equator in Africa, suggesting rich deposits of heavy metals like iron and uranium—had been accidentally discovered by Ogo 1, launched in 1964 with magnetometers that were still measuring the earth’s magnetic field in 1970 when the Geological Survey decided to use them for other purposes. Attempting to measure the ionosphere for traces of a jetstream above the equator, Survey scientists noticed a “kink” in the data and had checked their findings by scanning the region with magnetometers in aircraft. Results showed a magnetic difference so great that it could be caused only by an ore body larger than the Mesabi range in Minn., largest in the U.S. Scientists had deemed the find so important that NASA had suggested putting a satellite in orbit to do nothing but chart the earth’s magnetic field. The anomaly was named for the capital of the Central African Republic, an extremely poor nation almost as big as Texas with a population of about 2 million. The deposits had been localized in hilly regions away from the Ubangi River, so that a railroad or highway would be needed to carry ores to the river for shipping. State Dept, sources said that interest in the region among foreign mineral-extraction companies had risen. (O’Toole, LA Times, 15 Nov 75, 1)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Donald P. Hearth, Deputy Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, gave in their testimony before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology a preview of the new NASA report “Outlook for Space.” The report had been submitted to NASA by a 21-member study group established by Dr. Fletcher in June 1974 to develop an unconstrained listing of desirable and practical civilian space activities; to group these around goals, objectives, and themes; to define R&D tasks required by potential commercial and operational uses of space; to identify social and economic challenges that could benefit from space-reported data; and to relate space goals and objectives to national ones. All space objectives defined by the study group were evaluated in terms of their contribution to national interests, which included expansion of human knowledge, physical benefits to the U.S. and humanity, contribution to the vitality of the nation, exploration of the unknown, national prestige and self-esteem, and international cooperation. The report suggested categorizing space missions as either earth-oriented or extraterrestrial. Earth-oriented programs for the rest of the century should help increase food production by improved weather and water-availability forecasting, improved crop forecasting, improved detection and monitoring of diseases and infestations in vegetation. The consequent economic benefits and stabilization of the commodity market could gain hundreds of millions of dollars per year. Other earth-oriented space programs should emphasize improved forecasting of seasonal and climatic trends, to aid in the managing of food and energy resources and associated transportation requirements. Benefits from improved climate forecasting could reach hundreds of millions of dollars annually. The space program should also address itself to the challenge of the unknown by adding to man’s knowledge of cosmic and human evolution and destiny. Spacecraft could take instruments above the “dark and dirty glass” of earth’s opaque atmosphere, and should continue to carry instruments to other planets, setting up laboratories there as well as bringing samples back to earth for analysis. Extraterrestrial missions should include textural, chemical, and isotopic planetary studies and comparisons of atmospheric trends for all planets and their satellites. Plans should also continue for human activities in space, using both the space shuttle and free-flying laboratories to repair and maintain orbiting spacecraft systems and perform research in space. Although the study panel had found it difficult to assert that manned orbiting or planetary bases should be undertaken in the next 25 yrs, it found that man was an integral and necessary part of the more creative space-exploration programs. If the U.S. was to avail itself of the potential benefits of space, the next logical step for NASA’s manned program could be development of a permanent space facility in which crews could work for extended periods. (H.R. transcript)
The Air Force launched a “spy satellite” from Kennedy Space Center at 12:15 am EST into a stationary orbit at about 36 000 km above earth. Although no announcement had been made of the success or failure of the launch, observers next day concluded that the launch had been successful. The satellite was one of a series designed to monitor missile launchings in China and the Soviet Union to give a 30-min warning of a land-launched attack or about 10-min warning of a missile attack from submarines. It had been launched by a Titan IIIC, 24th of this type launched from Cape Canaveral, and was thought to carry both infrared sensing equipment and still and TV cameras to permit day and night monitoring. (NYT, 16 Dec 75, 14; C Trib, 15 Dec 75, 5)
The computer aboard Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) was the most advanced of its type ever flown on an unmanned NASA satellite, NASA announced. Able to handle up to 55 ground-station commands controlling spacecraft operations for up to 24 hrs, the compact digital computer was a forerunner of the NASA Standard Space Computer that will be used in a wide variety of unmanned missions. Managed by Goddard Space Flight Center, the standard space computer program was part of an agency-wide program to develop standardized satellite components, both to reduce costs and to increase reliability. The program also covers other spacecraft hardware such as nickel-cadmium batteries, transponders, attitude-control thrusters, pyrotechnic initiators, silicon solar cells, and tape recorders. (NASA Release 75 —85)
Dow Jones and Co.’s Wall Street Journal signed a 7-yr contract with American Satellite Corp. for the design and construction of earth stations and provision of high-speed communications that would permit a Florida-based WSJ printing plant to receive, via satellite, full printed pages for facsimile reproduction. Full pages would be transmitted, at an average rate of 3 min a page, from WSJ’s Massachusetts printing plant to a receiving antenna in Florida. The antenna would connect to printing equipment in the Florida plant, which would transform the communications signal into printed pages again. (AmSatCorp Release, 25 March 75; AmSatCorp Marketing Services Mgr., interview, 30 Nov 76; Jones, W Post, 1 April 75)
The Soviet Union launched Intercosmos 14 into an orbit with 1707-km apogee, 345-km perigee, 105.3-min period, and 74° inclination. The satellite had been equipped to study low-frequency electromagnetic fluctuations in the magnetosphere, the structure of the ionosphere, and the intensity of micrometeorite fluxes. Tass reported that flags of nine socialist countries had waved over “one of the Soviet cosmodromes” where the launching took place; mentioned as participating in this particular mission were scientists from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary, as well as the U.S.S.R. Satellites of the Intercosmos series were considered “closest to purely earth problems” in that they had been connected with specific orders placed by geophysicists, physicians, meteorologists, and radiocommunications experts. Academician Boris Petrov, head of the Soviet Intercosmos, said the launch ended the first decade of cooperation between scientists and engineers of the socialist countries, who had made significant discoveries regarding sun and earth climate, influence of solar activity on magnetic weather, and dispersal of radio waves. Collectives of experts in all nine member countries of Intercosmos would take part “as usual” in processing information received from the satellite, working at the scientific flight headquarters near Norilsk, beyond the polar circle, where parallel ground observations would be conducted. (Tass, in FBIS 240 and 243, 12 Dec 75)
Communications Satellite Corp. had received initial orders to lease terminals on tankers and other commercial vessels for communications via the Marisat maritime-satellite system. Exxon International Corp. had ordered five shipboard terminals to provide communications with Exxon tankers at sea. The U.S. Maritime Administration had ordered terminals for six U.S.-flag ships as part of a cooperative cost-sharing program between USMA and the vessel owners. The Marisat system, scheduled for commercial service later this year, would provide high-quality telex, data, and telephone communications 24 hrs a day to ships and offshore facilities. (ComSatCorp Release 75—48)
Two U.S. Air Force communications satellites, launched from Eastern Test Range, failed to reach orbit when the third stage of the Titan IIIC launch vehicle malfunctioned and tumbled out of control. United Press International quoted an Air Force spokesman as saying the two satellites, valued at $57 million, were to have been placed in geostationary orbits, one over the Pacific Ocean and the other over the Indian Ocean. The 544-kg comsats—designed to handle as many as 13 000 telephone calls or to relay televised or printed messages without danger of jamming or eavesdropping—would have completed the worldwide military communications network begun in 1973. Officials believed that a power problem was responsible for the failure. (UPI, NYT, 21 May 75, 40)
A Science magazine article detailed some early findings from the Atlantic Tropical Experiment (GATE) of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP). GATE, a 72-nation research effort during the summer of 1974 to gather meteorological information on the tropics, found very few cumulus clouds. Clouds in weather disturbances tended to be grouped in patterns, usually in roughly linear bands. Prior to GATE the only visible indicators of these weather-disturbance patterns were cloud clusters seen on satellite photographs, but the details were unknown; GATE demonstrated that these clusters were high cirrus clouds that formed above the weather disturbance and might persist long after the rainclouds themselves had dissipated. The organization of active rainclouds then came under intensive study as the essential feature of atmospheric convection. Although scientists had previously thought that cloud bases formed at a given level in the atmosphere, clouds in the GATE area were found to form at many different altitudes; many did not reach the heights often associated with tropical cumulus clouds until the latter part of the summer. The strength of weather disturbances intensified during the experiment, indicating that the tropical atmosphere probably altered over the course of the summer as its moisture content and convection increased, causing the clouds to grow taller as higher and higher levels of the atmosphere were warmed. GATE scientists also investigated the air layer between the cloud bases and the sea surface, finding that the subcloud layer was profoundly altered by the passage of a cloud. Warm moist air taken up into the cloud to fuel the convection was replaced by cooler drier air from higher in the atmosphere. Scientists believed that the resulting mix might explain cloud spacing and lifetime, and might indicate a continually changing subcloud layer in marked contrast to conditions prevailing in fair weather. GATE experiments documented the existence of atmospheric waves in the tropics and showed that weather disturbances developed near the low-pressure portion of the wave. Scientists also discovered a peculiar rapid meandering of the equatorial undercurrent—an intense eastward flowing stream 100 m below the sea surface at the equator—that shifted north and south about 1° in latitude on either side of the equator with an apparent period of 16 days. (Hammond, Science, 20 June 75, 1195—98)
NASA’s basic goal in the U.S. stratospheric research program was to determine the normal makeup of the upper atmosphere with emphasis on understanding the dynamic processes occurring and the perturbations caused by natural and man-made events, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s current high-altitude program was being carried out by conventional and special purpose aircraft such as the U—2, instrumented packages placed on commercial aircraft, instrumented balloons, sounding rockets, and computer modeling techniques. Satellites still provided the best potential for continuing repetitive global observations of the upper atmosphere. The Nimbus satellites had measured properties affecting the ozone and had made vertical profiles of the upper atmosphere. Atmospheric Explorer (AE) satellites had made coordinated investigations of photochemical processes in the upper atmosphere caused by solar ultraviolet radiation. Dr. Fletcher said that NASA would continue these efforts and had plans for new atmospheric studies. In addition to payloads planned for launch on the Space Shuttle, NASA would use instrumented aircraft, balloons, and sounding rockets to study the effects of chlorofluorometh-anes, or Freon, on atmospheric ozone. (Transcript)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) awarded a $145 000 contract to RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div. for a first-phase design study of the Tiros-N data-acquisition and control system (DACS). DACS would provide operational control of Tiros-N in orbit, and would collect and transmit telemetry and weather information to NOAA facilities in Md. RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div., which had been developing the new generation of weather satellites for NASA had scheduled the first flight for 1978. As part of the design study, RCA would provide descriptions of materials and procedures needed to implement the DACS, a network of ground stations including the Md. center and the command and data-acquisition stations (CDA) in Alaska and Va. (Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 149)
The Indonesian government concluded a $120.6-million (4.6 billion Belgian francs) agreement with the General Bank of Belgium to finance construction of two communications satellites, a satellite control station in Jakarta, and 39 comsat network stations throughout the Indonesian islands. (Jakarta Domestic Service, FBIS—Indonesia, 19 Feb 75, Nl)
Preparatory work was nearing completion on the Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE), a joint India— NASA program to broadcast educational TV via the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974. Installation of 400 TV sets had been completed, and the buildings to house them had been wired for electricity. (Delhi Domestic Service, FBIS—India, 18 July 75, U2)
Viking Lander 1 would undergo a critical milestone in its development, terminal sterilization, beginning 13 June, Robert S. Kramer, NASA Director of Planetary Programs, said at a Viking news conference in Washington, D.C. The Lander would remain in the oven for 2.5 days and then be removed and checked out. Past missions had failed because “maybe we knew how to sterilize a spacecraft but we didn’t know how to make one work after it was sterilized,” Kramer said. However, “we think we know a lot more now than we did 15 years ago. We believe we have developed the techniques to be fully reliable, but when we complete that test along about next Tuesday morning, then we are going to find out for sure.” A. Thomas Young, Viking Mission Operations Manager at Langley Research Center, said that plans called for launch of Viking 1 on 11 Aug. and launch of Viking 2 on 21 Aug. Mission planners had deliberately arranged for the first Viking to arrive at Mars on 18 June 1976, after 10 mos of travel, and Viking 2 to arrive on 7 Aug. 1976, about 1 yr after it was launched. Both spacecraft would spend about 17 days in orbit examining landing sites “to assure ourselves that they continue to be safe.” The sites, which had not been examined since 1971, must be checked again because Mars was a dynamic planet. Lander 1 was scheduled to begin its descent 4 July and start black-and-white photography immediately upon landing. Color photography would begin 18 hr later. The first soil sample would be collected on the eighth day. Analysis of the sample would take 12 days to complete, and 20 days would be required to complete one cycle of all surface science. Young noted that, to avoid confusion during the mission, Martian days would be called “sols” because they were a half-hour longer than earth days. During surface operations, the Orbiter passing overhead once a day would remain synchronized with the Lander; on the pass, the Orbiter, acting as a communications satellite, would relay information from the Lander to earth. When the Lander completed its work, the Orbiter would perform observations of its own, studying Martian surface features, including the proposed Lander B landing site, from orbit. (Transcript)
Heos 1, Europe’s longest-living satellite, reentered the earth’s atmosphere as predicted after exceeding its nominal lifetime by nearly 6 years. Launched 5 Dec. 1968 by the European Space Agency, Heos 1 was third of eight scientific satellites launched by ESRO/ESA between 1968 and 1975. Its full payload of 7 experiments gave excellent results 4 months longer than the nominal lifetime; the experiment to study the interplanetary magnetic field worked until reentry, providing invaluable data on the field for almost 7 of the 11 yr of a solar cycle. Experiments were: interplanetary magnetic field, high-energy galactic cosmic rays, and solar protons (Imperial College, London); solar wind (Universities of Florence, Rome, and Brussels); low-energy cosmic rays (Centre d’Etudes Nucleaires); high-energy electrons (CEN/University of Milan); barium cloud (Max Planck Institut). (ESA Release 29 Oct 75)
The Peoples Republic of China announced it had successfully recovered an artificial earth satellite for the first time, becoming the third country after the U.S. and the Soviet Union to develop a technique for returning a satellite from orbit. The satellite, which had been launched 26 Nov., was China’s fourth; the third had been orbited in July and the first two in 1970 and 1971. Edward K. Wu, Hong Kong correspondent of the Baltimore Sun, noted that Chinese scientists and engineers apparently had solved technological problems including development of a heat-resistant alloy to withstand reentry temperatures, automatic techniques for remote control, and a trigger system to fire the satellite back to earth. (B Sun, 4 Dec 75, A4)
The Federal Communications Commission approved a plan for International Business Machines Corp. and Communications Satellite Corp.’s Comsat General subsidiary to form a domestic satellite company with a third company as long as no partner owned less than 10% or more than 49% of the stock. However, a plan in which IBM would replace Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and MCI Communications Corp. as Comsat’s partner and own 55% was rejected. The FCC stated that this plan would give IBM too much power over the specialized communications business. Other alternatives suggested by the FCC included a plan whereby IBM and Comsat could independently enter the communications satellite business or Comsat could join another consortium without IBM. Another alternative was that Comsat, which was not permitted to deal directly with the public, could lease space communications circuits to IBM under an arrangement similar to the one Comsat had with American Telephone & Telegraph Co. Whatever the arrangement, FCC ruled, IBM must establish a separate corporation for its satellite operations. (FCC Memorandum Opinion and Order 75—156; FCC Release 46281; DJ, WPost, 24 Jan 75, D7; W Star-News, 24 Jan 75, F21)
The Knights of Columbus, a U.S. Catholic fraternal organization, had agreed to pay for worldwide satellite coverage of three live 90-min Vatican events, the Washington Post reported. Four Intelsat satellites would telecast the midnight mass at Christmas, the Stations of the Cross from the Roman Colosseum on Good Friday, and the Pope’s Easter Sunday message. Each broadcast would cost an estimated $25 000. (W Post, 21 Aug 75)
Goddard Space Flight Center awarded a $20 000 research grant to the University of Florida to establish the feasibility of the electromagnetic wave energy-conversion (EWEC) concept. The EWEC converter used electromagnetic antennas to absorb the sun’s electromagnetic radiation into an array of insulated components and then convert it directly to electricity. The absorber operated similarly to insect antennae and the retina of the eye: Insects communicated by the reception of infrared and other electromagnetic radiation or energy, using their antennae tuned to the proper frequency by nature’s design. Once received, the energy was converted into electrical impulses. (NASA Release 75 — 102) During April—May. NASA conducted Atmospheric Variability Experiment IV and Atmospheric Variability Severe Storms Experiments I and II in cooperation with the U.S. Air Force, Army, National Weather Service, and several universities. Coordinating data collected over the eastern two-thirds of the U.S. by satellites, aircraft, radar, and weather balloons, participants hoped to develop new techniques for predicting where and when tornadoes might strike. The data collected, including information on thunderstorms, updrafts, and wind and cloud data, would be compared with ground-truth observations to determine the relationship between severe storms and their environment. Participating in the experiments were 41 radiosonde stations, 18 radar stations, 7 instrumented aircraft, and 5 meteorological satellites. (MSFC Release 75 — 102) May 1975
Intelsat IV F-6 communications satellite was destroyed by a NASA range safety officer 415 sec after launch from Eastern Test Range when the Atlas-Centaur test vehicle tumbled out of control. Lifting off at 6:35 pm EST, the mission had been normal to Atlas booster-engine cutoff at 138 sec. Then telemetry data indicated several malfunctions, including electrical problems and loss of altitude. After destruction, the vehicle impacted in the Atlantic Ocean 800 km downrange from the launch site. An investigation of the failure was begun under the direction of Lewis Research Center and the mission was officially judged unsuccessful 6 March. The failure was the first for an Atlas-Centaur since May 1971, when a circuit problem in the Centaur ended the launch of the Mariner 8 Mars probe. The 1400-kg Intelsat IV F-6, launched by NASA on a cost-reimbursable basis for the Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the 89-member-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, was intended to be the primary spacecraft over the Indian Ocean region, with Intelsat IV F-5, launched 13 June 1972, becoming the backup. The failure of Intelsat IV F—6 would have no immediate effect on Intelsat global communications; Intelsat IV F-5 could provide the primary function and Intelsat III F-3, launched 6 Feb. 1969, was still capable of providing limited backup. The Intelsat IV F-6 mission had been scheduled originally for launch in February 1973 but experienced a series of delays from problems in both the satellite and the launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 26 Feb 75, 13 March 74; PAO, interview, 21 Feb 75; NASA Releases 73—83, 75—7, 75—47; NASA “Note to Editors,” 3 May 73, 27 June 75; SBD, 24 Jan 75, 127)
The Soviet Union may establish a ground station to receive data directly from the U.S. Landsat earth resources satellites, under a cooperative program in which the U.S. would establish facilities to receive data from Soviet weather satellites, NASA Administrator James Fletcher announced in Moscow. Landsat could be of enormous value to the Soviet Union, which is judged to have vast untapped oil and mineral deposits, which depends heavily for power on its water resources, and which needs help in improving crop yields and forecasting. (SBD, 20 Oct 75, 255) Astronomers had considered the compact stars in these binary systems the most exciting objects of current research: the stars have masses close to that of earth’s Sun, but diameters of only about 10 km. Neutron stars, for example, had been found so dense that a teaspoonful would weigh a billion metric tons, and “black holes” would be even more dense. Five satellites currently in earth orbit had been observing celestial x-rays: Copernicus, Oso 8, and Sas 3, managed by GSFC, and the U.K.’s Ariel 5 and the Netherlands’ Ans 1, for which GSFC had coordination responsibility. In the past year spacecraft had discovered six new and extremely powerful x-ray sources, brightness in the sky, known as x-ray novas from their sudden brightening and subsequent fading after several months. One of these x-ray novas is as bright as earth’s sun and more than 10 times brighter than the easily visible Crab Nebula, most famous of the supernovas (exploding stars). (NASA Release 75—279; JSC Roundup, 24 Oct 75, 1)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization announced the award of a $99 894 15-mo contract to the Research Foundation of the State Univ. of New York for a study of radiation-induced defects in solar cells. The Foundation would develop an information base for predicting electron damage to silicon solar cells over a wide range of parameters for the materials from which the cells were made. (INTELSAT Release 75—32)
Landsat 2, launched 22 Jan. 1975, developed a noise problem with one of its two image tape recorders, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The satellite’s mission was not in danger because the backup recorder was functioning properly. (Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 13)
NASA’s new Low Cost Modular Spacecraft (LCMS), a recoverable compartmented spacecraft being considered for use aboard the Space Shuttle, was. demonstrated at a news conference at Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Division. The LCMS consisted of an instrument and spacecraft assembly joined by a transition ring. Scientific instruments or earth-resources sensors could be attached to the LCMS for specific missions. Designed by Goddard Space Flight Center engineers, the LCMS would fit into the 5- by 18-m payload bay of the Orbiter and also could serve as a platform for as many as 14 satellites. The system could be placed in orbit by the Shuttle and later serviced or recovered and returned to earth for needed repairs. Dr. Robert G. Wilson, Director of Advanced Payload Analysis at NASA Headquarters', said that a recoverable modular satellite system such as LCMS could save as much as $100 million annually over the cost of nonrecoverable satellites. (JSCRoundup, 14Feb 75, 3;GoddardNews, Feb 75, 8)
The Political & Security Committee of the U.N. General Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution seeking wider adherence to international agreements on the peaceful uses of outer space. The resolution called for continued U.N. work on space agreements, including one covering natural resources of the moon; on principles governing direct TV broadcasting by satellite; and on legal issues arising from remote sensing of earth and its resources from space. (SBD, 29 Oct 75, 300)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Joseph H. McConnell told a stockholders’ meeting that ComSatCorp was finalizing a contract with Exxon Corp. for five shipboard terminals for use with ComSatCorp’s Marisat maritime communications satellite scheduled for launch in summer 1975. McConnell also said that ComSatCorp had agreed to lease one shipboard terminal to Seagap, an oil exploration consortium led by Phillips Petroleum Co. Marisat would make available, for the first time, reliable voice, data, teletype, and facsimile communications to ships at sea and to offshore drilling rigs. McConnell said that the success of the Marisat program would depend on the Navy’s use of the system and on ComSatCorp’s ability to develop a substantial market in the commercial shipping industry. (Snider, W Star, 14 May 75, FI) 13 —14 May: More than 500 representatives from government, industry, and universities attended a 2-day conference at Lewis Research Center to review progress in aerospace propulsion. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that high-speed performance was no longer the top priority among the propulsion researchers, emphasis having switched to quiet, clean, and fuel-conserving engines. Presentations and panel discussions included aircraft noise-reduction technology, fuel-conservative engine technology, upper-atmosphere pollution-measurement programs, and engine systems and component technology. LeRC’s John B. Whitlow reported that new technology generated by NASA’s supersonic cruise airplane research (SCAR) would develop an engine far different from the afterburning supersonic turbojet that was to have powered the first U.S. supersonic transport. A potential new engine might be a duct-burning turbofan with features such as a variable-geometry fan that allowed the engine to move as much as possible between straight turbojet and straight turbofan operational cycles. Other objectives for future NASA-developed SST propulsion systems included a 7400-km range with outstanding economy at speeds from mach 2.2 to mach 2.7, good subsonic cruise characteristics, good hold endurance and economy, and low takeoff noise. Whitlow stressed that, because of noise limitations, future SSTs would not be straight turbojets, and SCAR researchers were concentrating on low-bypass-ratio turbofans. As bypass ratio also affects engine weight, fuel consumption, drag, and cost-effective performance, no single bypass ratio of a conventional engine could meet all desired goals simultaneously. Thus SCAR researchers were developing variable-cycle engine technology that could tailor the bypass ratio and perhaps the fan/pressure ratio for optimum performance. Candidate engines included a mini-bypass turbojet, a variable-bypass supersonic turbofan, a duct-burning turbofan, and a rear-valve variable-cycle engine. (LeRC Release 75—19; Yaffee, Av Wk, 14 July 75, 46- 49) 25.5 hr into the simulated mission. With both Soviet and U.S. crewmen participating in simulators in their respective countries and control centers fully manned, the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft were “launched” and put through various maneuvers. Communications between the two control centers included voice, teletype, datafax, and TV. During the simulation, a technical problem prevented observers in Houston from hearing the two Soviet cosmonauts; NASA officials said later that that problem should not happen during a real flight. No other major problems were reported. A second simulation begun at 6:30 am CDT 15 May and continuing for 56 hr rehearsed Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, docking, crew transfers, and undocking and final separation. A third simulation, begun at 6:30 am CDT 19 May, was cancelled when the command module simulator in Houston did not work properly. The simulation, a 9-hr rehearsal of rendezvous and docking, was successfully completed 20 May. Final simulations by Houston and Moscow control centers and crewmen were scheduled for 30 June and 1 July. (NASA Release 75 — 141; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 16 May 75, Ul; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285; UPI, NYT, 14 May 75, 69)
Eight Soviet scientists would attend a meeting at the Earth Resources Orbiting Satellite (EROS) Data Center in S. Dak. this week to review previous U.S.-U.S.S.R. remote-sensing projects [see 20 Oct.] and to discuss future cooperation on remote sensing of geology and agriculture. The meeting was part of a joint effort by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences to advance studies of the earth from space; the Soviets might set up a ground station to receive remote-sensing data directly from U.S. Landsats. (SBD, 28 Oct 75, 295) 28 —29 October: Principal investigators and other scientists meeting at the Marshall Space Flight Center had presented preliminary findings on the space-processing experiments conducted during the U.S.—Soviet Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. First day’s discussions would be on the U.S. and West German experiments on electrophoresis—separation of biological materials by means of an electrical field—considered a key to the development of drugs to fight strokes, heart attacks, clots, and blood diseases. Six of the seven materials-processing experiments using a multipurpose electric furnace would be discussed the second day; a Soviet experiment using the furnace would not be discussed. The furnace experiments had demonstrated use of a weightless environment to investigate crystal growth, convection, and solidification processes for future use in space as well as for applications to present earth technology. (MSFC Release 75— 226)
NASA and the Air Force Systems Command’s Space and Missile Systems Organization had jointly contracted for procurement of 12 advanced meteorological satellites, saving more than $37 million, AFSC announced. Both agencies had developed satellites to observe and report worldwide weather conditions and were negotiating procurement of improved, longer lived meterological spacecraft. The contracts for long-leadtime parts for the new satellites—nine for NASA and three for the Air Force—were a follow-on to an earlier Air Force procurement program for a meterological satellite identified as Block 5D. Although some of the systems differed, similar technical requirements permitted the basic spacecraft to serve both agencies. Use of an already developed basic design would save NASA about $33 million, and the joint production contract would save both agencies nearly $2.4 million in material and assembly costs. (AFSC Release OIP
Science magazine reported that U.S. scientists had reprogrammed NASA’s Landsat 1 earth resources satellite (formerly called Erts l, launched 23 July 1972) to photograph large areas of the Soviet Union, although not specifically requested to do so by Soviet officials. The magazine reported that the intent of the U.S. scientists was to aid Soviet scientists, after discussions at a series of 1972 joint working group meetings—convened for geological studies of comparable land sites in each country—indicated that the Soviets had nothing available to them equivalent to this kind of satellite imagery. Because the Soviet government was sensitive about U.S. satellites flying over the U.S.S.R., the Soviet scientists who were to benefit had never been directly informed about the reprogramming decision. Resulting images had never been directly handed over to the Soviet scientists lest doing so should violate the 1972 joint space agreement signed by both countries. Science quoted Goddard Space Flight Center’s Dr. William Nordberg, scientist responsible for the reprogramming, as saying, “They knew where they could buy them.” Science also reported that the Soviet scientists had ordered the Landsat images from the U.S. Geological Survey’s Sioux Falls distribution center. Dr. Nordberg denied that any of the reprogrammed imagery had been done for “economic espionage.” (Science, 8 Aug 75, 441—2)
The U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution [see 29 Oct.] calling for wider observance of international agreements on peaceful uses of outer space, and providing for continued U.S. work on new international accords relating to space. Among these were a moon treaty, principles governing direct television broadcasting by satellite, and legal issues involved in remote sensing of earth from space. The resolution also called for continuing review of ways to help developing countries apply space technology. (SBD, 26 Nov 75, 140)
The first airborne terminal for an Air Force communications satellite system was being installed in a C—141 aircraft as part of a flight-test program to develop a system for transmitting high-priority messages throughout the world via Air Force repeater satellites. In addition to the C—141 terminal, the system included six additional airborne and four ground terminals. Results of the 6-mo test would help DOD decide whether the terminals should be produced in quantity. (AFSC Release OIP 303.74)
NASA had awarded a $45.8-million contract to Radio Corporation of America Astro-Electronics Div. to design and build eight Tiros-N third generation meteorological satellites. The 635-kg Tiros-N (Television InfraRed Operational Satellite) would have 4 times the payload capacity of the previous generation of metsats, and was expected to be able to forecast weather 2 days in advance with accuracy equal to the 1-day predictions. In addition to providing day and night imagery, the Tiros-N spacecraft would take atmospheric and sea-surface temperature readings; measure proton, electron, and alpha-particle activity surrounding the earth; and collect data from weather platforms on balloons and from ocean buoys. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 1)
Scientists believed that light flashes observed by Skylab 4 crew members during their 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974 mission as they flew through the South Atlantic Anomaly—a slight asymmetry in the earth’s magnetic field where the Van Allen radiation belt dipped unusually low over Brazil—were a previously unsuspected form of radiation, Science magazine reported. The radiation seemed to consist of atomic nuclei heavier than hydrogen which, when stripped of electrons, would carry multiple positive electric charges. The astronauts had seen the flashes when the spacecraft cabin was dark and they were preparing for sleep. Scientists suspected that the flashes were stimulated within the retina of the eye by the high-energy cosmic-ray particles. Normally earth was shielded from cosmic rays by the magnetic field, but strong penetrating cosmic rays could reach as far into the field as the Skylab orbit. Because the magnetic-field shielding of the earth weakened toward the geomagnetic poles, it was possible to predict variations in cosmic-ray exposure as Skylab moved away from the poles. During two test periods, light-flash observations of Astronaut William R. Pogue showed a close correlation with exposure variations. (Pinsky et al., Science, 30 May 75, 928—930; Sullivan, NYT, 29 May 75, 10) The new space agency’s symbol was a rounded “e,” for European, on a globe representing earth, with fine lines suggesting both orbit and axis and a white dot representing a satellite in space. (ESRO—ESA Releases 20 May 75, 23 May 75, 2 June 75) 30 May—8 June: The 31st Annual Paris Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport in France. New restrictions on flight demonstrations by high-performance aircraft, imposed by the French government after the 1973 Air Show crash of the Soviet Tu —144 supersonic transport, had placed the show’s emphasis on displays of the latest aerospace hardware and technology from throughout the world. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the general turndown in the economy throughout the western world had caused a decline of 20% in exhibitors from the 1973 show. France emphasized the cooperative nature of its major programs, displaying the French—British Concorde SST, the French—German Alpha Jet trainer-attack aircraft, the French—British Jaguar close-air support aircraft, and the multinational A—300B twin-engine wide-body transport. The U.S. pavilion reflected the changing environment at the show, reserving 66% of its floor space for company exhibits restricted to industry visitors; the remaining 33% contained exhibits open to the general public. In 1973 60% was exhibitor space and 40% for the general public. Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. displayed aircraft that were potential replacements for the Boeing 707 and McDonnell DC— 8 on commercial airlines. The Boeing aircraft, a three-engine member of the 7X7 family, incorporated the NASA-developed supercritical wing. “Blue Planet” was the theme of the public section of the U.S. pavilion which emphasized technological fallout and practical uses on earth of space technology. Included were full-scale models of the Viking spacecraft scheduled for launch to Mars later in the year, and of Martin Marietta Corp.’s large space telescope. The 80 participating British companies emphasized their country’s capability in avionics and equipment and aerospace technology. Among the new aircraft exhibited by the British were the BN2 Islander, a floating aircraft for service between islands; the Lock-spieser LDA— 1, for cargo and agricultural uses; and a new version of the BAC 111 fighter aircraft. West Germany’s display stressed its participation in international consortiums as a major hope for continuing growth. Messerschmitt— Boelkow—Blohm GmbH pointed out in its display that 70% of its revenues in 1974 had been derived from multinational projects. (Av Wk, 2 June 75, 14-20; 9 June 75, 12-17)
Indecision and lack of a national policy had prevented the U.S. from having its own domestic communications satellite system after 9 yr of planning, a Washington Star article quoted Communications Satellite Corp. President Joseph V. Charyk as saying. In less than 10 yr a global comsat system developed under U.S. leadership was carrying more than two-thirds of the world’s transocean communications. Canada had had its own since 1972. The problem, Charyk said, was that, after the success of the global system, “everybody wanted in.” Companies, including American Telephone & Telegraph Co., Western Union Telegraph Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., RCA Corp., and Fairchild Industries, Inc., expressed interest in developing a domestic system. The Federal Communications Commission, whose job it was to decide who would operate such a system, seemed only intent upon keeping ComSatCorp and AT&T from dominating the field. Quoting Charyk, the Star said the net effect of this lack of a positive policy by the White House, Congress, and the regulatory agencies was that all the U.S. had to date were two or three earth stations using reproductions of the Canadian system. Despite the problems, Charyk said that two of ComSatCorp’s domestic programs were nearing operational stages: Marisat, a maritime comsat planned for a summer 1975 launch, and Comstar 1, scheduled for launch in 1976. ComSatCorp would also participate with several European countries and Canada in the Aerosat program to test the use of comsats for aircraft navigation. However, Charyk said that, under the “open skies” policies of the FCC , ComSatCorp had no guarantees of permanent service. “It is hard to get customers with these rules in effect.” (Snider, WStar, 20 June 75, D7)
The Peoples Republic of China announced the launch of its fifth earth satellite, third launched this year. Reuters, quoted in the New York Times, said observers believed it had been a step toward Peking’s first manned space flight. The fourth China spacecraft, launched 26 Nov., had been recovered, leading observers to believe the Chinese engineers had perfected soft-landing techniques. Weights of the three craft launched this year had not been disclosed, to hide the capacity of the type of rocket used for launch, nor had the current announcement disclosed the satellite’s orbit or height. (NYT, 18 Dec 75, 26; New China News Agency, in FBIS 243, 17 Dec 75)
The current fleet of supersonic transports—including the 16 Anglo-French Concordes and 14 Soviet Tu—144s flying or scheduled for service—would cause minimal damage to the ozone layer, Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, Director of the Dept, of Transportation’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program, announced at a press briefing. Citing a 3-yr DOT study, “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft,” Dr. Grobecker said it would require 125 Concordes flying 4.5 hr daily to cause a minimally detectable change in the ozone layer. However, the study concluded that future expansion of stratospheric jet fleets should be carefully monitored. Recommendations made by the study included development of engines to meet specific nitrogen oxide-emission standards, development of low-sulfur aviation fuels, and establishment of stratospheric air-quality standards and engine-emission regulations. (AP, NYT, 22 Jan 75, 33; Robinson, Av Wk, 27 Jan 75, 16—17) 22 —25 January: NASA launched Landsat 2 (Landsat—B), formerly called Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS-B), from Western Test Range at 9:56 am PST on a two-stage Thor-Delta booster supplemented by nine strap-on rockets. The satellite entered a near-polar orbit with a 918.23-km apogee, 912.89-km perigee, 103.32-min period, and 99.09° inclination. Primary objective of the mission was to acquire multispectral imagery over the U.S. and foreign countries in quantity sufficient to improve remote-sensing interpretative techniques and to further demonstrate the practiced application of Landsat data. Secondary objectives were to acquire sufficient multispectral coverage over the U.S. to supply data requirements for the Applications System Verification Tests for at least 1 yr, to acquire multispectral coverage for at least 2 yr over the major agricultural areas of the world to illustrate further applications of Landsat imagery for crop inventory, and to demonstrate successful operation of the Data Collection System. A 3-day delay in the launch changed the initial orbital phasing of Landsat 2 relative to Landsat 1 (launched as Erts 1 on 23 July 1972) into a 12- to 6-day repeat cycle instead of the planned 9-day cycle. However, an orbital correction maneuver beginning 27 Jan. and ending 6 Feb. altered phasing to a 9-day repeat cycle. The payload separated from the launch vehicle 50 min 3 sec after launch, followed by solar-panel deployment and earth acquisition using the attitude-control system. The command system was turned on automatically, permitting activation of the payload by ground stations. During the night of 22—23 Jan. the mechanical integrity of the wideband video tape recorder was verified, Data-Collection System (DCS) activated, and data-collection platform experiment data transmitted. By 12:00 pm EST 23 Jan. all spacecraft systems were operating and by 25 Jan. the wideband transmitter, wideband video tape recorder, multispectral scanner (MSS), and return-beam vidicon (RBV) were turned on, and operating normally. Teaming up with Landsat 1, the 953-kg Landsat 2 would provide repetitive coverage of almost the entire earth to demonstrate the practical benefits of resources management from space for NASA in cooperation with the Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Dept, of the Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and various state, local, and foreign organizations. Experiments included the cooperative NASA—DOA—NOAA Large Area Crop Inventory (LACIE), which combined crop-acreage measurements derived from Landsat data with meteorological information from ground stations and NOAA satellites to assess crop yields and make production forecasts. During the first yr of operation, LACIE would concentrate on U.S.-grown wheat, but the experiment would later be expanded to other crops and other regions. Other experiments included land-use survey and mapping; mineral resources, geological, structural, and land-form surveys; water resources studies; marine and ocean surveys; meteorological and environmental studies; and interpretative techniques development. Data were being transmitted to three NASA tracking and data-acquisition facilities at Fairbanks, Al.; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md. In addition, Canada and Brazil operated Landsat ground data-acquisition stations and Italy and Iran were constructing similar facilities. Data received from the satellite were sent to the NASA Data Processing Facility at Goddard Space Flight Center where 1300 images, covering 45 million sq km, could be processed each week. The data would then be forwarded to the Federal Data Center and made available to the public. The Landsat mission was part of a U.S. program to develop remotesensing methods for improved management of earth’s resources. In addition to Landsat 1 and 2, the program included remote-sensor instrument development; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; low-, intermediate-, and high-altitude aircraft flights; and Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP) experiments completed during the 1973 manned Skylab missions. (NASA MORs, 9, 23 Jan 75; NASA Releases 74—329, 75-31)
The 14-nation Arab League, joined by 6 other African and MidEastern states in a 20-nation satellite organization, had finished initial technical and economic feasibility studies for an Arab satellite-communications network and were beginning to define specific technical requirements for the system, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Program goals were to meet telecommunications requirements of Arabic-speaking states in North Africa and the Middle East for police work, weather broadcasting, civil aviation communications, and shipping, and to expand Arab technology into space. The Arab States Broadcasting Union estimated immediate need of 15 radio channels for direct broadcast of educational and cultural programs to remote areas, and 2 TV channels each for general and educational broadcasting. Estimated need of the Arab countries by 1976 would be as many as 1060 telephone, teletypewriter, and telegraph channels, and up to 6200 channels for this traffic by mid-1984. Av Wk reported that, although the first satellites and initial ground stations would be bought from Western countries, the long-term goal was to shift operation and control to Arab nationals after 6 mo. The system, which would provide communications and broadcast coverage for 95% of the Arab world, would include a main orbiting satellite, a standby orbiting satellite to replace the prime satellite in case of failure, and a reserve satellite kept on the ground ready for quick launch in case of satellite failure. (Ropelewski, Av Wk, 21 July 75, 56 -59)
France would begin deactivating its space center at Kourou, French Guiana, in September, the New York Times reported. A space center spokesman was quoted as saying, “We’ll have to put the space center to sleep for a while because of lack of funds.” The deactivation did not mean that the French were abandoning their ambition to achieve independence from the U.S. in space operations but that it would take longer than originally thought. The European space program at Kourou would resume with launches of several experimental rockets scheduled in 1979 and a satellite launch planned for the 1980s. Since its establishment in April 1968, the Kourou center had launched more than 225 balloons, satellites, and sounding rockets. Its location 5° north of the equator made Kourou especially suitable for equatorial launches. The largest of its disappointments had been the failure of the Europa 2 launch vehicle in 1971, a program finally abandoned in 1973 in favor of the Ariane booster. (Howe, ATT, 14 June 75)
A significant influence on NASA’s ability to maintain viable programs in the face of possibly unstable funding will be the extent to which commercial and foreign government users participate in the development and financial support of future payloads,” Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Av Wk interviewed the Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, Philip E. Culbertson, who said that it would be better, in the long term, to move into a position where more organizations outside NASA were sponsoring and paying for missions and payloads. The agency was encouraged by the interest of industries in flying and funding Space Shuttle missions involving a wide range of basic scientific and technical operations. Foreign reimbursable payloads, already an important part of NASA launch operations, were seen as an even iarger factor in Shuttle payloads development. Japan, already holding discussions with NASA to lay the groundwork for a viable national space program, was considered a serious Shuttle customer; Japan would like to develop both scientific and earth applications programs in the communications, navigation, and weather satellite fields.. Canada’s interest in positioning domestic communications satellites over its territory would continue into the Shuttle era. Even individual Soviet scientists had made inquiries into the possibilities of flying payloads on the U.S. Shuttle. Culbertson pointed out that, unlike earlier NASA manned space programs that included scientific funding in overall program budgets, NASA in-house Shuttle payload development was the sole responsibility of the specific NASA disciplines themselves. NASA’s FY 1976 budget request contained from $50 to $100 million for various efforts that could evolve into Shuttle payloads, and the budget for FY 1977 would markedly increase payload funding. However, with the budget crunch, funding for Shuttle payloads would compete directly with other programs and the payload proposals “will have to stand on their own merit.” Culbertson also said that major decisions would have to be made on how long to keep which expendable launch vehicles in the program. In another interview, NASA Spacelab Program Director Douglas R. Lord said that upcoming major decisions concerning Spacelab included a follow-on procurement plan for Spacelab hardware and priorities on how often ESRO (European Space Research Organization) and other crews and experimental hardware would fly on Shuttle— Spacelab missions. Lord said that operations of overall Spacelab functions would probably be maintained separately from payload operations: Johnson Space Center was the logical place to handle overall operations, and Marshall Space Flight Center was the leading candidate for the Spacelab payload operations center. Goddard Space Flight Center had expressed interest in handling operational needs of the high-energy experiments on Spacelab pallets. (Covault, Av Wk, 17 March 75, 59- 60) 18March: “The expertise and facilities of LeRC [Lewis Research Center], as well as other NASA centers, are being considered by ERDA [Energy Research and Development Administration] as part of its overall definition of a total institutional structure required to carry out the nation’s energy R&D program,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., ERDA Administrator said in a letter to Representative Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio). The letter was a reply to correspondence from members of the Ohio congressional delegation and Cleveland businessmen and industrialists to President Ford calling for increased use of LeRC talent to meet the nation’s energy crisis. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Seamans noted that the newly established ERDA was the lead Federal agency for managing national energy R&D. ERDA intended to use the expertise and facilities of other Federal agencies where it was feasible and in the national interest with respect to cost, timeliness, and program management. LeRC, NASA’s lead center for aerospace propulsion and power, was already involved in ERDA-sponsored projects in solar heating and cooling, wind energy, and topping cycles to increase the efficiency of coal-fueled steam plants. But LeRC would continue its main task to work on propulsion technology, conducting energy research in support of ERDA “when it was consistent with the requirements of its principal mission within NASA.” (Text, letter to Mosher from Fletcher and Seamans, 18 March 75)
NASA’s use of the firefly s two light-producing chemicals, luciferin and luciferase, to test for the chemical presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), an energy-storage compound present in every living cell, had increased interest in luminescence as a tool for medical research, the New York Times reported. Research done in 1948 by Johns Hopkins Univ. scientists had demonstrated that ATP was the third essential ingredient—along with luciferin and luciferase—necessary for the firefly’s glow, and that the amount of light generated was directly proportionate to the level of ATP present. The Hopkins scientists had also developed a simple test for life itself, since luciferin and luciferase added to any living matter could reproduce the firefly’s glimmer. NASA applied this information, with more sophisticated lightdetection instruments, to develop a test for life on Mars for use aboard the Viking spacecraft (launched 20 Aug.) NASA scientists working with the firefly chemicals at Goddard Space Flight Center had developed many applications, including a method of detecting bacteria in water; this permitted speedy diagnosis of urinary infections, as well as testing the effect of various antibiotics on particular infections. Univ. of Calif, scientists continued the research, adapting the techniques for related work in measuring creatine phosphokinase (CPK) in the bloodstream. CPK, present in all human blood, was produced in abnormally high quantities during muscle-cell degeneration that accompanied cardiac arrest or muscular dystrophy. CPK could be treated to produce ATP and, with the application of firefly chemicals, to produce a glow proportionate to the amount of CPK in the bloodstream. Researchers had used the measurements as a quick blood test to tell whether a patient had suffered a heart attack. (NYT, 25 Aug 75) 26 August—3 September: NASA launched Symphonie 2, France and West Germany’s second experimental communications satellite at 9:42 pm EDT 26 Aug. from Eastern Test Range. A three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle boosted the spacecraft into a synchronous transfer orbit with a 37 974-km apogee, 413-km perigee, 678.3-min period, and 13.2° inclination. On 29 Aug. at 11:48 am EDT, ground controllers activated the onboard liquid-fueled apogee motor to circularize the. orbit at geosynchronous altitude. By 31 Aug. Symphonie 2 was in an orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 35 364-km perigee, 23-hr 47-min period, and O.CP inclination. NASA’s primary objective for the mission—to launch the Symphonie 2 into a synchronous transfer orbit with sufficient accuracy to enable the satellite to accomplish its operational mission—had been successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on 3 Sept. When finally positioned at 11.5° west longitude over the equator, the 402-kgSymphonie 2 would provide 1200 telephone, 8 voice, and 2 TV channels for experimental communications between Europe and the African and South American continents. Second of two experimental comsats developed by the French-West German Consortium Industriel Franee-Allemand pour le Satellite Symphonie (CIFAS), under the direction of Germany’s Gesellschaft fur Weltraumforschung GFW and France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Symphonie 2 would expand the French-West German experimental satellite TV and telegraph communications program begun with the launch of Symphonie 1 on 18 Dec. 1974. In October 1973 NASA had agreed to provide the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis, and in June 1974 had signed a launch services contract with the consortium. Estimated cost of hardware and services was $12 million. Goddard Space Flight Center, under the direction of the Office of Space Science, was responsible for the launch vehicle and for limited tracking during initial activities. When the satellite separated from the vehicle third stage, the Symphonie Project Operations Group in France and West Germany would assume operational responsibility. (NASAMORs S—492— 204— 75— 02, 25 July, 3 Sept; GSFC SSR, 31 Aug 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21—27 Aug 75; NASA Release 75— 234)
Communications Satellite Corp., U.S. representative in the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, transmitted its twelfth annual report to the President, covering the activities of ComSat from 1 July 1974—30 June 1975. Two more Intelsat IV satellites had been orbited, Intelsat IV F—8 21 Nov. 1974 over the Pacific Ocean and Intelsat IV F— 1 22 May 1975 over the Indian Ocean. A third satellite, Intelsat IV F—6, failed to achieve orbit when the launch vehicle malfunctioned. By 30 June 1975 a network of 112 antennas—27 more than last year—at 88 earth stations was providing 379 ComSat pathways, with 107 countries leasing satellite services, an increase of 7 over the previous year. Comsat General Corp., a subsidiary, had entered into a joint venture with the European Space Agency and the Government of Canada on 3 Dec. 1974 to provide satellite capacity for an Aerosat (aeronautical satellite) communications test and evaluation program. Comsat General and International Business Machines Corp. had notified the Federal Communications Commission that they would seek to enter the domestic satellite business with one or more partners. ComSat’s earth stations in Connecticut and California neared readiness for Marisat (maritime satellite) communications services in the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean areas. ComSat reported a net income of $44 918 000, or $4.49 per share, up from $36 299 000 or $3.63 per share in 1973. (Text) During August: “The importance of space to our defensive military effort can only increase in the future,” Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, retiring commander of the Air Force Systems Command and NASA’s Apollo Program Director from 1964— 69, said in an interview. Gen. Phillips speculated that aircraft, including the B— 1 bomber under development by the U.S., would be an important part of the military force “for as many decades ahead as anyone cares to project.” However, he saw energy scarcities increasing the need for training simulators and alternative aircraft fuels. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 75, 1) September 1975
The Japanese National Space Development Agency announced the award of a contract to the Mitsubishi Electric Corp. to design two experimental stationary communications satellites for launch in FY 1978. Design was expected to be complete by 20 Sept. Each 130-kg satellite, to be launched by a Japanese N rocket, would be used to study technology for launching stationary satellites, satellitetracking technology, and attitude-control techniques. (Kyodo, FBIS-Japan, 3 April 75, C2)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s board of governors had authorized issuance of a request for firm fixed-price proposals for design, development, manufacture, and test of seven Intelsat V satellites, with options for up to eight additional satellites. In 1979 Intelsat V satellites would replace the Intelsat IV—A series to be deployed in September 1975. Intelsat V satellites would have increased capacity by a fourfold use of the 6/4 ghz frequency band, use of both antenna-beam separation and dual-polarization concepts; introduction of the 14/11 ghz band for limited coverage in high-traffic regions; and a maximum effective bandwidth of 2280 mhz. A single satellite design would be used in all three ocean regions of the Intelsat global systems. Intelsat V satellites were expected to have a capacity of 12 000 two-way voice circuits plus one color TV channel. (INTELSAT Release 75—8)
HASPA—the Navy’s high-altitude superpressured powered aerostat— failed to reach its predicted altitude when the balloon-inflation mechanism malfunctioned. When fully extended, HASPA had measured 101.5 m long and 20.4 m in diameter. The launch at Kennedy Space Center had been planned as a 3- to 5-hr flight; during launch, the mylar container was inflated with the helium contained in the upper third and restrained there by a collar that would drop away to give the gas room to expand with altitude. The mechanism failed and the balloon inverted at 11.26 km, releasing the helium through a vent in the nose of the balloon, which impacted at KSC a half hour after launch. HASPA had been designed to function as a low-level satellite for a variety of payloads. (Spaceport News, 14 Nov 75; ETR PIO, interview, 5 Nov 75)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization—had awarded a 20-mo fixed-price contract for $220 000 to the Messerschmitt—Boelkow—Blohm Co. of Munich for design, fabrication, and test of a prototype lightweight deployable solar array for use in synchronous satellites. The new array would provide 30 to 33 watts per kg at the end of a 7- to 10-yr mission, compared to the current level of 10 to 15 watts per kg. (INTELSAT Release 75—20)
Soyuz 20, the unmanned Soviet spacecraft launched from Baykonur 17 Nov., docked automatically withSalyut 4 using onboard radio devices and computer installations for a program of “testing unit constructions and onboard systems. . .in joint flight,” Tass announced. Salyut 4, the orbiting space station, had been visited by the crew of Soyuz 17 for almost 30 days and by the crew of Soyuz 18 for more than 60 days. The Soyuz 20 mission had been analyzed as transfer of fuel to Salyut 4; in orbit since 26 Dec. 1974, the space station was thought to be running low on maneuvering fuel. Reporters had speculated that a new two-man crew might be sent to Salyut 4 later this year for a stay of 3 mo or longer that would break the 84-day record set by U.S. astronauts in 1974. The value of the automatic docking for resupply would be the economy of not sending men with each flight, although the Soviets had never indicated the cost of their launches. Tass reported that the “space complex Salyut-4— Soyuz-20” was in an orbit with apogee 367 km, perigee 343 km, 51.6° inclination, and 91.4 min period of revolution. (IF Post, 21 Nov 75, B14; NYT, 21 Nov 75, 25; FBIS No. 225, 19 Nov 75, No. 226, 20 Nov 75; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 108) 19 November—23 December: Atmosphere Explorer—E, third in a series of new deep-dipper spacecraft designed to investigate the ionosphere, was launched from Eastern Test Range aboard a Delta vehicle at 9:07 pm EST (0206GMT) into an almost perfect orbit: apogee, 3026 km; perigee, 157 km; inclination, 19.7°; period, 118.1 min. In orbit the satellite became Explorer 55. Major difference between the original and new generation of atmosphere explorers was the unusually large onboard propulsion system that enabled the later spacecraft to move themselves up or down in space by hundreds of km or go from highly elliptical to circular orbits. The name “deep-dippers” meant that the spacecraft could drop into the atmosphere and pull out again, taking measurements only while in the upper reaches of the thermosphere. This region, important because it absorbed most ultraviolet light and heat received from the sun and because movement of that heat determined the structure of the upper atmosphere, had been difficult to study because the altitude was too high for all aircraft and most balloons and too low for other satellites. The dipping orbit prevented accumulation of excessive heat in the metal skins of the AE spacecraft. Explorer 55 would also carry a backscatter ultraviolet spectrophotometer to obtain a vertical profile and density measurements of the ozone layer between 20°N and S; the measurements would be compared with those from Nimbus 4, launched in 1970, to evaluate the long-term accuracy of the Nimbus instrumentation. A mission operations report 23 Dec. said Explorer 55 had completed more than 400 orbits and all subsystems were performing well. (NASA Release 75— 290, 70-29, 72-212; KSC Release 266-75; SBD, 21 Nov 75, 114; KSC Spaceport News, 31 Oct 75, 3; MORs 13 Nov 75, 3 Dec 75, 23 Dec 75)
According to International Telecommunications Union figures, a satellite had been launched every 3 days in 1974. Of the total of 124 launched, 18 belonged wholly or partly to the U.S., and the Soviet Union accounted for 95. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 3) November 1975
Predictions of a trend toward harsher winters for North America had been put in question by satellite monitoring of snowcover over the northern hemisphere during the past 9 yr, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service had published a document, “Monthly Winter Snowline Variation in the Northern Hemisphere from Satellite Records, 1966—1975,” containing the most complete record available of hemisphere snowcover. Analysis of the charts had revealed no significant change in North American snowcover during the entire period. Predictions of harsher weather had raised the possibility of southward movement of the polar ice cap, which could be caused by a drop of only a few degrees in average winter temperature. The document concluded that “Lack of systematic increase in . . . snow cover tends to contradict the evidence . . . that the current climate is changing adversely.” (NOAA Release 75—217)
NASA successfully launched Intelsat IV F—l for the Communications Satellite Corp., as agent for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, from Eastern Test Range at 6:04 pm EDT. The 1400-kg satellite entered the desired synchronous transfer orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 534-km perigee, 10-hr 40-min period, and 26? inclination. ComSatCorp successfully fired the apogee motor at 6:45 pm EDT on 24 May, placing the satellite in synchronous orbit over the Indian Ocean (36 184-km apogee, 35 704-km perigee, 24-hr 4-min period, and 0.5° inclination) with a final operational position to be at 61° east longitude. When it became operational in June, it would replace Intelsat IV F—5 as the primary operating satellite in the Indian Ocean area in the global 6-active-satellite Intelsat network; it would be able to transmit 3500 two-way telephone conversations or 12 TV channels. The launch was the second recent attempt to place an Intelsat IV satellite over the Indian Ocean; on 20 Feb., the first attempt failed and Intelsat IV F-6 had to be destroyed when the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle tumbled out ctf control. INTELSAT launched its first comsat, Intelsat I F—l {Early Bird), on 6 April 1965. Between 1967 and 1970 12 Intelsat II and III satellites were launched before the Intelsat IV launches began in 1971. (NASA MORs, 16 May 75, 25 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—125; NASA Audio News, 23 May 75; GSFC WklySSR, 25—28 May 75; Salmanson, Atlas mgr., NASA Hq., interview, 25 May 77)
NASA commemorated the 15th anniversary of the 12 Aug. 1960 launch of Echo 1, world’s first communications satellite. Visible to millions around the world, the 30-m gas-inflated mylar (0.0013-cm thick aluminum-coated plastic) balloon served as a passive radio reflector in space, bouncing signals from one point on earth to another. Its first transmission sent the recorded voice of President Eisenhower from Goldstone, Calif., to Holmdel, N.J.; during its first year in orbit, it served in approximately 150 experiments, including voice, teletype and facsimile communications. Echo Vs large size, small mass, and extreme sensitivity to solar radiation pressures and aerodynamic drag helped scientists confirm orbital behavior theory. Despite its original 1-yr life expectancy, Echo 1 remained in orbit for nearly 8 yr until, leaking gas through its skin bombarded by meteorites, it reentered the atmosphere and burned up 23 May 1968. (NASA Releases 61—177, 75—217; A&A 68, 23 May)
Comsat General Corp. of the Communications Satellite Corp. announced its intent to pay MCI Communications Corp. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. $1.5 million each for their common stock in the CML Satellite Corp. Restructured in 1972 by Comsat General Corp. and with thirds owned by Comsat, Lockheed, and MCI, CML was to have entered the domestic-communications-satellite business but had stopped short because of the financial difficulties of MCI and Lockheed. On 3 July 1974, Comsat and International Business Machines Corp. had announced plans to buy out the shares in CML owned by Lockheed and MCI, subject to approval by the Federal Communications Commission. Restrictions imposed in a 23 January 1975 ruling by the FCC—concerned that the combination of the two companies would create a monopoly—required that no one partner own less than 10% or more than 49% of the stock. Under this “balanced CML” ruling, Comsat and IBM were seeking a third partner; to that end, Comsat was acquiring all of the stock so that it could be reapportioned in the proposed new structure. (Comsat General Release 75—45)
NASA commemorated the 15th anniversary of the launch of Tiros 1 (Television Infrared Observation Satellite), the world’s first weather satellite. Since its launch 1 April 1960 at Cape Canaveral on a Thor-Delta booster, 30 experimental and operational weather satellites of increasing complexity had been launched to provide continuous information on earth’s environment. Over the 15-yr span the weather satellites had taken more than 2.2 million photographs while traveling through 12.1 billion km of space. Not a single major hurricane or storm had gone undetected or untracked. President Ford issued a statement in recognition of the Tiros 1 anniversary: “More accurate daily weather forecasts. . .have had an immeasurable impact in making the lives of millions more pleasant, productive, and secure. No major storm anywhere goes undetected by NASA or NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] satellites. We can be proud that people everywhere can benefit from this practical application of U.S. space science and technology.” (NASA Release 75—73; NASA Activities, April 75)
NASA executed a $3.65-million supplement to a cost-plus-award-fee contract with Serv-Air, Inc., to continue to provide aircraft for earth-observation and astronaut-proficiency training at Johnson Space Center. Contract provisions also called for maintenance, modification, and related ground support of the JSC aircraft; maintenance and ground support of transient aircraft; engineering, design, fabrication, and installation of electronic and mechanical systems, subsystems, components and equipment; and related logistic functions. This agreement provided for the third and final year of the contract which had an estimated total value of $7.57 million. (JSC Release 75 —23) 1 —4 April: In Montreal, the 89-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Organization held its third ordinary meeting of signatories in conjunction with the 25th anniversary of the Canadian signatory, the Canadian Overseas Telecommunications Corp. Significant accomplishments of the meeting included agreement that domestic services provided for Chile by INTELSAT would be considered on the same basis as international services, thus increasing Chile’s voting representation on the board of governors; that any signatory owning shares in INTELSAT totalling 1.25% or more would be entitled to representation on the board of governors; and that the capital ceiling of $500 million for payments and contractual commitments for development of Intelsat V satellites, planned for launch in the late 1970s, would have to be increased by from $200 to‘$400 million. (INTELSAT Release, April 75)
The Commerce Dept, had awarded Aeronutronic Ford, Inc., a contract for $5 581 824 to design and build a space environment monitor for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which had commissioned it to make constant measurements of energetic solar particles when Tiros-N would be launched in 1978. Tiros-N, a joint mission of NOAA and NASA, would be first of a new series of polar-orbiting satellites to be operated by the National Environmental Satellite Service as “a major improvement in our capability of monitoring environmental phenomena,” according to Dr. George H. Ludwig, director of NESS’s Office of Operations. Detecting changes in the space environment and learning how they affect conditions on earth would help scientists to predict and prepare for these effects. The NOAA space-environment monitor, the only set of sensors facing away from the earth, would provide much of the needed data. (DOC Release G 75—180)
The European Space Research Organization (ESRO) announced the award of a $4.4 million [3.5 million accounting units] contract to a European consortium to provide software for ESRO’s Meteosat meteorological satellite, scheduled for launch in April 1977. Under the terms of the contract the consortium, consisting of companies in France, United Kingdom, West Germany, Belgium, Italy, and Sweden, would provide data-acceptance capability, image processing, operational mission support, data archiving, analysis and dissemination of image data, and monitoring of the overall data-process-ing system. Meteosat, ESRO’s first applications satellite, would record and transmit data for more accurate weather forecasting. (ESRO Release, 7 April 75)
X-ray satellites—including Uhuru (Explorer 42 launched 12 Dec. 1970) and Oso 7 (Orbiting Solar Observatory launched 29 Sept 1971)—had revealed a previously unidentified class of x-ray sources associated with very old star clusters, Science reported. In at least five documented cases, satellites had detected x-rays from globular star clusters coming from above and below the pinwheel disk of the Milky Way galaxy. These clusters, left behind when the rest of the primordial galactic matter fell into the disk of the galaxy over 10 billion yrs ago, still orbited the galactic center, bound to it by gravitational forces. Scientific evidence had indicated that the birth of new stars within clusters ended soon after the formation of the clusters themselves; the clusters had not been expected to contain any young binary star systems, those believed to make up the majority of galactic x-ray sources. This fact, along with the finding that sources were much more plentiful in globular clusters than in the galactic disk, indicated that some different process of x-ray production was at work. Scientists offered three explanations for the findings: existence of very large black holes, 1000 times as massive as the sun, within the clusters; a smaller black hole steadily fed with matter from the surrounding disk; and origin of the x-ray emissions in binary stars behaving like x-ray binaries in the galactic disk but with very different origins. Scientists were hoping that two more x-ray satellites, U.K.’s Ariel 5 (launched 15 Oct. 1974) and Ans 1 (Netherlands Astronomical Satellite launched 30 Aug. 1975), would contribute additional data to the study. (Metz, Science, 26 Sept 75, 1073—74)
U.S. intelligence reports indicated that the Soviet Union had fired 22 missiles and orbited 9 satellites in July, making it one of the most active months in Soviet space history, the Baltimore Sun reported. In an impressive display on 2 July, the Soviets fired 11 ballistic missiles from four different sites within an hour, launched eight SSN—6 submarine-based rockets at 8-sec intervals, and launched an SS—7, SS—8, and SS—11 all within 2 min. Other tests included submarine missile launchings by northern and far eastern fleets, medium- and intermediate-range missile firings from Kapustin Yar, and a test flight of the new SS—17 missile which could carry four warheads. The month’s only failure was the malfunction of the second stage of a SS—19 missile, a vehicle believed to be capable of delivering six nuclear warheads to separate targets over ranges of 9260 km. The nine satellite launches included six Cosmos satellites, a Molniya communications satellite, a Meteor meteorological satellite, and the manned Soyuz 19, the Soviet spacecraft participating in the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (Corddry, B Sun, 14 Aug 75, A2)
NASA’s Earth Resources Technology Satellite, ERTS, had been renamed Landsat, NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews announced at a Landsat—B prelaunch press briefing in Washington, D.C. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, would be called Landsat 1; ERTS-B, scheduled for launch 19 Jan., would be designated Landsat 2 once in orbit. Mathews said that, since NASA planned a SEASAT to study the oceans (see 9 Jan.), Landsat seemed a more appropriate name for a satellite that studied the land. Landsat Program Manager Harry Mannheimer said that Landsat— B would be launched into the same orbital plane as Landsat 1 but 180° out of phase. Between them the two satellites would retrace the identical ground track every 9 days rather than the 18-day interval of one satellite. The additional coverage would enable scientists to study dynamic phenomena more effectively. Mannheimer said that a significant improvement over Landsat 1 was Landsat—B’s increase in command storage, adding flexibility in commanding the various instruments while the spacecraft was out of view of a ground station. James R. Morrison, Landsat Resources Survey Program Manager, said that, whereas the emphasis of the Landsat 1 mission was on experimentation, the emphasis for Landsat—B would be on fewer but larger scale applications of remote-sensing information to real resource problems. Of the 120 investigators—compared with 320 investigators during the Landsat 1 mission—57 were U.S.-sponsored and 52 were from foreign countries. During the rigorous selection, preference had been given to investigations that included direct participation and cost-sharing by bona fide users in both the public and private sectors. New with Landsat— B were the Applications Systems Verification Tests (ASVT), based on results of Landsat 1, to further develop, demonstrate, and document Landsat results. The ASVTs were larger in design and scope than earlier investigations, essentially beyond the capability of any one investigator to manage. ASVTs for Landsat—B included a large-area crop inventory experiment (LACIE), ice-warn program, snow-cover and snow-melt prediction program, natural resources information system, and environmental information system. (Text)
The People’s Republic of China had confirmed that its three satellites— China 1, launched 24 April 1970; China 2, launched 3 March 1971; and China 3, launched 26 July 1975—had earth-observation capability, Defense Space Business Daily reported. Although the PRC’s People’s Daily had published cloud photos taken by one of the satellites, and the implication was that the satellites were forerunners of meteorological satellites, their performance suggested the development of higher resolution observation-reconnaissance satellites. All three satellites had been placed into orbits with perigees at reconnaissance altitudes sufficient to cover all targets of interest to the PRC. (SBD, 25 Aug 75, 290]
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $74 998 contract to the Univ. of Fla. Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences for continuation of a freeze-prediction study. A1973 contract had provided for study of the application of satellite thermal and infrared imagery to development of a freeze-prediction model; results were so encouraging that a second contract had been awarded in 1974. Also involved in this effort had been meteorologists from the Lakeland office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and its Environmental Services Center at Auburn, Ala. Freeze-warning information had previously been provided by NOAA’s Ruskin, Fla., facility on the basis of data from 300 recording thermometers operated by a Federal-state agricultural weather system and other reporting stations; the KSC contracts had aimed at developing a computerized system using thermal scanning and infrared imagery from spacecraft and aircraft for more accurate predictions. The study used data from till agencies, including spacecraft readings and actual ground- and leaf-temperature measurements provided by Univ. of Fla. personnel at specific times in selected test areas, combined at KSC for analysis in its earth resources data-analysis facility. The analyzed data had then gone to the university and to NOAA for predictive model development. (KSC Release 294—75)
The Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded a $36.3-million contract to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for building and testing in earth orbit a space laser communications system. The 5-yr contract would produce three synchronous satellites to relay high-data-rate messages by laser to aircraft, ground stations, or other satellites, with a capability of transmitting a billion pieces of data per sec—about 20 times the data volume possible with present commercial communications-satellite systems. The award includes development of the space and ground-station equipment. McDonnell would work on high-accuracy pointing of the laser beams, within 10 millionths of a degree. (St. Louis P-D, 20 Nov 75,13; LA Times, 9 Dec 75, 15C; SBD, 20 Nov 75, 107) 21 November-. Goddard'Space Flight Center awarded Boeing Co. a fixed-price incentive contract for $8 236 000 to provide modules for the first two Atmospheric Explorer missions: AEM—A (heat capacity satellite) and AEM—B (the stratospheric aerosol gas experiment—SAGE). AEM-A, scheduled for launch in 1978, would carry a heat-capacity mapping radiometer that NASA would acquire independently, to gather thermal-inertia data on rock types, location of mineral resources, soil moisture, and vegetation-cover temperature measurements. AEM—B’s SAGE would measure spatial distribution of stratospheric aerosol and ozone on a global basis. It had been scheduled for launch in 1979. (NASA Release 75—299; WSJ, 24 Nov 75, 28)
The People’s Republic of China successfully launched an earth-orbiting satellite into an orbit with 483 km apogee, 173 km perigee, 63° inclination, and 91-min period, the New China News Agency announced. (FBIS No. 230, 26 Nov 75; IF Star, 27 Nov 75, A2)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aeronautics launched Scats (Taiyo)—Solar Radiation and Thermospheric Structure Satellite— from Uchinoura Space Center at 2:25 pm local time after a 10-day delay because of faulty instrumentation. The three-stage MU3C liquid-fueled launch vehicle placed the 86-kg spacecraft into an orbit with a 3130-km apogee, 247-km perigee, 120.2-min period, and 31.5° inclination. The purpose of the satellite was to observe solar and cosmic phenomena. By 25 Feb. the satellite was reported to be functioning normally, with two NASA tracking stations—one in Ecuador and one in Chile—reporting signals fromSrats. (Kyodo, FBIS— Japan, 18-26 Feb 75) Sessions were held in four areas: transportation efficiency, national defense, space applications, and frontier technologies. The more than 500 attendees of the technical sessions listened to papers on computers in aerospace, short-haul aircraft systems, advanced communications, and satellite technology. Harris M. Schurmeir, Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s manager of the Mariner Jupiter—Saturn 1977 project, delivered the von Karman Lecture 24 Feb., “Planetary Exploration: Earth’s New Horizon.” Schurmeir said that, despite American virtuosity in the unfolding drama of solar-system exploration, the never-abating high launch rate of the Soviet Union would make them competitors if the U.S. failed to exercise its mission options in the late 1970s and 1980s. On 25 Feb. Hans E. W. Hoffman, managing director of West Germany’s ERNO Raumfahrttechnik GmbH, said that the development of Spacelab was exactly on schedule, with a complete engineering model to be delivered to NASA in April 1978. The first flight unit would be delivered 1 yr later. The first mission of the Spacelab would be a joint U.S.—European venture. A call for ideas for experiments had netted 243 proposals, from which a selection would be made; the selection process for European payload specialists would begin in 1975. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, addressed the gathering 26 Feb. He noted that, although aerospace technology had been one of the “key drivers” in retaining the U. S. lead in world technology, a feeling of the importance of technology was “not universally shared.” A decline in the national emphasis on technology “has much to do with the decline in productivity in this country.” The increasing cost and complexity of applying new technology had become a vexing national problem. Finding new ways to reduce costs was a key management task that the aerospace business must face. Caspar W. Weinberger, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, said in an address 26 Feb. that satellite-delivered services in Alaska had been so successful that the Alaskan Federation of Natives —a highly representative broad-based grassroots organization—had made them the organization’s top priority. The goal was to achieve an operational satellite service for health, education, and other communications needs. The formation of the Public Service Satellite Users Consortium, consisting of health and educational organizations, represented the first effort to organize a market of small independent users sufficient to attract private investment capital for large-scale technology to meet their collective needs. HEW was investigating the possibility of a “social service satellite” to meet the needs of various public and social service communities by means of an inexpensive ground receiver. The satellite could dramatically reduce the cost of such services while greatly increasing the quality. At the Honors Night Banquet 26 Feb., Chairman Hansen was installed as the 13th president of the AIAA. The 19 newly elected fellows included Hans M. Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, and William H. Phillips of Langley Research Center. Other awards presented at the banquet included: Award Recipient Citation (purpose) (Affiliation) Goddard Award (for contributions in propulsion energy conservation) Robert M. Losey Award (for contributions to meteorology as applied to aeronautics) G. Edward Pendray Award (for contributions to aeronautical and astronautical literature) Sylvanus Albert Reed Award (for contributions to aeronautical engineering design or aeronautical sciences) (for improvement in aerospace, aviation, or astronaut training) Louis W. Hill Award (for enterprise and ingenuity in art and science of space flight) ’ Gordon F. Holbrook (General Motors Corp.) George Rosen (United Aircraft Corp.) Paul W. Kadlec (Continental Air Lines, Inc.) Prof. William R. Sears (U. of Arizona) Prof. Antonio Feni (New York U.) Prof. Hugh H. Hurt, Jr. (U. of Southern Calif.) Dr. Rocco A. Petrone (NASA) For leadership in development of turbo-propeller propulsion systems For identifying factors indicating clear air turbulence and publications on meteorological features of high atmosphere For contributions to aeronautical and astronautical literature since 1938 For advances in air-breathing propulsion and airplane design For contributions to flight safety by development of military and civilian texts and training programs For contributions to space flight technology while Director of KSC during last 6 Apollo missions Award (purpose) Recipient (Affiliation) Citation John Jeffries Award (for contributions to aerospace medical research) Col. Malcolm C. Lancaster (USAF) For clinical research in aerospace medicine Spacecraft Design Award (for advancement in spacecraft, launch vehicle, reentry vehicle, or missile design) Dr. Herbert A. Lassen (TRW, Inc.) For conceptual design of spin-stabilized Pioneers 6-11 using high-gain antennas and communications link for attitude reference Space Science Award (for achievements in studies of physics of atmospheres of celestial bodies and dynamics and energy) Dr. Murray Dryer (NOAA) For contributions to understanding of interplanetary shock phenomena generated by solar disturbances Lawrence Sperry Award (for contributions to advancement of aeronautics) Jan R. Tulinius (Rockwell Inl’l Corp.) For development of advanced theoretical aerodynamic design methods (A&A, Feb 75, April 75; AIAA Releases 10—20 Feb 75; AIAA Bulletin, Aug 74; Fletcher speech, text)
Michael Collins, Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum, and Santiago Astrain, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, signed an agreement to transfer three early Intelsat communications satellites to the Museum as part of its 1976 inaugural display. INTELSAT was providing the museum with a backup model of the INTELSAT’s Early Bird 1, launched 6 Apr. 1965 as the first commercial comsat. A backup model of the second-generation Intelsat II and an engineering model of third-generation Intelsat III satellites would also be sent for display. Fourth-generation satellites would not be represented because they were too large for display. The new Air and Space Museum, located in Washington, D.C., was scheduled to open 4 July 1976. (INTELSAT Release 75—9)
France launched two satellites, Castor and Pollux, on a single Diamant BP—4 booster from Kourou, French Guiana. It was the first time France had orbited two satellites on a single booster. Castor entered orbit with a 1269-km apogee, 273-km perigee, 100.3-min period; and 3(f inclination; Pollux entered orbit with a 1283-km apogee, 270-km perigee, 100.4-min period, and 3(f inclination. The press reported that Castor carried an accelerometer to measure changes in the earth’s atmosphere for a 5-to-6-yr period. Pollux carried a micrometer for experiments in satellite propulsion. (GSFC Wkly SSR, 15—21 May 75;SF, Nov 75, 406; Agence France-Presse, Today, 18 May 75) .
NASA’s Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May 1974 into geosynchronous orbit) began a 6-wk move from its position 35 900 km over the Pacific Ocean west of the Galapagos Islands to a new location above Lake Victoria in eastern Africa. The satellite, which was expected to reach its new location by 1 July, would be checked out in time to participate in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in mid-July. During that mission Ats 6 would track the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and relay TV and data from the two spacecraft to earth, marking the first time a satellite had been used to relay TV from a manned spacecraft. The new location also would bring Ats 6 within range of India for the 1-yr Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) scheduled to begin 1 Aug. During the experiment—a cooperative effort by NASA and the Indian Space Research Organization—the Indian government would relay daily educational TV programs to 5000 villages and cities throughout India. After the experiment, the satellite would be moved back to a position within range of the U.S., where it would be used for further experimentation. (NASA Release 75-153)
NASA’s flying laboratory Galileo II, an instrumented Convair 990, participated in a month-long cooperative investigation of the Arctic seas. Researchers from NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Army, U.S. Navy, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and several Canadian agencies hoped to find methods of measuring critical changes in the Arctic environment that would help environmentalists find out how best to manage Arctic resources. A major objective of the program was an experiment—called the AIDJEX, the Arctic Ice Dynamics Joint Experiment—to investigate the relationship among ice motion, weather, and ocean conditions. Combined data from aircraft- and ground-based investigations would be used to interpret satellite data obtained at the same time. BESMEX, the Bering Sea Marine Mammal Experiment, would study the migration patterns of marine mammals and the relationship between mammal population, migration, and sea-ice conditions. In a third experiment, scientists would measure microwave emission characteristics of polar ice, hoping to find a key to global monitoring of ice distribution by climate and size. This information would aid in predicting the survival rate of offshore drilling rigs. (ARC Release 75-11)
Soviet engineers had been working on a “spaceplane” to carry cosmonauts to and from orbit as part of a long-term project to establish a major space platform in the 1980s, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Western observers had expected the reusable spacecraft to be launched by an expendable booster, but CSM reported that the rumored aim was to fly it from the back of a ramjet-powered boost vehicle that would return to base. The project was thought to be linked with development of a large multiman modular space station that the Soviets expected to assemble in orbit before 1980. CSM reported that U.S. Air Force reconnaissance satellites had noted preparations at the Baykonur Cosmodrome to retest the huge SLX—14 booster, scheduled to launch the station. The SLX—14 had been delayed for 5 yr by a series of mishaps: Two launch complexes had been built for the SLX—14, one of which burned during a 1969 fueling test. Intelligence reports indicated it had been rebuilt. In an August 1975 issue of Sputnik magazine, reprinted from the Soviet Naukal Zhin, U.S.S.R. Chief of Cosmonaut Training Vladimir A. Shatalov confirmed Soviet interest in a reusable space vehicle. Although “the future of cosmonautics is largely connected with longterm orbital stations,” he said, the fact that carrier rockets were extremely expensive and could be used only once was “becoming a serious brake on the development of cosmonautics and relevant research.” Neither the airplane nor the spaceship had proven capable of flying into orbit and then reentering. But there is every reason to believe that in the not-so-distant future aviation and cosmonautics would “draw appreciably closer together.” Shatalov said Soviet and U.S. scientists had already made important high-altitude and highspeed experiments. Shatalov visualized “a new-type spaceship” consisting of a smaller one launched from a larger one after reaching required speed. The carrier craft would return to a landing field, and the smaller craft would orbit, accomplish its mission, and then land. “Creation of an apparatus with greater orbital maneuverability would . . . make it possible ... to deliver satellites on orbits in the spacecraft’s freight compartment, serve and repair them in space and bring back to earth samples of explorations and observations and even the satellites themselves if they go out of order.” Although “creation of this new type of space apparatus” posed a host of technical problems, “modern science and technology can solve them” and “the time was not far off when such a plane would make its maiden flight.” (Gatland, CSM, 28 July 75, 11; Sputnik, “Plane for Outer Space,” Aug 75, 68-71)
Fifteen years ago the launch of two U.S. satellites on the same day would have “blasted the top off of Page One,” Ernest B. Furguson said in a Washington Star article. But when it happened 7 May—Explorer 53 and Anik 3—it “drew less coverage than two swallows returning to Capistrano.” At a total cost of $44 million, to be shared by NASA and foreign friends, Explorer 53 Small Astronomy Satellite would study x-ray sources within and beyond the Milky Way, and Anik 3 would transmit communications back and forth across Canada. The NASA space budget for FY 1975 was nearly $3 billion. “Considering inflation, that seems a bargain.” The current space budget was “not quite 12 times what the President has asked to handle the Vietnamese refugee effort for each of two years. You are free to say for yourself where the two programs stand on the relative scale of things.” (Furguson, W Star, 14 May 75, A17)
The House of Representatives’ Committee on Appropriations reported out H.R. 8070, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-Independent Agencies Appropriations Bill for FY 1976. The committee proposed the continuation of the Space Shuttle and Viking projects; various planetary, weather, and scientific satellites; and further development of a strong aeronautics program. No new starts were proposed. The committee also directed deferral of the Pioneer—Venus mission for 1 year to permit a budget-priority decision in 1977 between the Large Space Telescope and Pioneer—Venus. The committee recommended reducing the $57 600 000 requested for Pioneer—Venus to $9 200 000 to maintain a management capability during the 1-yr deferral. NASA FY 1976 Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 2678.4 2687.2 (+8.8) 2629.0 (-49.4) Construction of Facilities 84.6 99.1 (+14.5) 82.1 (-2.5) Research & Program Management* 776.0 776.0 (0) 775.5 (-0.5) Totals 3539.0 3562.3 (+23.3) 3486.6 (-52.4)
Press briefings on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project were held at Johnson Space Center. ASTP participants would be conducting experiments in space sciences, life sciences, and applications, ASTP Project Scientist Dr. Thomas Giuli said at an experiments briefing. The five space-science experiments included a soft x-ray experiment to study radiation by scanning across the celestial mode, pointing at known discrete sources in the soft part of the spectrum from 2 kev to 0.1 kev, and investigating 10 specific x-ray sources known to emit only in regions below 2 kev. A helium-glow experiment would investigate temperature and density of the interstellar medium in the vicinity of our solar system by observing two special frequencies of extreme ultraviolet light emitted from the sun after they traveled into interstellar space, hit the interstellar medium, and were reflected back again. Other space-science experiments included a study of the sun’s outer atmosphere during an artificial eclipse created by maneuvering the Apollo spacecraft. During the “eclipse,” the Soyuz crew would photograph the sun’s corona. Among the earth environmental and applications studies was an experiment to measure neutral atomic oxygen and neutral atomic nitrogen of the earth’s upper atmosphere. Another experiment would try to devise a simple means of monitoring the aerosol content of the earth’s atmosphere. A water-resources management experiment, planned and coordinated with the government of India, would photograph the Himalayan area to map drainage patterns and water-reservoir locations. Life-science experiments included a study to observe optical sensations from cosmic rays experienced by the crew, an investigation of mutation in cells grown in space, and studies of the effect of space flight on the ability of microbes to infect humans and of changes in the human immunity system to resist infections under space flight conditions. . At a mission profile briefing, Kenneth A. Young of JSC’s Mission Planning and Analysis Div. said that plans called for a 9-day Apollo mission beginning 7.5 hrs after the launch of Soyuz by the U.S.S.R. The planned rendezvous period would be 2 days, with docking scheduled for the 30th inertial orbit, or third day in flight, of the Apollo spacecraft. Following much negotiation, U.S. and Soviet mission planners determined that the two spacecraft would dock over Soviet territory, providing real-time telemetry coverage for the Soviet Union, but at a location where NASA’s Ats 6 communications satellite could provide communications coverage to the U.S. The first handshake would take place over Spain. The spacecraft would undock on the 5th day and perform several joint experiments while separated. Soyuz was scheduled to land the following day. Apollo would continue unilateral experiments in orbit before landing at the end of the 9th day in space. Astronaut Richard H. Truly said, during a joint crew activities briefing, that while the Apollo and Soyuz were docked, all communications would be conducted in the language of the listener regardless of the nationality of the speaker. (Transcript)
Westar I, first U.S. domestic commercial communications satellite (launched by NASA for Western Union Telegraph Co. 13 April 1974), had transmitted its first live sports event—the Milwaukee Brewers vs. Texas Rangers baseball game—within the 48 contiguous states, WU announced. WU Vice President Dow C. Pruitt noted that the low-cost transmission reflected “the power of technology to change basic living patterns.” (Westar News, 11 Aug 75)
“Clear and immediate benefits to society” that NASA could produce would justify a 25% increase in its budget, said Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), chairman of the House subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, urging the space agency to come up with plans for such a program. Noting that the Administration had been considering across-the-board cuts in the Federal budget, Rep. Fuqua said the President and the Office of Management and Budget should reconsider the NASA cuts, as returns from the space program should give it higher priority than nonproducing areas of the budget. The subcommittee’s three-volume report, “Future Space Programs,” called for new space systems for educational and medical services, and for new earth-survey satellites to provide maritime, agricultural, geological, and demographic data. The report stressed that the agency should offer both short-term and long-term plans. The latter should include plans for lunar bases, orbital colonies, extraterrestrial communications, planetary and stellar exploration, satellite solar power, and disposal of nuclear waste. Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) of the House Committee on Science and Technology endorsed the subcommittee report, which he said contained “sensible recommendations,” noting particularly the concept of space-based generation of electrical power. Growth of the nation, said Teague, “is fundamentally dependent upon our continuing its number one ranking in science and technology.” (IFPost, 6 Nov 75, A10; NYT, 6 Nov 75, 51; SBD, 6 Nov 75, 28-30)
Thor-Delta launch operations at the Eastern and Western Test Ranges had resumed on a limited basis despite the continuing strike by employees of the launch vehicle’s manufacturer, McDonnell Douglas Corp. [see 10 Feb.and 22—23 March], Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. With supervisory personnel at the company’s plant completing the hardware in the place of striking workers, McDonnell Douglas hoped to finish 10 of the 12 launch vehicles scheduled for delivery to NASA launch sites by the end of 1975. NASA’s GEOS—C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and Canada’s Telestar—C communications satellite, both originally scheduled for March, had been rescheduled for April and May launch on Thor-Delta vehicles delivered before the strike began. Other launch dates would depend on the buildup and checkout of booster hardware at the launch site, and on availability of hardware still at the plant. Other scheduled launches affected by the strike included Nimbus— F experimental satellite, OSO—I Orbiting Solar Observatory, and Communications Satellite Corp.’s Marisat—A maritime communications satellite. (Av Wk, 7 April 75, 17)
NASA closed its tracking station on Madagascar after the agency was unable to reach agreement with the government of the Malagasy Republic for continued operation of the station. Functions of the station would be taken over by the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974. The Madagascar station had opened in 1964 under an agreement that called for station operation by NASA and Malagasy personnel. Data collected by the station were made available to the Malagasy Republic. The agreement had not called for an exchange of funds between the cooperating governments. The agreement expired in December 1973, and a new one could not be reached when Madagascar claimed rent for the station retroactive to 1964. (AP, NYT, 15 July 75; NASA Release 63— 279; NASA Contracts Div., Phillips, interview, 2 Aug 77) .
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 1 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA budget called for the authorization of $3,539 billion and net outlays of $3,498 billion for the 12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional NASA Budget Plan, FY 76 (in millions of dollars) FY 1974- FY 1975 FY 1976 Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 amounts of $958.9 million in authorizations and $905.6 in net outlays for the 3-mo transition period beginning 1 July 1976. Dr. Fletcher said the new budget was “lean but manageable.” For the first time since 1961 the budget provided no new program starts. In accordance with President Ford’s request "to hold FY J975 and FY 1976 expenditures to a minimum, NASA, in FY 1975, had deferred obligations of $72 million and outlays of $70 million, reduced civil service employment by 300, and made program adjustments to stay within the total FY 1975 and 1976 hudgets. Further adjustments might be necessary if the inflation rate continued to grow. Although NASA’s FY 1976 budget was up $300 million from the previous year, $200 million of this increase was specifically anticipated in last year’s budget to carry forward commitments built into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA had received an effective increase of only $100 million, or about 3%. This, along with the nation’s current 9% inflation rate, was a “good indicator of the leanness of NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” The budget would permit NASA to proceed with current major programs as planned: The Space Shuttle, scheduled for a first manned orbital flight in mid-1979, and Landsat—C, scheduled for a fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in aircraft remained a principal focus in NASA’s aeronautics research and technology. NASA was also continuing stratospheric studies, including the effects of pollutants on the environment, with significant contributions coming from NASA meteorological and atmospheric satellites, sounding rockets, and balloons and high-flying aircraft. Although there would be no new starts, NASA would continue its study and advanced technical development for science, applications, and aeronautics projects to be started in future years, including preliminary work for payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. The 1975 calendar year launch schedule was one of the most ambitious in U.S. history with 28 launches scheduled, including the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July and the two Viking missions to Mars scheduled for August. Although NASA’s legal responsibilities for energy research and development—designated under the Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 1974—had been transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration, NASA would work closely with ERDA in various aspects of solar research and development. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said at the press briefing that the largest budget increase was for manned spaceflight, where the increase for the Shuttle was partially offset by reduced spending for the rest of manned spaceflight. The small increase for space science did not tell the whole story: If funds for the Viking program were subtracted, the budget for the rest of science had increased $170 million from FY 1974 to FY 1976. Although applications, aeronautics, and space technology programs each showed small increases, funds for tracking and data acquisition decreased slightly despite increased maintenance costs for tracking stations, because NASA was beginning to close down tracking stations, preparing for the time when tracking and data relay satellites would be available. . NASA Budget Plan (in millions of dollars) FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1976 Manned space flight 999.9 1110.3 1414.6 Space science 664.5 542.8 582.6 Applications 159.0 174.5 175.0 Aeronautics and space technology 234.3 237.8 250.3 Tracking and data acquisition 244.0 248.0 243.0 Energy programs 4.7 4.4 5.9 Technology utilization 4.5 5.5 7.0 Total Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 Total budget plan 3156.0 3231.2 3539.0 William E. Lilly, NASA Comptroller, said that, of the $84.6 million budgeted for construction of facilities, $47.2 million was to continue the buildup of Space Shuttle facilities, mostly for launch and landing facilities at Kennedy Space Center. The remaining funds were for normal rehabilitation and modification of existing facilities, with smaller amounts for minor construction and for facilities planning and design. Civil service manpower was expected to continue at the same level for FY 1976 with 24 316 employees. However, the number of support service contractors—excluding mission or stage contractors—would decrease from 18 637 in FY 1975 to 17 811 in FY 1976. The estimated 125 000 persons working on NASA programs during FY 1975 was expected to increase by 6000 to 7000 by the end of FY 1976. Distribution of funds to the Centers would change: An increase of $224.3 million would go to Johnson Space Center for the Shuttle program. A decrease of $37.3 million for KSC reflected a decrease in funding for the construction program. Goddard Space Flight Center Estimated Distribution of Total NASA Budget (in millions of dollars) FY 1975 FY 1976 Decrease Johnson Space Center 922.6 1146.9 224.3 John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA 275.9 238.6 -37.3 Marshall Space Flight Center 428.7 541.2 112.5 National Space Technology Laboratories 10.0 10.9 0.9 Goddard Space Flight Center 493.7 461.1 -32.6 Wallops Flight Center 31.9 31.3 -0.6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory 180.9 188.1 7.2 Ames Research Center 168.2 193.0 32.0 Flight Research Center 34.6 40.3 5.7 Langley Research Center 285.5 249.4 -36.1 Lewis Research Center 218.1 253.3 35.2 NASA Headquarters 159.1 166.4 7.3 Undetermined 22.0 18.5 -3.5 Total 3231.2 3539.0 307.8 was down $32.6 million, largely because of a decrease in funding for Delta vehicles. (OMB, Budget of U.S. Govt., FY 76 and Appendix; NASA FY 76 budget briefing, 1 Feb 76, transcript; NASA Release, FY 76 budget briefing background material; Fletcher budget statement, 3 Feb 76, text)
President Gerald R. Ford presented the 1974 National Medal of Science, the nation’s highest science award, to 13 distinguished American scientists. Among those honored during the White House ceremony was Dr. Rudolf Kompfner of Bell Telephone Laboratories Research Communications Div., who received the award for his invention of the traveling-wave tube and for major contributions to communications satellites and to optical communications. Dr. Linus C. Pauling received the award for his contributions in the fields of structural chemistry, molecular biology, immunology, and genetic diseases. Dr. Pauling, two-time winner of the Nobel Prize, had been long bypassed for the national award, despite repeated recommendations of a scientific advisory committee, because of his outspoken criticism of much of American foreign policy. Victor Cohn of the Washington Post reported that the award signaled “an end to a White House war on unfriendly scientists conducted during the Johnson and Nixon administrations.” President Ford told the 200 persons attending the ceremonies that, looking back over 200 yr of the nation’s history, we owed a great debt to science and to all the men and women who have “carried on the scientific enterprise of this country.” The whole spirit of science— one that urged us to innovate, to explore the unexplored, and to answer the unanswered—was the true spirit of America. Although scientific priorities had changed over the years, the “Nation’s commitment to that most basic of all inquiries—basic research— has not diminished, . . . Our Nation’s future and that of the world depends on the creativity and the genius of men and women such as these we honor today.” (PD, 22 Sept 75, 1027—28; Cohn, W Post, 18 Sept 75, Al; ATT, 19 Sept 75, 23)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) said in a speech on the Senate floor that he had asked the Central Intelligence Agency to assess the safety of Soviet manned space technology. “The inlaunch failure of another Soviet manned satellite last Saturday [7 April] reinforces my deep concern that the upcoming joint Apollo-Soyuz experiment may be dangerous to American astronauts. . . . The history of the Soviet-manned program shows an appalling lack of consistency. As soon as one severe problem is solved another occurs.” (CR, 9 April 75, S5527)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a 10-mo $149 325 contract to Econ, Inc., to study the technical and economic feasibility of two different solar power plants, both in space and on the ground, and compare them with conventional terrestrial plants expected to exist ift the future. The first system was an orbiting system which would generate electrical power from the sun and transmit it to industries and cities on earth. A second kind of solar-power generating system, located on a remote area of the earth, could transfer power via an earth-orbiting satellite to users thousands of kilometers away. Econ, Inc., would use results from earlier concept studies to define requirements for payload packaging, development and checkout, and resupply for launch on the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—37)
The U.S.S.R. launched Aryabhata, India’s first scientific satellite, from Kapustin Yar in the Soviet Union. The satellite entered orbit with a 611-km apogee, 568-km perigee, 96.5-min period, and 50.7° inclination. The Delhi Domestic News Service said that the 360-kg satellite, named for a fifth-century Indian astronomer and mathematician, carried instruments to measure x-rays from celestial sources, look for neutrons and gamma radiation from the sun, and measure ionospheric parameters. Ground tracking stations in India and the Soviet Union reported the instrumentation was functioning normally. Aryabhata, designed and built by scientists at India’s Space Research Organization with technical assistance from Soviet scientists and specialists, was completed under an agreement for joint Indian-Soviet collaboration signed on 10 May 1972. The press reported the estimated cost of the project to be $6 million. (Delhi Dom News Ser, FBIS—India, 22—24 April 75; Weintraub, ATT, 21 April 75, 49; GSFC Wkly SSR, 17—23 April 75; educ’l attache, Indian Embassy, Wash DC, interview, 18 Nov 76)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, and Major General Soehardjono, Director General of Posts and Telecommunications for the Republic of Indonesia, signed an agreement for the July 1976 launch of Indonesia’s first communications satellite on a NASA Thor-Delta rocket. The new comsat, in synchronous equatorial orbit over Indonesia where its signal could be transmitted to 40 ground receiving stations, would permit Indonesia to begin development of a national communications network. (NASA Release 75-134)
The Soviet Union launched Prognoz 4, a 905-kg automatic station to study corpuscular and electromagnetic emissions of the sun, flows of solar plasma, and near-earth magnetic fields, to determine solar influence on the earth’s magnetosphere. The satellite’s orbit would have a 40 836-km apogee, 451-km perigee, 12 hr 16 min period, and 62.8° inclination. (Tass, in FBIS No 247, 22 Dec 75)
NASA was inviting U.S. and foreign corporations, universities, and government organizations to propose experiments for the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May 1974) after it completed its year of service to India [see 2 July]. After the Indian experiment, Ats 6 would be moved westward to the west coast of South America where it would operate within range of North and South America and adjacent ocean areas. NASA’s announcement of experiment opportunities for the comsat’s third year of operation invited proposals in the fields of societal, communications, or technological disciplines. (NASA Release 75 — 187)
When commercial communications via satellite began with the 6 April 1965 launch of Early Bird 1, the U.S. was expected to be the prime user of the new global communications system, a New York Times article said. Experts assumed the system would be used chiefly for occasional live events such as sports, state affairs, space missions, etc. However, these uses had actually accounted for only a fifth of transglobal comsat TV volume. A number of poor and developing countries had come to depend heavily on the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s seven Intelsat comsats. Although major events were still the subject of much global TV traffic, the most extensive and consistent use of commercial comsats was for daily news. News packages were sent from one country to another. U.S. networks used almost daily satellite news reports from correspondents in various parts of the world. Spain and Mexico were linked full time by satellite. Madrid also transmitted 15 min of daily news to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Venezuela. When events warranted, these countries transmitted news to Spanish TV. France transmitted daily news to Israel, Iran, Jordan, and Martinique as well as several North African countries. News from London was transmitted daily to Australia. The ATT quoted officials of Communications Satellite Corp., U.S. manager of the Intelsat system, as saying that in 1965 the comsats carried about six TV transmissions a month for a total of less than 6 hours of programming; in 1975, the Intelsat system was handling 400 transmissions a month, more than 200 hrs of programming not including the 200 hrs a month carried on the Spain—Mexico channel. (Brown, ATT, 28 June 75, 43)
NASA’s winter phase of meteorological rocket and satellite comparisons had b'een completed at Wallops Flight Center, where 31 single and two-stage rockets had been launched since 18 Nov. Data obtained from the launches had been compared with measurements received from the Nimbus 6 satellite passing over the Wallops facility. The Super-Loki single-stage rocket had carried three types of payload: inflatable spheres of mylar to obtain atmospheric density and wind measurements; datasondes to obtain temperature and wind data; and ozone-measuring devices. The Nike-Cajun, a two-stage vehicle, carried acoustic grenade payloads to measure wind and temperature by recording time and location of detonation on arrays of sensitive microphones at the launch site that could measure time lapse and direction of sound arrival. The rocket and satellite data comparison had been the latest of several conducted from the Wallops facility since 1970. (WFC Release 75—14)
The U.S.S.R. launched comsat Molniya 1—30 and France’s Sret 2 on a single booster from Plesetsk. Molniya 1—30 entered elliptical orbit with a 39 876-km apogee, 448-km perigee, 712.2-min period, and 62.8° inclination. Sret 2 entered orbit with a 40 824-km apogee, 512-km perigee, 737.8-min period, and 62.8° inclination. Tass reported that Molniya 1—30 would ensure long-range telephone, telegraph, and radio communications as well as transmit TV programs to Qrbita network stations in extreme northern Siberia, the Far East, and central Asia. Sret 2 (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique), according to Tass, would study the efficiency of a radiation system of thermal protection in outer space. It was the second of three spacecraft in a program of Soviet—French cooperation. Sret 1, launched 4 April 1972, had studied the characteristics of solar batteries for space operations and the degeneration of solar cells from cosmic-ray exposure in the Van Allen Belt. (GSFC WklySSR, 5—11 June 75; Tass, FBIS-Sov, 17 June 75, Ul; A&A 1972, 128)
Two Boeing Co. scientists had proposed construction of a 64-million-kg solar power satellite, with 57 sq km of mirrors, to collect and concentrate solar energy, together with thermal engines to convert solar power into electricity, the Christian Science Monitor reported. A microwave transmission system would convert the electricity to a form suitable for transmission to earth. CSM quoted Boeing as saying that within 2 decades “Powersat” could provide up to 10 000 mw of useful power, twice the hydroelectric capacity of Grand Coulee Dam. (AP, CSM, 6 Aug 75, 7)
