INTELSAT—the International Telecommunication Satellite Organization— awarded a 12-mo $22 000 fixed-price contract to the Republic of China’s Government Radio Administration for collection and study of ionospheric scintillation data at 4 ghz, to be used as a data base for studying satellite-signal fluctuations caused by ionospheric effects. (INTELSAT Release 76-5-M) During January: Using Landsat imagery of an 85 000-sq-km region from the western edge of the Nile to the border of Libya along the Mediterranean coast, the Egyptian Academy of Scientific Research and Technology at the request of President Anwar Sadat made a study of the region’s geology, drainage, and ground water. The study resulted from problems of a rising ground-water table and salinity on newly reclaimed areas west of the Nile Delta. A copy of the report, sent to NASA by the Egyptian academy’s remote-sensing research project, said in part, “The new maps prepared from Landsat satellite images are more detailed and much more elaborate as compared to previous maps prepared by the traditional methods ... It has been possible to construct on the Landsat images 14 geological and environmental units in the investigated area . . . This work helps to decipher the geological history of northern Egypt, the Mediterranean Sea and the Nile Delta ... It is emphasized that additional irrigation waters should not be introduced in the area of investigation until detailed geological and hydrogeological studies have been carried out.” (Wkly Briefs for Administrator, 12 Jan 76)
An unmanned ground terminal that could operate with several satellites in synchronous orbit above the earth was patented by three engineers for the Communications Satellite Corporation. Previously, a separate earth terminal was needed for each satellite. William K. Sones, Laurence F. Gray, and Louis Pollack, of the ComSat staff in Washington, D.C., invented the new facility, considered a major advance that would add reliability and reduce costs. The structure included a single reflector about 9.7m by 15.4m with enough traveling-wave tubes, transmitters, receivers, and amplifiers to handle two or more satellites, plus monitors and controls; the reliability feature was a system that switched in another tube if one became defective. Possible uses would be on offshore rigs or at oil-pipeline installations that were unmanned but required constant communication by satellite. (ATT, 10 Jan 76, 31)
The French government had earmarked a preliminary budget of $3.6 million for development of a spy satellite that would survey the earth’s surface with infrared cameras, the N.Y, Daily News said. Weighing several hundred kg and orbiting at 500 to 600 km altitude, the satellite would use several lenses in visible and infrared light to detect details at sizes ranging from 10 to 100 m. The government’s representative for armaments, J.-L. Delpech, said that France had “no military space policy” because reconnaissance satellites were “not essential” to France’s “deterrent strategy.” (FBIS, in French, 13 Jan 76; NY News, 14 Jan 76, 58)
The Space Segment Board for Aerosat met at Frascati, Italy, to review proposals for development, production, launch, and 7 - yr operation of two satellites [see 22 Jan.]. The space segment of the Aerosat program, conducted jointly by the European Space Agency, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, and the government of Canada, would provide an experimental system of satellite communications between transoceanic aircraft and the ground, leading to guidelines for an operational system to be established by the Inti. Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). During the program, two satellites would be launched into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean, separated by about 25° longitude, with a 7-yr lifetime; the first launch would occur in 1979, and the second 8 mo later. The space board, representing ESA, Canada, and Comsat General Corp., reviewed the proposals submitted by General Electric, Radio Corp. of America, and TRW; all were reported to be of “a commendably high technical standard,” but the price submitted by GE was below that of the other two. The board therefore authorized negotiation with GE toward award of a fixed-price contract. (Comsat General Release CG 76-120; ESA release 10 Sept 76) the passengers originate in the U.S. The statement also called for more flexibility in charter rules, the addition of domestic feeder routes to strictly international carriers such as Pan Am to fill seats between domestic cities, and elimination of cross-subsidization (promotional discounts) so that economy-fare passengers would not subsidize bargain-fare customers. (NYT, 9 Sept 76, 5)
The European Space Agency announced choice of payloads for its Ariane launcher L02 and L03 qualification flights scheduled between June 1979 and October 1980. Principal passenger on the L02 flight would be the recently announced Geosari satellite, with a lateral passenger, Amsat, a 70-kg radio-amateur space communications satellite proposed by a German organization affiliated with the Inti. Radio Amateur Satellite Organization. Ariane L03 would carry the India comsat Apple (Ariane passenger payload experiment), a three-axis-stabilized spacecraft weighing 616 kg that would continue experiments in the 4- to 6-ghz frequency to be performed by India in the Satellite Telecommunications Experiments Project (STEP). Mounted in the lower central portion of the launcher, Apple would bear the load of a principal-passenger satellite to be chosen by the end of the year from among a second Meteosat prototype; a flight prototype of Symphonie, Franco-German comsat; an Italian Sirio microwave comsat with a payload different from the first model (see A & A75, 10 Mar); and a Canadian CTS spacecraft equipped with a European communications payload. Nominal orbit for the L02 and L03 flights would be 35 800-km apogee, 200-km perigee, and 17.7° inclination. (ESA release 13 Oct 76)
Western Union announced that it had signed a 7-yr contract with the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB) for transmission services via the Westar satellite. Duration of the contract was a possible 15 yr. Contingent upon approval by the Federal Communications Commission, Western Union would begin 31 December 1978 to provide CPB with service on 3 fulltime fully protected transponders for $800 000 per transponder per yr, or $2.4 million annually, permitting CPB to offer national distribution of programs to 165 public-television stations through its manager, the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). The contract would give CPB an option on a fourth Westar transponder and establish rates for both scheduled and unscheduled service, and anticipated satellite distribution of radio programs to about 170 public radio stations through National Public Radio (NPR). Use of a 3- or 4-channel satellite system would serve many of the Congress’s policy goals for public broadcasting, CPB officials said: autonomy of local public stations, increased flexibility in programming, and lower cost of expanding public broadcasting coverage. (Western Union release, 16 June 76)
NASA launched Marisat 3, third and last in a series of Comsat General maritime communications satellites, from ETR at 6:44 pm EDT on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit. At seventh apogee 8:11 pm EDT 16 Oct., the apogee boost motor was fired to maneuver the satellite to a position at 36 000 km altitude above the equator at about 182°E; final move to operation location at 73°E above the Indian Ocean would take place in Nov. The spin-stabilized active-repeater spacecraft, weighing about 700 kg in orbit, was a cylinder with a diameter of about 2 m and an overall length of 3.65 m. Built by Hughes Aircraft Corp., the comsat would act as a relay station to transmit and receive information between ships and submarines at sea and shore stations. It would join Marisat 1, operating at 15°W over the Atlantic Ocean since Feb. 1976, and Marisat 2, operating at 176.5°E over the Pacific since June. (The Marisat 3 mission was judged successful 3 Nov. 1976; the Marisat 2 mission [see 9 June] had been judged successful 6 Oct. 1976.) (NASA Release 76-156; MOR M-492-205-76-03 [prelaunch] 6 Oct 76, [postlaunch] 5 Nov. 76; WStar, 15 Oct 76, A-5; MOR M-492-205-76-02, 14 Oct 76)
The board of governors of INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization—announced award of a 14-mo $2.9 million contract to the Societe Des Telecommunications Internationales du Cameroun for additional tracking, telemetry, command, and monitoring services to be provided by a new antenna collocated at Zamengoe, Cameroon, with existing standard communications and antennas. The new facilities, to be operational by October 1977, would augment service as the global satellite system became more complex, providing redundant service especially in the Atlantic and Indian Ocean areas. The contract included an option for extended service for an additional 24 mo. The Cameroon facilities had monitored Intelsat IV-A satellites since 1 April 76. (INTELSAT Release 76-23-1)
Marisat 1—first satellite of a privately owned $ 100-million system to provide rapid high-quality communications between ships at sea and shore stations—was launched on a Delta for Comsat General Corp. from Cape Canaveral at 5:32 pm local time (1032 GMT). The 655-kg craft was headed for a stationary orbit 35 788 km above the Atlantic Ocean at 15°W, about 547 km southwest of the coast of Liberia. A second satellite, Marisat B, would be stationed over the Pacific later this year. Marisat 1 carried 2 channels each about 4 mhz wide, operating in the L and C bands; one would translate shore-to-ship signals from 6 to 1.5 ghz, the other would translate ship-to-shore signals from 1.6 to 4 ghz. Ground stations at Southbury, Conn., and Santa Paula, Calif., would provide earth-satellite communications links, using 12.8-m-dia. antennas to relay tracking, telemetry, and command information between the satellites and the Comsat General control center in Washington, D.C. The U.S. government would use three UHF channels on the satellite, completely separate from the L- and C-band channels, through its own terminal facilities. The satellite system, owned and operated by a consortium headed by the Comsat General Corp., would he used by commercial shipping lines, as well as by the U.S. Navy pending completion of its own Fleet Satellite Communications System. By early April, commercial telephone, telex, and data communications would be available to link ships and offshore facilities with shore stations connected into domestic and international communications networks worldwide. Marisat mobile terminals had been purchased or leased from ComSat and installed on ships of a number of nations. (NASA Release 76-22; MOR M-492-205-76-01 [prelaunch] 26 Jan 76, [postlaunch] 13 Apr 76; ComSat Release CG 76-107; W Star, 20 Feb 76, A-6)
A 2-wk experiment to observe the Gulf Stream about 580 km east of NASA’s Wallops Flight Center used a combination of spacecraft, aircraft, and water craft to check the ability of remote-sensors to measure the magnitude and boundaries of the Gulf Stream from space. Gulf Stream measurements would aid in planning more effective use of coastal waters, as in cooling nuclear power plants, or in constructing offshore drilling rigs or airports located on manmade islands. Scientists also wanted more data about the Gulf Stream, which carries heat energy that influences the global balance of energy in the atmosphere and the ocean, affecting weather and climate as well as coastal water movement, besides carrying nutrients important to the Ashing industry. Traditional methods using closely spaced ship stations or buoys to obtain data had proved inadequate for studying fast-changing or large-scale phenomena. Satellite measurements used in the experiment included infrared signatures that identifled the Gulf Stream boundary from space photographs. A precision altimeter on NASA’s Geos 3 (geodynamic experimental ocean satellite) measured surface deviations in the ocean within 20 cm, from which velocity of a current could be calculated; the experiment also used the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 4 weather satellite. A C-54 research plane from Wallops carried instruments on 3 flights to measure the current by observing wave interactions; surface measurements were taken by the research vessel Advance II from Cape Fear Technical Institute at Wilmington, N.C., manned by ocean scientists from N.C. State University at Raleigh. The project was part of a scientific research task directed by NASA Hq’s Office of Applications. (NASA Release 76-115; WFC Release 76-7)
A vacuum test facility built near Philadelphia in 1962 by General Electric to test satellites would be used to freeze-dry most of New York City’s air-pollution control records, damaged in a 16th-floor records office on Wall Street by flooding from a ruptured check valve in the 17th-floor airconditioning system, the New York Times reported. Hundreds of thousands of cards and pages had been shipped in a refrigerator truck to Pa. to be dried before mold could form and consume the cellulose fibers in the paper. After placement in the chamber, the records would undergo a vacuum so that the water would turn into vapor, move to a condenser, and turn to ice; after being frozen and dehydrated, the papers would be rewarmed. Use of the facility would save “hundreds of thousands of dollars” and untold time in attempting to duplicate the records, the Commissioner of Air Resources said. (NYT, 29 Jan 76, 35)
The first satellite in the 2-ocean Marisat system inaugurated communications services to U.S. Navy ships. However, the scheduled 1 Apr. start of service to commercial shipping was canceled because of malfunctions in C- and L-band transmissions, involving random variations in signal strength. The Navy operations used UHF frequencies. Marisat 1 was launched 19 Feb. into synchronous orbit over the Atlantic; Comsat General Corp.—86% owner and manager of the Marisat system—said tests indicated that the problems could be solved “with respect to the [second] spacecraft” awaiting launch at ETR, in time to permit its scheduled launch 27 May for service in the Pacific Ocean. The difficulty appeared to be associated with a despun C-band triplexer, arising from loose metal particles. (Av Wk & Space Tech, 29 Mar 76, 14; Comsat 1975 rept. to stockholders, 9)
INTELSAT announced award to the British Aircraft Corp. of a 15-mo fixed-price contract for design, fabrication, test, and delivery of a model onboard processor programmable to perform a variety of tasks, including monitoring and control of satellite electronic functions. A standardized system based on microprocessors, rather than hard-wired logic, for each individual function or system would reduce weight and power consumption and increase satellite reliability and efficiency. Value of the contract was $121 600 in U.S, dollars. (INTELSAT Release 76-27-M)
Dr. William H. Pickering, director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology since 1954, retired, announcing that he would return to Caltech as a professor of engineering. He had earned all his degrees at that institution and had joined the faculty in 1936, becoming a member of the JPL staff in 1944. The staff at that time numbered a few hundred; when he became director, the total had reached 1000, and numbered about 4000 when he announced his retirement. Born in New Zealand in 1910, Dr. Pickering had become one of the world’s foremost experts in space technology. Under his leadership, JPL had designed Explorer 1, first successful U.S. satellite, and went on to develop and operate the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner space probes. Dr. Pickering was first president of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1963, and president of the International Astronautical Federation in 1965-66. NASA’s announcement of his retirement said he would work on gaining worldwide scientific support for the proposed International Solar System Decade of research and space exploration of all aspects of the solar system. (NASA anno. 23 June 75; NYT, 21 June 75, 41; LA Times, 31 Mar 76, 1; Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1)
Noaa 5, launched by NASA 29 July for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) into a sun-synchronous polar orbit at 1505 km, was turned over to NOAA after checkout and would become the primary operational satellite providing weather forecasters with a wide variety of environmental data. Noaa 5 would replace an earlier version, Noaa 4, which would become the backup spacecraft; an older polar orbiter launched in 1973 would be deactivated. NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service operates 2 satellite systems: one polar-orbiting, the other consisting of 2 geostationary satellites remaining in the same relative position to earth’s surface at all times. The polar-orbiting craft would scan any spot on earth twice every 24 hr and return visual and infrared imagery of cloudcover, sea-surface temperature, and other environmental indicators. (NOAA Release 76-199; MOR E-601-76-17 [postlaunch] 1 Oct 76; telcon, NOAA PAO, 5 Oct 76)
A Titan III-C rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center at 2:55 am local time (0755 GMT) carried into stationary orbit at about 36 000 km 2 experimental nuclear-powered comsats for the U.S. Air Force; 23 min later, the Navy’s Solrad 11-A and 11-B riding piggyback on the same rocket were sent toward an orbit more than 120 000 km up and at opposite sides of the earth, where they would monitor solar flares that disrupt communications and navigation systems on earth. The Air Force’s Les—8 and Les—9 were designed to guard against space jamming of U.S. military communications; spokesmen said the satellites were “right on the money” but would undergo various tests before they began their experimental message traffic. (NYT, 17 Mar 76, 39)
NASA launched Palapa 1, first of a series of Indonesian comsats, into a synchronous transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 7:31 pm EDT on a Delta vehicle. Orbital elements were 36 504-km apogee, 231-km perigee, and 24.6° inclination. At the 10th apogee, the boost motor was fired (4:30 pm EDT on 11 July) and the spacecraft was maneuvered into a position above the equator at about 83°E. Satellite status was reported satisfactory. The satellite’s name came from a 14th-century prime minister, Gaja Mada, who vowed not to eat a popular delicacy called palapa until Indonesia was united. The 8 July launch date was selected to ensure that the satellite would be operational on 17 Aug., when Indonesia celebrated its 31st anniversary of independence. Produced by Hughes Aircraft, the Palapa satellites would be identical to the Telesat Canada and Westar satellites except for antenna modifications; each satellite could relay 12 color TV channels or up to 4000 telephone circuits. A second Palapa was scheduled for launch in 1977. (NASA Release 76-117; MOR M-492-208-76-01, [prelaunch] 24 June 76, [postlaunch] 14 Oct 76)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
U.S, failure to renew the Indian government’s access to the ATS satellite relaying birth-control and agricultural information to 2400 villages might intensify tensions between Washington and New Delhi, the Baltimore Sun said in an editorial. An alliance of U.S. scientists and environmentalists had already protested the sale to India of uranium for a power station near Bombay; the group had asked the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to require India to demonstrate that the substance would not be used to make bombs, as India had done in 1974 with plutonium derived from Canadian material supplied for a joint atomic-energy project. Combined with Ford Administration efforts to use development aid to force India into a more friendly posture, the Sun said that withholding advanced technology used by India for humanitarian purposes would create “an unnecessary blur” between humanitarian and development aid and would exacerbate rather than relax existing tensions. (B Sun, 6 Mar 76, A-12)
Comsat General Corp. announced an agreement with ARCO—the Atlantic Richfield Co.—to install a Marisat terminal on the S/S Arco Prudhoe Bay, a tanker commissioned in Baltimore in 1971, to evaluate satellite communications with an eye to equipping other Arco ships if the new medium should prove reliable. The tanker would transport crude oil from Alaska to U.S. west-coast ports, and communications via satellite would be valuable during periods when the aurora borealis (northern lights) made high-frequency communication difficult. Comsat facilities had been installed previously on 15 commercial vessels; the Marisat system would be the 16th, and would begin operations in commercial service about 1 April. (Comsat Release 76-105)
ERDA announced selection of Clayton, N.M., as the first municipal utility to field-test its 200-kw wind-turbine generator. The Clayton utility would operate the modern windmill for 2 yr beginning late in 1977, and would assemble test data on the performance and economics of wind-energy systems connected with conventional power plants and providing power through existing utility lines. Clayton, a 3000-inhabitant town located in an area of the Great Plains with high average wind speeds, would be the first U.S. locality in more than 30 yrs to generate electric power for public consumption through the use of wind. Its conventional utility system used both gas and oil generators. Integration of the wind-power system would be supervised by technicians from NASA’s LeRC at Cleveland, 0., who would train the municipal utility employees in operating the wind turbine. (ERDA Release 76-348) Astronautics and aeronautics, 1976 Defense Donald Rumsfeld had stated that the U.S. satellites had been damaged by the glare of natural gas fires along a pipeline in Western Russia, but did not deny that lasers might have caused the damage. Newsweek said the U.S. had already developed chemical lasers requiring no electrical power, and described a possible fleet of U.S. “dark satellites” with radar-absorbing exteriors that would be invisible to Soviet detection. It also predicted that a full-scale war in space—a science-fiction type of clash of hunter-killer satellites, manned orbital shuttles, and laser death rays—could “leap off the drawing boards” in the 1980s. Reporter Tad Szulc said in the current Penthouse magazine that the U.S. government had not publicized the attack on its satellites used to police the 1972 arms pact with the USSR for fear of endangering negotiations with Moscow on a new strategic arms pact. He said Washington was perplexed by the Soviet effort to interfere with satellites that were verifying compliance with the 1972 treaty. The NY Times noted that spokesmen for both the State Dept, and the Dept, of Defense had denied the magazine reports of interference with U.S. satellites, although DOD had verified that the USSR had been attempting to intercept its own satellites already in orbit, not always successfully. Pentagon sources told the NYT that the Soviet hunter satellites used conventional explosives, although shockwaves from an explosion would not proliferate in the vacuum of space and a hunter would have to be accurate enough to close in and destroy a target with debris. A NYT editorial 26 Nov. said the “vast sums” needed for space weapons would be more wisely spent on peace and good relations on earth. (C Trib, 23 Nov 76, 4-15; NYT, 23 Nov 76, 15; 24 Nov 76, 12; 26 Nov 76, A-22)
NASA launched Marisat 2, second in a series of ComSat maritime communications satellites, at 8:09 pm EDT from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle, into a transfer orbit with apogee of 36 924 km, perigee of 185 km, and 26° inclination. The apogee boost motor fired 11 June would put the spacecraft into a 36 000-km-altitude synchronous orbit at 176°E over the Pacific. Marisat was designed to transmit voice, data, facsimile, and telex messages to and from ships at sea, through special stations in Conn, and Calif, interconnected with existing domestic land networks; initially, the system would be used by the U.S. Navy, until its requirements terminated in the late 1970s. The cylindrical satellite, weighing 655 kg at liftoff and 317 kg in orbit, measured 2.1 m in diameter and was 3.6 m long. Like Marisat 1, which had been operating over the Atlantic since its launch 19 February, it carried 3 UHF channels for government use, activated or deactivated by ground command, and 2 4-hz channels operating in the L- and C-bands respectively to carry ship-to-shore and shore-to-ship signals; the full ship-to-shore capacity would always be available independent of government use of the UHF channels, which would use separate receiving facilities. (NASA Release 76-83; MOR 492-205-76-02 [prelaunch] 7 June 76, [postlaunch] 14 Oct 76)
America’s Bicentennial year might be called the “Year of the Communications Satellites,” NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher told participants at the Conference on Satellite Communication and Public Service meeting at GSFC. Recalling that Alexander Graham Bell had unveiled the telephone at the Philadelphia Centennial exactly a century ago, Dr. Fletcher quoted an observer’s statement that, of all the gifts young America had received on its 100th birthday, the telephone proved to be the most valuable; in 197 6, of NASA’s 19 launches, 13 had been communications satellites, which might prove the most valuable gift received by the U.S. on its 200th birthday. Comsats were in use by 107 countries or territories on 6 continents, Dr. Fletcher said, and more than a billion people—one of every 4 on earth—could witness an international event as it happened “live by satellite.” Not only had comsats been able to do current jobs better and cheaper, they had also opened new possibilities for public service. Development of small inexpensive simple earth stations would permit sending needed information to millions of people without present access to it, Fletcher said; very large antennas and high transmitter power in space would make it possible to use receivers on earth “not 30 feet in diameter, or even 10 feet, but the size of your watch crystal,” he added. To get the larger, heavier spacecraft into orbit, Fletcher predicted use of the Space Shuttle, making “runs to space on a regular schedule, carrying people and cargo for communications, scientific research, earth resources inventory, materials processing, and other tasks.” Use of the Shuttle would reduce the cost of putting a satellite in orbit from more than half to less than a quarter of the total cost of design, construction, and launch. Fletcher called on members of the conference to help NASA define the public purposes to be served by “an imaginative space program” that would involve users in its development from the outset. (Text; NASA Release 76-202)
The Peoples Republic of China launched an unidentified satellite from the Shuang-Cheng-Tzu site into an orbit with 483-km apogee, 170-km perigee, 59.5° inclination, and 91.1-min period. Aviation Wk and Space Technology magazine reported that mission characteristics indicated the vehicle was in the 2700- to 4500-kg class and that the launch vehicle was a CSS-X-3 booster. Hsinhua News Agency, whose launch announcement the Tass agency picked up, reported 10 Dec. that the satellite had returned to earth “with precision according to plan,” with no further details. This was PRC’s seventh satellite launch. (FBIS, Tass in English, 7 Dec 76; CSFC SSR, 9 Dec 76; FBIS, Peking NCNA, 10 Dec 76; Av Wk, 13 Dec 76, 29; SBD, 14 Dec 76, 234)
GSFC Director Dr. Robert S. Cooper presented a Group Achievement Award to the AIDSAT team for “the highly successful international demonstrations in which leaders of over twenty-five underdeveloped countries were shown the potential benefits to be derived from the application of satellite communications and remote earth sensing.” The demonstrations had taken place over a 90-day relocation period during which the Ats 6 was moving from its position over India to a new geosynchronous position over the western Pacific. The team—led by former GSFC engineer Paul McCeney, NASA Hq Office of Applications, as AIDSAT program manager; A1 Whalen of GSFC, as project manager; and John Wilhelm of the Agency for Inti. Development, as program coordinator—undertook to produce 27 programs for broadcast to as many nations over the 3-mo period. Three technical teams carried portable terminal equipment to three clusters of nations: A, consisting of Thailand, Oman, Jordan, Sudan, Mali, Cameroon, Uruguay, Ecuador, and Jamaica; B, consisting of Bangladesh, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Libya, Upper Volta, Central African Republic, Bolivia, Surinam, and Costa Rica; and C, consisting of Pakistan, Kenya, Morocco, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Argentina, Peru, and Haiti. Goddard engineers Dave Nace, John Chitwood, and A1 Whalen were managers of the A, B, and C clusters respectively. The high-level government officials and businessmen in the participating countries who took part in the programs included eight presidents, three prime ministers, a king, and a sultan. Each country received virtually the same 2.5-hr program format, which began with a personal taped message from U.S. President Ford and presented films on remote sensing and on earth-orbiting communications and meteorological satellites, ending with an hour of two-way direct video communications between panelists in the U.S. and the host country. Millions of viewers in the host countries watched the programs by direct or delayed broadcast over national TV networks, some seeing the first colorcasts ever received in their country. The historic experiment in telecommunications technology transfer fulfilled a promise to make U.S. technology available to developing nations, given by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger in May 1976 at the U.S. Conference on Trade and Development in Nairobi, Kenya. (Goddard News, Dec 76, 3-4)
ESA announced plans to award to Messerchmitt-Bolkow-Blohm of West Germany, as prime contractor for COSMOS (a consortium of European aerospace companies), two contracts worth a total of about $55.38 million (U.S.) for definition of the Exosat satellite (phase B) and for subsequent design and development (phase C and D). Subcontractors from ten member states of ESA would share in satellite development. Exosat, scheduled for launch in 1980-81 by a Delta or Ariane vehicle, would measure position, structure, spectral and temporal characteristics of cosmic x-rays between — 0.1 kev and +50 kev. Work on the 12-mo phase B contract would begin in Jan. 1977. (ESA release 13 Oct 76)
The European Space Agency announced that its exhibit at the Famborough International Aerospace Exhibition in Sept, would include a full-scale model of the Spacelab, to be exhibited for the first time in Rritain to give the British public a better idea of Europe’s space activities and to extend contacts with science and industry. ESA’s exhibit would also include full-size models of Meteosat and the OTS comsat, plus a tenth-scale model of the Ariane launcher. British firms were prime contractors for the OTS (orbiting test satellite) scheduled for launch in 1977 and for the maritime satellite Marots to be launched early in 1978. (ESA release 19 Aug 76)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
2 January: NASA planned 18 major satellite launchings in 1976, 16 from Cape Canaveral and 2 from the Western Test Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base. First of these, on 13 Jan., would be a U.S.-Canadian communications technology satellite; second, on 15 Jan., would be the Helios satellite built by West Germany. Other NASA launches during the year would include 2 comsats for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization; 2 maritime comsats (Marisats); Palapa, a comsat for the Indonesian government; the second geostationary operational environmental satellite (COES-B); and Lageos, a laser geodynamic satellite to help alleviate earthquake hazards. (NYT, 3 Jan 76, 5)
A simple device to reorient an orbiting satellite toward the earth stations with which it would communicate had been used successfully on Satcom 1, RCA-owned comsat launched by NASA in December 1975. Patented by two engineers at the RCA Electronics Div. in N.J., the new equipment took advantage of the gyroscopic effect of a wheel normally rotated to stabilize a satellite in synchronous orbit; only a simple start signal from the earth could activate it. Previous systems needed precision controls involving delicate sensors and thrust motors manipulated from the ground. Satcom 1, in synchronous orbit at about 35 000-km altitude, had been rotated 90° by the new system to point its instrumentation at the earth; it would begin regular transmission in March. (ATT, 21 Feb 76, 31)
The U.S. Navy launched an experimental ocean-surveillance satellite—part of the Whitecloud system developed by the Naval Research Laboratory—on 30 April from Vandenberg AFB aboard an Atlas launch vehicle, reported Defense/Space Business Daily. The satellite was in a near-circular orbit of 1122-km apogee, 1100-km perigee, inclined 63.5°, with a period of 107.5 min. (SBD, 20 May 76, 21) NASA Hq conducted a news conference on the Viking mission to Mars, with Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science; Robert Kraemer, director of planetary programs; Walter Jakobowski, Viking program manager; James Martin, Jr., Viking project manager; and Dr. Gerald S. Soffen, Viking project scientist, to review the mission and answer questions. Dr. Anthony Calio, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science, opened the session by recalling the work done on Viking over the past 7 yr that would culminate in Viking’s reaching Mars within the next few weeks. The U.S. for the first time would be operating 4 spacecraft simultaneously, 2 in orbit and 2 on the planet’s surface. Kraemer mentioned Galileo’s sighting of Mars in 1609, the detection of “eanali” on the planet’s surface by Schiaparelli and others in the 1800s, and Percival Lowell’s founding of the Lowell Observatory in 1894 followed by his publication of reports on “Mars and Its Canals” and “Mars as the Abode of Life.” Edgar Rice Burroughs, author of the Tarzan stories and “grandfather of science fiction writers,” began writing stories about civilization on Mars that had kept the public “waiting ever since to get down to the surface and see what is there.” Although, as Kraemer pointed out, 4 Mariner missions had shown that civilization did not actually exist on Mars, nothing had ruled out the existence of life, and that was a purpose of the Viking mission. Jakobowski reviewed the history of Voyager, Surveyor, and Viking, especially the 1971 Mariner flyby that revealed Mars as a dynamic planet. Martin, Viking project manager at Langley Research Center, said the 2 Viking spacecraft had been flying for a long time and had turned in “exceptionally good” performance; this would be the first mission to use optical navigation to confirm radio-tracking data, and the first set of results had shown the spacecraft to be “right on course.” Martin added that—as an expression of confidence in his team—a quiet period had been declared the coming week when most of the flight team would be on vacation; “the team needs that time off to get ready for a pretty active and hectic summer,” he said. A.T. (Tom) Young, Viking mission director at LaRC, showed slides of mission operations and possible landing sites, reviewing the reasons for site selection and what NASA hoped to learn in both scientific and engineering areas, concluding with a summary of expected activities during the first 20 days on Mars. Viking-mission audio from JPL would be available starting about 15 June. Dr. Soffen noted that the scientific questions about Mars covered more than the presence of life there, which was only one of 13 investigations to be conducted by Viking, and suggested that the press representatives “ought to prepare yourselves from an educational point of view about all the experiments other than just the biology.” The first question raised by the press was on the indicators of a safe landing; Martin replied that there would be 5—telemetry from a footpad switch; startup of the lander computer, accompanied by turnoff of the descent-engine heaters; drop on equipment-power bus with shutoff of entry equipment; and switch in data rate from the orbiter-to-lander 4-kilobit rate to a 16-kb rate for sending pictures to the orbiter. A question about turning on the backup lander computer got a detailed response involving detectors and switches in a complex procedure that occur when “the second computer hollers for help,” as Young put it. Other questions concerned dust storms, camera resolution, and chances of success; Soffen concluded by noting “if we knew the answers, we wouldn’t have to do this mission.” (Text, 20 May 76; NASA Releases 76-90, 76-98)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that MSFC engineers had developed an optical processing system that could use earth pictures taken by satellites such as Landsat or Seasat to survey highway traffic. When the New Orleans, La., planning commission asked the Center if space technology could provide an automated way to conduct thorough, reliable, and inexpensive traffic surveys, MSFC responded with a technique used several years ago of scanning phototransparencies with a laser beam; the new laser scanner would sense differences in intensity of the filtered beam, recognize vehicle sizes and shapes, and store size and location data for later use. Data from an aerial traffic survey using the system could be in the hands of users within hours. The new method must start with aircraft photographs, said MSFC engineer Joseph H. Kerr, who patented the rapid survey system; present Landsat satellites passed over a target only once in 18 days, but the project gave NASA a chance to refine the method for use on satellites in the 1980s. Whereas processing of satellite data might now take months, Kerr said his system could produce data 100 times faster. (NASA Release 76-128)
Eight nations located on the equator had claimed sovereignty over the orbital locations of space satellites stationed above their territory, the Washington Star reported. The foreign ministry of Colombia listed the nations as Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Congo, Kenya, Uganda, Zaire, and Indonesia. (WStar, 11 Dec 76, A-4) , of the formation after an airlift to the site from the McMurdo Sound station. The body of rock in the Pensacola Mts., first reached by explorers in 1957 and first studied in the 1965-66 season, was a layered structure produced by eruptions from earth’s interior and “strikingly similar” to productive formations elsewhere in the world, such as the Bushveld complex of S. Africa, the Stillwater formation of Montana, and the Sudbury region of Ontario. A Soviet party in the Shackleton Range to the northeast, a similar area, reported findings which the leader of the USGS group, Dr. Arthur B. Ford, hoped to visit by air. Dr. Edward S. Grew of UCLA, who had spent the Antarctic winter at the Soviet Molodezhnaya base, had been working with the Russians from a temporary camp in the Lambert Glacier, near which “a mountain of iron” was reported recently. Meanwhile, a Natl. Science Foundation project that aimed at drilling a hole through the Ross Ice Shelf was proceeding with the participation of 10 nations, seeking to explore the depths below the ice for data on the Antarctic bottom water, indirectly responsible for much of the world’s oceanic food, and to learn whether the ice sheet might eventually slip into the sea, raising global sea levels by as much as 10 meters. Countries participating with the U.S. in the Ross Ice Shelf Project (RISP) were Australia, Britain, Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Soviet Union, Switzerland, and West Germany. The NYT commented editorially that the Antarctic continent posed a number of scientific problems still unanswered in the age of space that had seen visits to and returns from the moon; close photographs of the moon and planets; and regular reports by man-made instruments on the surfaces of Mars and Venus. The RISP—an example of “continued, steady, quiet international cooperation” in Antarctic research—was “one of the great success stories of the post-1945 world,” encountering temporary setbacks that would be overcome in time as were those of the space program, the NYT added. {NYT, 12 Dec 76, 1-1; 19 Dec 76, 26; 20 Dec 76, A-22)
A celebration in Moscow of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s flight into space heard a speech by A.P. Aleksandrov, president of the Academy of Sciences, reviewing Soviet firsts in space: launch of the world’s first artificial satellite, first manned flights and walk in open space, first flight to the moon and delivery to earth of lunar soil samples by automatic devices, creation of orbital stations, and unique experiments in the study of solar-system planets. Aleksandrov recalled that the first manned space flight occurred only 3.5 yr after launch of the first artificial satellite, which he said made the Russian word “sputnik” common to all peoples in all languages of the world. He reviewed Soviet progress in space research and applications, especially in communications, mentioning that the number of Orbita network ground stations to reach remote parts of the Soviet Union had now climbed to 68. He referred to the success of the Apollo-Soyuz joint experimental flight as “a significant contribution to the progress of world cosmonautics.” (FBIS, Tass report 13 Apr 76)
A 2-mo study this summer at the Ames Research Center would bring together a specially chosen panel of a dozen scientists—“authorities on every aspect of space exploration”—to make an in-depth examination of problems anticipated in the colonization of space. Sponsored by NASA, the group would also consider whether satellite power stations for earth could be built by space colonists. In a report by James Barron for the Washington Star, Princeton physicist Gerard K. O’Neill detailed his ideas for a kilometer-plus-wide cylinder with living quarters for 10 000 colonists on its outer rim, the length to be determined by the number of colonists desired; O’Neill emphasized that the colony could be ready by 1990 using existing technology and materials mined from outer space. O’Neill last year took his theories to a NASA-sponsored study group at Stanford University that included 28 physicists, engineers, and social scientists; the panel recommended that the U.S. move toward the colonization of space, saying that it “would represent ‘cashing in’ on the scientific information returned to us by Apollo.” (W Star, 18 June 76, A-l)
The Communications Research Centre (CRC) of the Canadian government’s Communications Department in Ottawa announced successful demonstration of a new satellite-aided search-and-rescue concept that could reduce time, fuel-dollar, and other costs associated with conventional ways of finding downed aircraft. The demonstration was funded by the Canadian Department of National Defence. The project, begun in May 1975, used the Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation’s Oscar 6 satellite with simulated distress signals to show that crash sites in Canada—and elsewhere in the world—could be pinpointed with accuracies as good as 1.6 km, generally within 3 km, in as little as 15 to 20 min after the spacecraft first heard the signal. The conventional emergency locator transmitter (ELT) mandatory for aircraft in Canada and the U.S. would automatically signal on crash impact, as designed, providing a signal on the international distress frequency of 121.5 hz for at least 100 hr for search-and-rescue aircraft to home into. The search range until now had been within 50 km of a crash site, flying crisscross patterns involving many planes and dozens of costly as well as risky flying hours. The satellite system would depend on two things: highly precise orbit predictions (knowledge of the satellite’s exact position at any instant) and sophisticated computer processing of distress signals relayed to a ground station. The system works by measuring the Doppler shift in the ELT signal frequency as the satellite at about 1100 km altitude passes over the crash site; locations of about 60 “crashes” simulated by transmitters as far away as Winnipeg had been fixed by processing Oscar 6 signals with increasing degrees of accuracy. An operational system would include 3 satellites with a design lifetime of 7 to 10 yr, with total spacecraft and launch costs about $30 million. When the satellite nearest to a crash site appeared over the visible horizon, it would alert ground stations that it had received an alarm; 15 min later, at the conclusion of its pass, an immediate fix accurate within 112 km would be possible, and a position fixing the site within 3 km would be delivered within 2 to 15 min depending on the capacity of the computer. A $3 million annual cost over 10 yr would be only a small part of what Canada was now spending on aerial searches. (CDC release 8 June 76)
The 26-m “Venus dish” at NASA’s Coldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calif., normally used to communicate with interplanetary spacecraft, was serving as a research tool to study conversion of solar energy from satellites to electricity for use on earth, Goldstone researchers reported. In the tests, the big antenna represented an energy satellite collecting and converting sun energy into microwaves; more than a km and a half away, a set of receiver panels called a “rectenna” played the part of a ground station. The 7.6-m-high receiver panels contained more than 4500 aluminum T-shaped rectenna elements about 100 mm high, working like a TV antenna to gather and filter the microwave energy, converting it to AC or DC that could be fed directly into a utility. Results had been promising, with collection and conversion of mierowave beams to usable electricity at an efficiency of 82%. (NASA PAO, 76-H-685, caption)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel J. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, had selected Drs. Charles R. Chappell and James L. Burch of Marshall Space Flight Center as members of the flight team for the proposed Electrodynamics Explorer (EE) satellite mission, consisting of 2 satellites in polar orbit to study physical processes in the atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere from high and low orbit. Dr. Chappell’s proposal for the mission was a cold-plasma instrument, a retarding ion-mass .spectrometer; Dr. Burch proposed a high-altitude instrument for measuring medium-energy plasma. The 2 scientists participated in the project study phase during the past yr, and would work on the flight team with the EE study office at Goddard Space Flight Center in preparing a project plan for the dual-satellite mission. (NASA Release 76-123) At ceremonies in the town of Smiljan, Tesla’s birthplace, President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia praised the “orientation” of Tesla and his compatriots in the U.S. in their support for Yugoslavia during World War II. Later, at a luncheon, Tito reviewed Tesla’s achievements and urged the Yugoslavs to create conditions that would induce talented youths to remain and not leave their country to go abroad. At an informal meeting Dr. Fletcher presented Tito with photographs of Yugoslavia taken by a U.S. satellite, and received from the celebration committee a “golden plaque” bearing Tesla’s picture to be presented to President Ford. President Ford’s message at the ceremonies had stated that Tesla’s work “stands as a link between our two countries in the history of notable accomplishments in science and engineering.” (FBIS, Tanjug Domestic Service, 9-10 July 76, 11-16)
The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) reported 1975 net income of slightly more than $46 million, compared to nearly 145 million for 197 4, attributing the increase to additional leasing of circuits to the corporation’s customers—3833 at the end of 1975, compared to 3510 in 1974. The report noted the FCC decision of 4 Dec. 1975 ordering lower rates for services provided through ComSat’s global system, and warned that the decision would have “a substantial adverse impact” on future earnings unless modified by judicial review. ComSat had appealed the ruling and delayed filing a schedule of lower rates. (ComSat Release 76-3)
NASA-funded studies conducted in Fla. and Tex. using infrared images from NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service had provided fruit and vegetable growers with timely information on ground temperatures during periods of crop-killing freezes, NOAA announced. The images, provided every half hour by Goes 1 from its equatorial station over South America at 35 800-km altitude, were transmitted from heat-radiation sensors to ground stations for conversion to visual imagery. The Fla. study used a computer to display the temperature variations in shades of gray, verified by ground readings taken in the area by Univ. of Fla. personnel. The Texas study converted the satellite data to typewriter characters that produced a remarkably similar printout, transmissible over teletypewriter machines, more widely available than photofax equipment. Both studies aimed at helping growers decide whether to undertake expensive steps to keep crops from being damaged by frost; heating orchards in Florida might cost up to $5 million per night. (NOAA Release 76-257)
Jan A. Bijvoet (pronounced byfoot) of the Netherlands arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center where he would on 1 April become the new representative of the European Space Agency (ESA) in the Spacelab program office. Most of his career had been with transatlantic cooperative programs; from 1961 to 1970, he had worked for NATO as a senior scientist in the evaluation methods section of SHAPE’S technical center. Before coming to MSFC he had spent 6 yr in ESA’s aeronautical satellite program, a joint activity of ESA and the Federal Aviation Administration. At MSFC Bijvoet would be responsible for technical and managerial liaison between NASA and ESA on the Spacelab program. He succeeded Robert Mory, who had been at MSFC since the beginning of the Spacelab program in 1973 and had been reassigned to the Paris office of ESA. (MSFC Release 76-70)
The official Manila radio announced an agreement between Domestic Satellite Philippines and the Nippon Electric Co. of Japan for acquisition, installation, and construction of 11 earth-satellite stations in a $26 million satellite communications system, to be operational by 1978. The system would provide long-distance service in the national communications network. (FBIS, Manila FEBC in English, 5 Oct 76)
Images from Landsat had reinforced the theory that mankind had created his own deserts through overgrazing of livestock, according to Joseph Otterman, a Landsat data user at Tel Aviv University. Satellite and other data had shown that overgrazed land on one side of the fence along the Israel-Egypt armistice line consistently measured several degrees cooler than the other side; the denuded land, reflecting more sunshine, retained less heat than vegetated land. The warmer land heated the overlying air, causing it to rise, form clouds, and rain; lack of this “heat mountain” effect over the denuded land encouraged formation of deserts. (CSM, 15 Dec 76)
Tests on the Lageos—a geophysical research satellite expected to remain in orbit several million years—concluded at Goddard Space Flight Center at the end of Jan., NASA announced, and the satellite would be shipped to the Western Test Range in California for launch in late April. Called the “cosmic golfball” because of its 426 special reflectors designed to return laser pulses to their exact point of origin on the earth, Lageos would provide a stable point in the sky to permit measurement of the relative locations of participating ground stations within a few centimeters; these measurements would provide scientists with models of earth’s crustal motion, useful in predicting earthquakes. Manager of the Lageos project would be the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 76-17)
Simultaneous measurement of ocean-surface conditions from an aircraft and from an altimeter on NASA’s Geos 3 satellite 840 km above the surface was the mission of a NASA-Navy team just back from a month’s expedition to Newfoundland. Correlation of aircraft data on actual surface conditions with remotely sensed data from Geos 3, launched 9 April 1975, would demonstrate satellite capability of making accurate and rapid sea-state measurements. Newfoundland was chosen for the experiments because it exhibited a wide range of climatic and oceanographic conditions within a relatively short time period. Measurements taken were sea ice, sea state, surface-wind field, and determination of atmospheric refractivity. Each pass of the satellite—8 to 10 times a day— would produce 10 to 15 min of data relayed to Goddard Space Flight Center via tracking stations at Bermuda, Madrid, or Winkfield, England. Satellite observations plotted for the North Atlantic would be compared with aircraft data and with daily Navy-NOAA forecast maps. The team consisted of 8 persons from the Naval Research Laboratory and 11 representatives of Wallops Flight Center and Lockheed contractors. (NASA Release 76-39; WFC Release 76-2)
Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increasing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from various observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars, and meant that—“in several tens of millions of years from now”—it would fall on to the planet. (FBIS, 15 Sept 76) ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut 5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight, Izvestia said. (FB1S, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Inti Service in Russian, 15 Sept 76; IF Star, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; NYT, 16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A18; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25) Moscow radio said 16 Sept, that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multispectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology research; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record changes in its composition during the flight. Tass reported 20 Sept, that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photography to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phenomena and processes. The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions 22 Sept, in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the landing module and checking its engine. After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed 23 Sept, at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being processed and studied. ! Soyuz 22's East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jettisoned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various investigations.” Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 22) oriented and stabilized the ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the camera. The crew “carried out all operations ... by heart, so to say, without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported. Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health, Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount of research” in space during their week-long expedition. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, commander of the Soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4, who had told a COSPAR meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions independent of the Salyut stations. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 23 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
A press briefing following the 7th lunar science conference at Johnson Space Center [see 22 Feb.] featured the cochairmen, Dr. Larry Haskins, chief of planetary and earth sciences at JSC, and Dr. Robert Pepin, director of the Lunar Science Institute, and Dr. Deter Hayman of Rice Univ. Dr. Haskins said the conference aimed at broadening the planetary view of people working with lunar samples and data; a substantial interest was developing in the lunar polar-orbiter mission among people more interested than before in planetology, and aware that orbiting and remote-sensing missions would be the principal source for studying geoscientific evolution of these bodies. As an example, long-range operation of the lunar-surface packages had produced information that resulted in a lowered value for lunar heatflow; this in turn “constrained” the composition of the moon and its evolutionary history—“Whatever history it has, the amount of heat in the interior has to match the present heat loss from the body.” Also, said Dr. Haskins, lunar data were being used widely by scientists not previously concerned with lunar research: for example, archived data would be used to tell whether the moon was differentiated only in its outer extent, or more than 50% of it had undergone chemical separation or even developed a core. Another example would be the matching of seismic with magnetic data to get a better overall picture of lunar evolution. Dr. Pepin noted that 740 people had attended the conference, many more than the previous year; the program committee had purposely included discussions of other planetary and meteorite investigations that revealed much about the first 500 million yr of solar-system history, whose clues still exist in the moon (although hard to interpret) but no longer exist on earth. Experience with other planets had been insufficient to say if they had preserved early solar-system records; “best chances are not,” he added. Early solar-system history, especially of the inner planets, was characterized by enormous bombardment of all solid surfaces by objects now referred to as meteorites, but on a scale in those days “that almost suggests we should call them something else.” These huge objects clearly left their mark, with evidence that the bombardment took place more than 4 billion yr ago, then rapidly tapered off. Data from Mercury, Mars, and Venus would be expected to show that the historical record had been erased by time, constant impact, and geological activity in which the surface was pounded, dispersed, or remelted. The intense bombardment had wiped out earth’s early geological record too; terrestrial geologists had tried to put the age of the oldest earth rocks farther and farther back, getting in gradual stages as far back as 3.7 billion yr in a large anorthosite deposit in Greenland.This boundary condition for earth geology was one reason for the growing interest in lunar and general planetary studies: the flow of information had been not only from planetary to terrestrial scientists, but also in the other direction. Lunar scientists had begun to examine terrestrial craters such as the 60-km impact phenomenon called Manicouagan: what would have been referred to 5 yr ago as remnants of a Manicouagan volcano had now been established as an impact, mainly because the ease of sampling (greater there than on the moon) had permitted study of energy partition and formation of rock, glass, and melt material in a large-scale impact. Comparative planetology means applying results of studying one planetary surface to explain phenomena on other planetary surfaces. Earth, unlike other planets we know about, continued as a thermally active planet with volcanism, mountain upheaval and wearing down, and had obliterated much of its earlier record. The early stages of the lunar and planetary program focused attention outward; now these studies had provided knowledge applicable to earth, and the generation and development of lunar-surface morphology as a result of external bombardment was only one example of this application. Over the next 2 to 3 yr, a group of 50 to 100 scientists would be studying in detail the phenomenon of volcanism on all the terrestrial planets as a fundamental stage of planetary development, in a pilot project to define comparative planetology and relate it to a specific aspect. Mercury apparently had basalt flows; Venera pictures suggest recent activity on the surface of Venus that produced what seem to be basalts. Mars clearly had basalts: it had the largest volcano in the solar system, “an enormous structure that would . . . cover the state of Kansas if . . . plunked down there.” In 2 or 3 yr, Dr. Pepin said, we should be able to give an integrated picture of the issuing of basalts from the interior onto the surface, an extremely important process in the development and evolution of a planet. Life in the solar system was an exciting subject now, said Dr. Hayman, and discoveries were coming in at a pace that would make today’s theories outmoded by the time they got into print 6 mo from now. The task of scientists, he said, was to include the general public in the excitement, and to make it filter through to the colleges and universities, to high schools, and even to grade-school levels. One thing that had changed in the past 20 yr since the days of Harold Urey and Hans Seuss was the concept of the solar nebula and the formation of planets and satellites by accretion. The problem was the noncondensable material in the nebula, and where it went: the solar physicists explained its absence by the theory of a solar upheaval that cleaned out the inner parts of the solar system by a superstorm of ions. Applying thermodynamics to this theory made it possible to calculate which compounds would condense out at what temperature. The Allende meteorite that fell in Mexico in 1969 contained compounds similar to what had been predicted as a result of condensation of the solar nebula at high temperatures. Then, 2 or 3 yr ago the idea arose that the sun and planets had formed not only from gases but also from so-called presolar grains, which had not been specifically identified; their identity on the earth and moon would have been lost over time because of geological processes. So the search shifted to meteorites. Although none of the grains had been definitely identified, the conference had heard 2 reports that might be interpreted as finding presolar grains. Metallic nuggets in the Allende meteorite were found to consist of platinum-group metals in extraordinarily small fragments, a millionth of a meter, that did not vaporize or melt readily and might be presolar grains (although it would take a lot of work to settle the question, Dr. Hayman said). Also, a group from Berkeley had dissolved carbonaceous meteorites in hydrofluoric acid to get rid of the silicates; the carbon residue was found to be full of gas called “planetary” because its composition differed from that of the sun and was much more like that of earth. The question was how carbon material could have been of planetary origin under the solar-nebula theory: speculation was that the carbonaceous material might predate the formation of the sun and have originated elsewhere. It could not have undergone great heat without being destroyed, so the objects containing the material must have been created farther out, not in the inner region of the sun and terrestrial planets but in the region of the giant planets. If the heavier elements were synthesized in the stars by nuclear processes, especially in explosions of novas and supernovas that produced all sorts of elements as they blew away their outer envelopes, all the elements are probably represented in this expanding envelope. With rapidly dropping temperatures, the condensation of presolar grains would occur within 10 yr. It would be possible to look at the product of a single event to extrapolate the total of many such events of which all the elements around us would be the product. Dr. Haskins said in summary that developments in methodology and the availability of more precise measurements would make it possible to supplant earlier measurements. Geophysicists were learning to extract information from bits of material instead of bucketsful or large chunks as they had done in the past. The Apollo program had been responsible for a steady progress in the field of measurements: “there simply was not the funding and interest correlated together to do it prior to that time.” Asked what the scientific community had learned about the moon in the 3 yr 3 mo since the last moon mission, Haskins said they were beginning to understand the major stages in the evolution of every planetary body composed of rocky material; the moon had passed through stages that the earth had not reached, and had preserved a record of what had happened—for example, a preview of the kind of rock that would be formed later in earth history. The findings provided a broad framework in which more and different questions could be asked, not just investigation of the more obvious characteristics of the many materials brought back. Queried on the lunar-sample curatorial facility, Dr. Haskins said that moon rocks from the Apollo expeditions were housed in a leaky, flimsy facility that would not protect them for use of future generations of scientists. A new facility was desperately needed, because the present building was not fireproof and the roof leaked; within the building, the rocks had been kept in nitrogen-filled cabinets and handled only in clean-room conditions, to prevent contamination. However, moisture in the surroundings might have led to erroneous deductions regarding the moon environment when scientists analyzed the lunar samples. (Transcript, 7th lunar science conf. press briefing, 19 Mar 76; NASA Release 76-25; JSC Release 76-15; Science, vol. 185, 346; W Post, 21 Mar 76, A-3)
Images from NASA’s Landsat 1 earth-resources survey satellite helped Alaskan Indians to choose the best areas of timberland and mineral deposits in compliance with the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971, NASA announced. The act set aside 99 million acres from federal public lands so that more than 200 native village corporations and 12 native regional corporations—representing about 100,000 Indians, Eskimos, and Aleuts—could settle claims going back to the U.S. purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867. A regional corporation—Doyon, Inc.—asked the Univ. of Alaska to recommend the best land out of inaccessible, irregularly shaped tracts scattered over the huge state. Though known to be rich in minerals and commercially profitable forests, the area had no detailed maps and few settlements, roads, or airfields. Scientists at the university’s Geophysical Inst, used Landsat images, combined with limited ground and aerial data, to map 7 million acres of which Doyon chose 2 million. The Doyon selections were based heavily on the Landsat maps; the university reported that application of Landsat data “at least doubled the value of the land selected . . .” (NASA Release 76-63)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced an agreement on loan of a radiometer for 2 yr to the Iranian College of Science and Technology at Tehran for use in propagation experiments in the 12-ghz band, to be used by European relay satellites for long-distance public telecommunications. The experiments would be carried out in “particularly interesting conditions,” ESA said, because of Iran’s geographical and climatic characteristics. (ESA release, 1 Mar 76)
The USSR had made good use of observations from its manned space stations, Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov said, citing photographs taken by Salyut 3 showing 67 locations where oil and natural gas could be found in the Caspian Sea region and 84 in Uzbekistan. The satellite did in 3 mo a job that had taken 60 yr of ground prospecting to reveal 102 deposits, he said. Published in the Feb. issue of the British magazine Spaceflight, the report by Sedov mentioned contributions to agriculture from a space survey that revealed millions of gallons of water “just below the surface” of arid lands near the Caspian Sea, showing areas that might be suitable for “oasis farming” or grazing livestock. Discussing changes in the environment made possible by space technology, Sedov said such influences should “bear a global character,” to avoid a repetition of the “notorious experiment” (the so-called West Ford) in which the U.S. released a cloud of copper fibers in orbit in 1963 for communications experiments; West Ford caused worldwide complaints by radio astronomers. (Spaceflight, Feb 76, 54) March 1976
India’s second artificial earth satellite would be launched in 1978 from a USSR cosmodrome, Tass announced. The agreement had been made at a Moscow meeting of a working group of Soviet and Indian specialists. (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 Apr 76)
Two Landsats, launched in 1972 and 1975 to monitor earth resources, had been tested for the job of census taker by NASA and the Bureau of the Census, NASA announced. Public Law 521, signed by President Ford 18 Oct. 76, required a complete U.S. census every 5 yr instead of once every 10 yr; the satellites, if their performance in 1980 in regional readouts and verifications should prove satisfactory, would permit significant savings in manpower, the Bureau said. Landsat images, although not detailed enough to count people or houses, could serve to identify geological, agricultural, and societal features, especially residential patterns of growth. Satellite images of areas of Md. and Tex. had been processed in 1975 to identify land cover typical of transition from rural to urban use; conventional census boundaries overlaid on the images enabled a computer to identify urban fringe zones in the test areas, verified by actual census statistics, the Bureau said. (NASA Release 76-176)
Simultaneous measurements by two polar-orbiting satellites of powerful electric currents causing magnetic disturbances on earth had produced composite diagrams of horizontal current-flow in the ionosphere, vertical currents along magnetic-field lines, and the resulting magnetic perturbations, NOAA announced. A team of scientists representing NOAA and five universities had presented their findings at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco. Dr. Yohsuke Kamide of the Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (sponsored by NOAA and the Univ. of Colorado) said that, before the advent of satellites, auroras had been studied from the ground with cameras and magnetometers, which could detect the presence of powerful currents but not their location or direction. The Triad satellite launched in 1972 by the U.S. Navy had carried a Johns Hopkins Univ. three-component magnetometer to measure the strength of vertical currents supplying the “auroral electrojets”; using it, together with a satellite launched by the USAF Defense Meteorological Satellite Program and ground-based measurements from stations in Alaska, Canada, and the USSR, the team had produced its composite for 30 instances of perturbation. Other members of the team were Herbert W. Kroehl of NOAA’s Environmental Data Service; Dr. Gordon Rostoker, Univ. of Alberta; Dr. Syun-ichi Akasofu, Univ. of Alaska; Dr. Thomas A. Potemra, Johns Hopkins Univ.; and Dr. Ching Meng, Univ. of Calif, at Berkeley. (NOAA Release 76-274)
San Marco C-2, launched from the San Marco platform 18 Feb. 1974 into an elliptical orbit to record day-by-day variations in the equatorial atmosphere’s density, composition, and temperature, was declared a success after 2 3 mo in orbit during which it obtained more than 17 diurnal cycles of data. The data had been correlated with data from Explorer 51 (AE-C) in studying the physics and dynamics of the thermosphere, and these studies would continue as more data from the two satellites were processed and analyzed. Two U.S. scientific instruments were still operating normally, but the Italian air-drag balance instrument (which malfunctioned shortly after launch) had not performed properly. (MOR S-894-74-04, 30 Jan. 76)
NASA launched ITOS-H, fifth operational spacecraft of the second-generation improved Tiros operational satellite (ITOS) series, from the Western Test Range at 1:07 pm EDT (10:07 am PDT, local time) on a 2-stage Delta vehicle into a synchronous polar orbit with 1523.6-km apogee, 1512.5-km perigee, 102.1° inclination, and 116.2-min period. After successful injection into orbit, the satellite was redesignated Noaa 5; upon completion of in-orbit checkout, spacecraft control would be transferred to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) as part of that agency’s National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (NOMSS). Of 4 previous Noaa polar-orbiting spacecraft, 2 still provided limited information but had deteriorated after 2.5 and 1.5 yr in orbit respectively because of harsh environmental conditions in space. ITOS spacecraft were designed to provide complete global coverage of earth’s cloudcover and atmospheric structure on a daily basis, using both daytime and nighttime instrumentation. The 345-kg boxlike spacecraft measured roughly 1 x 1 x 1.25 m and carried 3 winglike panels covered with solar cells, as well as earth-orientation devices and 4 communications antennas. Sensor systems included 2 vertical-temperature profile radiometers, 2 very high-resolution radiometers, and 2 solar-proton monitoring systems, as well as a scanning radiometer system to provide both stored picture coverage for transmission on demand and direct transmission of images to receiving stations within range. Visible-channel resolution was 3.7 km, infrared resolution 7.4 km. (NASA Release 76-130; MOR E-601-76-17 [prelaunch] 28 July 76, [postlaunch] 30 July 76, 1 Oct 76; NOAA Releases 76-143, 76-152)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) reported net income for the third quarter of 1976 of $7 607 000, down from last yr’s third-quarter net of $11 837 000. The decrease was the result of amounts placed in escrow under an FCC accounting and refund order of 16 June 1976; if the order had not been in effect, the quarter’s net would have been $14 603 000. Although operating income dropped as a result of the escrow requirement, the wholly owned Comsat General Corp. for the first time had realized revenues for the entire period from both Marisat and Comstar programs; in the third quarter a yr ago, the subsidiary had reduced ComSat’s net operating income by a penny per share. Operating expenses, including taxes, were $30 223 000 for the quarter, up from $24 997 000 for the third quarter of 1975; the increase was due to costs of the launches of Intelsat IV-A, Marisat, and Comstar satellites. ComSat’s gross operating revenues for the third quarter of 1976 totaled $36 260 000, an increase over last yr’s third quarter total of $35 116 000; the escrow requirement had prevented the gross revenues from increasing more than $ 15 million over last yr’s third quarter with the beginning of Marisat and Comstar services and continued growth in the number of circuits leased to customers of the Intelsat global communications system. Half circuits leased at the end of Sept. 1976 numbered 4129, a 16% increase over the 3547 leased at the end of Sept. 1975. Money put in escrow under the FCC order represented the difference between customer payments to ComSat under present rates, and the amounts based on lower rates that would be required under an FCC rate decision of 4 Dec. 1975. The rate decision was still under judicial review. (ComSat Release 76-16)
INTELSAT (International Telecommunications Satellite Organization) announced that its board of governors, meeting in Washington 21-28 July, had approved the loan of a cesium ion thruster to NASA under a 1-yr no-cost arrangement, for use in research on inert gases (argon and xenon) as propellants for auxiliary propulsion in spacecraft and ground-based applications. Like the nickel-hydrogen battery for the Navy’s navigation-technology satellite to be launched later this year and an echo canceller to be licensed for use in satellite communications, the INTELSAT thruster was developed under a series of contracts managed by COMSAT Laboratories at Clarksburg, Md. It had exhibited higher electrical and propellant efficiency than other thrusters of comparable size. (INTELSAT Release 76-22-M)
Scientists at the Naval Research Laboratory successfully used a computer system to orient sensors on high-altitude balloons orbiting the earth on observation flights of up to 100 days, NRL announced. The long-duration missions were required to monitor high-energy solar flares, cosmic gamma-ray bursts, and transient x-ray sources. The NRL system, designed for superpressure balloons flying at 40-km altitude, used a microcomputer programmable for as many as 32 observation tasks, which could be modified in flight by ground command. An L-band telemetry link from the balloon permitted receipt and recording of data on position and sidereal time, used by the microcomputer to orient the detector. Data could be relayed through geosynchronous satellites, using the computer to orient a high-gain antenna toward the satellite. Realtime long-duration monitoring by balloons could offer a low-cost and frequently more sensitive alternative to satellite experiments, NRL stated. (NRL Release 44-7-76B)
The Communications Satellite Corp. reported net income of $11 041 000 for the first quarter of 1976, compared with $12 692 000 for the same period of 1975. Although total income of $37 276 000 for the first quarter was 2% higher than that for the same period in 1975, higher depreciation charges associated with the launch of additional satellites— Intelsat IV-A F-l and F-2, and the first Marisat—and higher operating costs, together with expenses of operating Satellite Business Systems—a partnership formed by subsidiaries of ComSat, IBM, and Aetna— accounted for the reduction in income. ComSat had appealed the FCC decision of 4 Dec. 75 reducing its rates, and FCC had delayed the effective date of the lower rates until the court had ruled on the appeal. (ComSat Release 76-7)
A Soviet-American symposium of oceanography experts in the Black Sea town of Yalta ended as scientists agreed on a 2-yr program of joint effort in the Atlantic aimed at compiling a theoretical model of the ocean. The model would aid in more accurate weather forecasting, in predicting climate fluctuations several yr in advance, and in combating environmental pollution. Cooperating in the work would be 10 Soviet and American vessels, earth satellites, and meteorological ground stations. (FBIS, Tass in English, 27 Aug 76)
NASA announced a first-time use of satellite relay of medical data from a moving ambulance to a hospital. Scientists and engineers at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) at Bay St. Louis, Miss., worked with General Electric’s Science Services Laboratory to develop a special portable transmitter and antenna that could continuously transmit voice and medical data—including electrocardiograms—from a moving ambulance to the satellite and down to a hospital receiving station. During demonstrations of the system on a highway near Bay St. Louis, communications from the ambulance had been received as far away as N. Mex. The NSTL system, using the data-collection system on Goes 3, was similar to a telemedicine system being demonstrated by Johnson Space Center at the Papago Indian Reservation in N. Mex., and use of the Ats 6 for medical communications in Alaska. Use of an inexpensive receiver at the medical center could make remote health care economically feasible; the system might eventually lead to development of a special medical satellite to relay emergency data from remote hospitals, ships, offshore oil platforms, and other remote locations to major medical centers for consultation. (NASA Release 76-86)
Photographs from U.S. remote-sensing satellites had revealed the existence of water, oil, uranium, and other minerals in the Egyptian Sahara and the Sinai peninsula, the Washington Post reported. Egyptian scientist Ahmed Abdel Hady, head of an Egyptian-American scientific team in charge of a remote-sensing project that had been receiving data from satellites since 1972, said in an AP interview that the satellites revealed enough water in the Sinai desert “to turn most of it green.” (Most of Sinai was still occupied by the Israelis, who seized it in 1967.) The Egyptian government, working in cooperation with Okla. State Univ. and the Univ. of Mich., had an annual budget of $1.2 million for study of the untapped resources, Abdel Hady said. Although the satellite data had shown that highlands in northern Sinai and the coastal strip of Wadi el Arish, totaling more than 770 km“, concealed a huge water potential, he declined to go into details because “I don’t want to make it difficult for Egypt when it negotiates the next Israeli pullout.” However, he described photographs of an area about 1350 km" in Sinai that showed three different areas rich in petroleum and natural gas: the Gulf of Suez, with oil reserves already proven; the Mediterranean offshore area in northern Sinai, not yet explored; and a large area in southern Sinai marked by sedimentary rocks carrying natural gas. Uranium was also detected in northwest and southern Sinai, and west central Sinai contained huge amounts of silica that could lead to a glass industry, Abdel Hady said. Besides the desert potential, he added, the images also showed significant food-growing potential in a previously unnoted fertile area measuring about 965 km~ near the Nile basin; the images were also used to study the Qattara Depression in the desert west of the Nile, site of a huge proposed hydroelectric project. (W Post, 13 June 76, G-2)
Leadership of Europe’s comsat programs had gravitated toward the U.K.—“more by accident” than by design, said an ESA official—since prime contractorship for those programs had fallen to Britain’s Hawker Siddeley Dynamics within the European consortium known as MESH (Matra of France, ERNO of W. Germany, Saab-Scania of Sweden, Aeri-talia of Italy, and Fokker-VFW of Holland). Current programs included OTS, the orbital test satellite scheduled for launch in 1977 to evaluate items for an operational European telecommunications system; Marots, to be launched in 1978, an experimental maritime comsat; and ECS, the European comsat that ESA hoped to fly in the early 1980s. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that potential markets worldwide for prime-contractor capability had become so numerous that MESH had divided marketing responsibilities among its members according to their influence in various regions, HSD being strongest in Arab League areas and in Africa. An HSD official noted that Europe was ahead of the U.S. in three-axis stabilization and in higher frequencies for satellite communications; demonstration of effective project leadership would assure future success in the world market. (Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 96) Japan’s Natl. Police Agency announced that Belenko was the 15th Soviet national to seek protection in Japan with a view to taking political asylum in some other country; of the previous 14, 11 went to the U.S. and 1 each to Italy, Israel, and West Germany. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFB in English, 6, 7 Sept; Tokyo Kyodo in English, 6, 7 Sept; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 25; W Post, 7 Sept 76, A-l)
A proposal for consolidating about 60 current federal programs— in areas such as health, education, child nutrition, and social services—into “block grants” to the states, with few strings attached. Proposed spending for defense represented a turnaround of sorts: defense spending had fallen for a while after Vietnam, then rose again in FY 1975 with the end of the draft and conversion to higher priced all-volunteer armed forces with an upward pressure on wages. The outlay in FY 1977 would be for weapons; more than half the recommended increase would go for procurement, research, and development. Defense at $101.1 billion would constitute a fourth of the total budget, as in recent years, and Social Security about another fifth. Interest on the public debt would add a tenth; these three items would account for more than half. Five other basic budget items—Medicare-Medicaid, unemployment compensation, civil service retirement, and veterans benefits—would make up three fourths of the total, leaving only a fourth of the total budget for all remaining government spending. Science, represented by $23.5 billion in federal R&D spending proposed for FY 1977, would use more than half that amount for military projects; the space program would get $3.6 billion, only 4% more than the current year and much less than price escalation. Highest priorities for increases in civilian spending on science would be colleges and universities, which would get $2.6 billion in research funds, and the National Science Foundation, which would get $812 million. NASA, under the proposed budget, would postpone purchase of one of the Space Shuttles for a year, and would drop its plan for a Mars-Jupiter-Saturn explorer. At the height of spending for the Apollo program 10 yr ago, civilian and nonspace science got 20% of R&D funding; in FY 1977, it would get 37%. (W Star, 21 Jan 76, A-l, A-10, A-ll; W Post, 22 Jan 76, A-l, A-l4, A-15, A-16; NYT, 22 Jan 76, 1, 24, 25, 26) At a hearing on solar power from satellites conducted by the subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Deputy Administrator George M-Low and Dr. John M. Teem, ERDA’s Assistant Administrator for Solar, Geothermal, and Advanced Energy Systems, were questioned closely by Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky), subcommittee chairman, on the ERDA and NASA responsibilities for the program. Testimony revealed that ERDA had prime responsibility for solar, as well as other, power-generating concepts, and that NASA had not requested funds for developing an independent program but was working on solar-power ideas to use in satellite missions. Primary goal of ERDA’s program, Dr. Teem testified, was development and demonstration of terrestrial solar-energy applications that were commercially attractive and environmentally acceptable: solar thermal electric, photovoltaic, wind, and ocean-energy conversion. Dr. Teem pointed out that the FY 1977 budget included no direct funding for energy R&D for NASA, as the basic responsibility rested with ERDA. Dr. Low added that, when ERDA decided that research should proceed, NASA would do the work with ERDA funding. (Text, pp. 192-227)
A communications satellite system to serve more than 200 U.S. public television stations within the next 2 yr was proposed by the Public Broadcasting Service and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting in a report prepared for managers of PBS member stations before the annual meeting in Los Angeles next month. If the member stations approved the proposal and the Federal Communications Commission followed with its approval promptly, the system could be in operation within 21 mo, putting PB ahead of commercial networks by renting circuits on satellites operated by Western Union Telegraph Co. instead of leasing land lines from American Telephone & Telegraph at $12 million a yr. The $38-million satellite system would offer 3 or 4 channels instead of the single land line; expense of additional land lines had precluded additional transmissions to special audiences, such as Spanish-speaking populations in major cities and the U.S. Southwest; the cost of the land lines would increase yearly; and the cost of adding other stations to the PB satellite system would he limited to the cost of a simple ground receiver. (W Star, 28 Jan 76, A-l; W Post, 29 Jan 76, A-7)
Both the United States and the USSR were working on ways to shoot down enemy satellites in earth orbit, reported Henry S. Bradsher in the Washington Star. Commenting on a Department of Defense disclosure of “aggressive basic technology research efforts” to protect U.S. satellites from a potential Soviet threat, Bradsher noted that the DOD previously had refused to comment on U.S. work on so-called satellite killers [see 27 July] and had tended to play down any Soviet danger. With the DOD announcement came word that the USSR had conducted 3 satellite-destruction tests this year; it had conducted 5 tests of such systems between 1968 and 1971, but had dropped them, leading Pentagon officials to think the program had been halted in accordance with 1972 agreements that limited strategic defense armament (SALT l) and antiballistic-missile systems. The agreements had been based on each side’s ability to monitor the other’s compliance by means of reconnaissance satellites; however, recent reconnaissance photographs had been interpreted as showing Soviet launch pads carrying satellite-killer systems. Secretary of the Navy J. William Middendorf had stated 25 Sept, that the Soviet Union was presumed to be working on guidance systems that could destroy targets such as over-the-horizon naval warfare missiles, greatly heightening the threat to U.S. warships. Asked if the U.S. were developing satellite-killers, Middendorf replied, “We’re working in that direction.” The Pentagon at first refused to comment on a satellite-destruction program, but released a statement when pressed about Middendorf s answer. (WStar, 26 Sept 76, A—1)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization— announced award of an $8840 contract to the Univ. of Oulu, Finland, for measurements of low-elevation-angle scintillation. The 1 -yr contract covered investigation of the slow fluctuation in received-signal strength from a satellite to earth stations in humid localities, at elevation angles of 5° above the horizon. Water vapor in the lower atmosphere could cause fluctuations in signal strength, intensified where the look-angle from station to satellite is as low as 5 °, causing the signal to pass through more of earth’s atmosphere than if the elevation angle were greater. (INTELSAT Release 76-21-M)
A radio sensing system deployed by the federal government in remote areas of the U.S. since the spring of 1975 to warn of impending natural disasters had already passed one test, reported David S. Johnson, director of the National Environmental Satellite Service. An impending flood upstream from the town of Deming, Wash., had been detected by the sensors, and the river had crested an inch above its flood stage as predicted. The radio sensors, attached to transmitters, collected and relayed data from NOAA geostationary satellites (Goes 1, watching the East Coast, and Sms 2 watching the Pacific Coast); the satellites relayed the information to NOAA computers in the World Weather Building at Suitland, Md. Initial work on the system began in the 1960s, and it was already operational. By summer of 1976, 150 to 200 sensor stations would be in place; a total of about 10 000 would eventually be situated to warn of floods, earthquakes, forest fires, or tidal waves that began in unfrequented areas. The system could also be used for keeping track of ships at sea or of trucks on the highway. (B Sun, 26 Feb 76, A—1; NOAA Release 76-32)
At 0300 CMT (12:30 pm local time) the Japanese ionosphere sounding satellite Ume was launched from the Tanegashima site on the 3-stage liquid-fuel N rocket to an orbital altitude of about 1000 km. The cylindrical satellite weighed 139 kg, had a diameter of 94 cm, and was 82 cm high. Its estimated lifetime was 1.5 yr. This was the second successful launch with the new N rocket. (FBIS, Kyodo 29 Feb 76)
Scientists at Mass. Institute of Technology, using NASA’s Sas 3 x-ray astronomy satellite, found a stellar object unlike any other and were unable to say what it was. The discovery, located by Dutch astronomers in the center of the galaxy in the constellation Sagittarius, gave off x-ray bursts that were unevenly spaced, although pulse after pulse proved to be identical. The object might be a single new source or a combination of old ones, but its distance was millions of light years and the source might be nonexistent now, the investigators said. (W Star, 1 Feb 76, A-6)
The Aerosat Space Segment Board, representing the European Space Agency, Comsat General Corp., and the government of Canada, decided to issue requests for proposals for a supply of Aerosat spacecraft beginning 1 Mar., with target date for award of contract 15 Nov. The Aerosat program, to be carried out by ESA, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, and the government of Canada, would set up an experimental satellite-communications system between transoceanic aircraft and the ground to tesffunctions and timing of an operational system for the International Civil Aviation Organization. Two satellites designed for 7-yr lifetime would be launched into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean, probably in 1979-80. (ESA release 23 Jan 76; Comsat General Release 76-103)
At the request of the Soviet Union, U.S. satellites took pictures of the predicted bumper crop of grain in the USSR and turned the pictures over to that country to confirm the predictions, said presidential science adviser Dr. H. Guyford Stever at a White House briefing. The Russians had announced 5 Nov. that more than 220 million metric tons of grain had been harvested; U.S. Dept, of Agriculture officials said the final figures would probably exceed 1973’s record Soviet harvest of 222.5 million tons. (NYT17 Dec 76, A-4)
The Brazilian Telecommunications Company received bids from international firms to supply space tracking equipment to the Brazilian satellite communications system, according to a broadcast from the Brasilia Domestic Service. The announcement said the first stage of the domestic satellite system, to be concluded in 1979, would consist of 17 receiving and transmitting stations primarily in the Amazon region, and two space satellites; a third would be used for replacement. During a second phase ending in 1981, 19 more stations would be added. The system would consist of 44 stations in all, the last eight to be added later. (FBIS, Brasilia Domestic Service in Portuguese, 6 Oct 76)
NASA announced an agreement with the Indian Space Research Organization (1SRO) to add a solar-energy experiment to the cooperative satellite instructional television experiment (SITE) now under way using Ats 6, the applications technology satellite. In May, 1SRO was sent 2 solar arrays capable of producing 260 watt-hr of power a day under Indian sunlight conditions; the arrays would provide electricity to run 2 of the SITE TV receivers during the 4 hr each day that Indian programming would be broadcast to some 5000 villages using Ats 6. When India’s National Committee for Space Research studied power alternatives for the SITE terminals in 1969, solar cells were used almost exclusively in spacecraft and were considered too expensive for use on the ground; since that time, demand had increased sharply, the price had come down, and the sharp rise in petroleum prices had made the price of solar power more attractive. Although current cost of a solar-power system for a SITE terminal was estimated as $311 per yr (26% higher than the $247 cost of kerosene generators), research and production should bring the cost down to about $139 a yr by 1979, while the price of kerosene-generated electricity could well be higher. Also, arrays from solar cells could be produced in India and other developing countries by using existing technology, which would add to the advantages of solar power for use throughout the world. Solar power had proved desirable for use in areas not having central power stations; the solar-power systems were simple to install, had no moving parts, and needed only cleaning of array surfaces and maintenance of electrolyte levels as operational maintenance. NASA’s Lewis Research Center had demonstrated a solar array as a power source for an Ats 6 ground station last year; the India project would be one of many conducted by L<RC to support the U.S. Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA) in demonstrating terrestrial applications of solar-cell-generated electricity. An ISRO engineer would visit LeRC for training in assembly and operation of the solar arrays. (NASA Release 76-95)
The Soviet Union’s earth satellites had added a new profession—that of printer—to those of meteorologist, cartographer, and communicator, the Tass news agency announced. A Molniya comsat tested in Khabarovsk had transmitted newspapers from Moscow to the Far East more economically and more rapidly than had been possible using the transcontinental cable. The high-resolution capability of the equipment had produced excellent images, the announcement said, adding that “papers received by Far Eastern subscribers will now be absolutely identical to those taken out of their letter boxes by the Moscovites.” (FBIS, Tass Inti Service in Russian, 27 Oct 76)
Ithaco Inc. of Ithaca, N.Y., a space-industry subcontractor specializing in low-orbital unmanned-satellite electronics, had discovered a lucrative and largely untapped agricultural market by turning its expertise on animal electronics: specifically, a new device first marketed 19 mo ago to help farmers determine whether their pigs were pregnant and to preview the quality of porkchops the hogs would produce. The device would let farmers determine pig-pregnancy status 50 to 60 days earlier than previously possible, meaning substantial savings for breeders, company officials said, adding that the market would not be attractive to a large company. Overseas farmers accounted for up to 40% of “Scan-oprobe” sales, which totaled $3.8 million for the 1976 fiscal year, best in the firm’s 14-yr history. Ithaco would not abandon its space contracts, the company said, but employees who worked on intricate satellite parts could be switched over to the “animal electronics” contracts. (ATT, 15 Dec 76, A 16)
Study of earth’s climate to permit predictions of global climatic changes by the end of the century should be the top space priority, said a study group formed by NASA last year to assess U.S. progress in space and where it should go next. The 3-vol report of the study group did not mention manned exploration of Mars, which had been the prime recommendation of a forerunner study 7 yr ago. Citing the dependence of the world’s population on a complex system producing food and fiber where climate is favorable, the report said the entire system was predicated on a constant climate. Understanding of climatic processes would help solve earth’s most pressing problems: food shortages, and worldwide weather changes caused by pollution. The report estimated that a 1-degree cooling of earth’s annual temperature would mean loss of $1 billion in grain production, $2.2 billion in timber and fiber output, and $1.4 billion in fish catches; the drop would also increase the demand for electrical energy by $700 million, with a $2.4 billion rise in health costs other than treating skin cancers caused by alterations in earth’s atmosphere. The group recommended development of 6 satellites to identify and assess worldwide crop conditions; other satellites to study chemical changes in the atmosphere and to watch for solar changes affecting earth’s weather; and a network of 4 to 6 large geostationary satellites to observe ice and ocean conditions and keep tabs on the earth’s radiation balance. Manned flight should develop along the lines of Space Shuttle and space station— to be used partially for climate study—and instrumented craft should be sent to explore every solar-system planet except Pluto, the report said. Cost of the weather-satellite program was set at $1.7 billion, with operating costs over 20 yr estimated at $4.6 billion; the planetary exploration program would cost a total of $5.1 billion to the year 2000. (WPost, 22 Feb 76, A-3)
NASA launched Lageos—a laser geodynamic satellite—from Western Test Range on a Delta rocket at 3 am CDT (0800 GMT) into a nearcircular orbit with 5940-km apogee, 5845-km perigee, inclination of 109.8°, and period of 225.5 min. Lageos, resembling a “cosmic golf-ball” 60 cm in diameter and weighing 411 kg, would act in space as a sophisticated mirror reflecting laser beams directed at it by stations on the ground; scientists timing the round trip of the laser beams would be able to detect movement of the earth’s surface as small as 2 cm. The 3-yr phase 1 of the Lageos mission would validate laser-ranging techniques as compared with long-baseline interferometry and lunar laser ranging; phase 2 would consist of application of phase-1 techniques continuously for the usable life of the passive satellite. Although Lageos was not expected to fall back to earth for at least 8 million yr, and contained no moving parts or electronics to wear out, the 426 laser reflectors on its surface would be eroded in the space environment probably within 50 yr. (NASA Release 76-67; MSFC Release 76-82; MOR E-639-76-01 [prelaunch] 28 Apr 76, [postlaunch] 27 May 76; ATT, 5 May 76, 30; W Post, 5 May 76, A-8)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organizationawarded an 18-mo $275 000 fixed-price contract to TRW Systems, Inc., for a skewed reaction-wheel thruster attitude-control and stabilization system. A system based on the reaction-wheel principle would offer a combination of fight weight, high reliability, and accurate performance for future comsats. External disturbances of satellite stability would be canceled by spinning up the reaction wheels to create offsetting torques, then stopping the spin by use of thrusters. (INTELSAT Release 76-4-M)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced opening of a new ground station near Michelstadt/Odenwald, West Germany, that would include two 15m-dia parabolic antennas that would be operational for the launches of ESA satellites Geos and Meteosat in 1977. Geos, first geostationary scientific satellite, and Meteosat, Europe’s first meteorological satellite, would remain in uninterrupted contact with the Odenwald station because of their geostationary orbits. The two antennas represented an innovation in the field of telecommunications, ESA said, because of a special construction: To avoid mutual interference with ground-to-ground links operated by the W. German post office, the special construction resulted in an exceptionally low sidelobe level heretofore unattained, without reducing the station’s telecommunications performance. The station would be inaugurated 14 Sept, by Hans Matthofer, German minister for research and technology, and Roy Gibson, ESA’s director general. (ESA release 13 Sept 76)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Science Applications, Inc., of Los Angeles and Rockwell Inti. Corp. for negotiation of contracts to study space industrialization. The study program would lead from Shuttle Spacelab and early space-station experiments to permanent, practical, commercial use of space. The space-industrialization accomplishments so far achieved would be expanded into disciplines other than communications and meteorology; the study program would attempt to define a balance between future opportunities (satellite power systems) and relatively immediate benefits (space processing of materials). Possible areas of activity would include development of new techniques and materials, new development of earth resources, and eventually the movement of people to space for tourism or medical purposes, and the industrialization of the moon. The parallel studies would proceed in two phases, each requiring about 8 mo, and would cost about $200 000 each. (MSFC Release 76-160)
Tass reported from Moscow the launch of Intercosmos 16, carrying scientific apparatus developed in the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, and Sweden, as well as in the USSR. Orbital parameters were said to be 523-km apogee, 465-km perigee, 94.4-min period, and 50.6° inclination. The probe was to study ultraviolet and x-ray radiation from the sun and the effects of this radiation on upper-atmosphere structure. Observatories in Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR, and Czechoslovakia were making ground observations of the sun simultaneously with measurements taken aboard the satellite. (FBIS, Tass in English, 27 July 76)
Cosmonauts from 8 “socialist member-countries of the Intercosmos program” would join crews from the USSR in space beginning in 1978, the official Soviet news agency Tass announced. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, chief of training for the cosmonaut program, said that timing of such flights would depend on the readiness of technology and preparedness of the crews: the crew commander would be a Soviet flyer, and the flight engineer and research engineer would represent another participating country. Crewmembers from Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia would train at the Yuri Gagarin Center near Moscow where Soviet cosmonauts have trained. Intercosmos is an association of Communist nations that had already cooperated in launching 16 unmanned satellites, the New York Times noted; the only men in space so far had been either Soviet or American. (FB1S, Moscow Tass in English, 15 Sept 76; NYT, 15 Sept 76, 72; W Post, 15 Sept 76, A-14)
A Russian system for intercepting and destroying satellites apparently was unsuccessful this week, U.S. intelligence sources said. The test involved Russian satellites only, and posed no threat to any U.S. satellites in space. A target spacecraft (Cosmos 803) launched from Tyuratam 12 Feb. was the object of the test, carried out by an interceptor spacecraft (Cosmos 804) launched 4 days later. Observers differed on whether the interceptor had been maneuvered close enough to destroy the target, although a routine announcement by the USSR said the second launch had successfully completed its mission. In 5 tests between 1968 and 1971, USSR interceptor satellites had blown up on radio signal after approaching the targets in orbit, and the explosions had destroyed both interceptors and targets; Cosmos 804 had not blown up. U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger had said that the 1972 nuclear arms limitation agreement with Russia forbade the 2 countries from interfering with each other’s satellites, but did not prohibit tests of an antisatellite system. (B Sun, 21 Feb 76, A— 1; W Star, 21 Feb 76, A-3)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for a day-long meeting 16 Sept, at MSFC to review the status of the spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) that would deliver spacecraft from the Space Shuttle in low orbit to their operational synchronous orbits. The SSUS, carrying a satellite of the type now being launched by expendable Atlas-Centaur or Thor-Delta vehicles, would be launched from earth in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle. In orbit, the SSUS with its payload would be extended from the cargo bay on a cradle with a spin table that would stabilize the SSUS as it ejected from the cradle, before its own engine ignited to send it and its payload into the proper orbit. After reaching the required altitude, the payload’s propulsion system would position it in the desired orbital attitude. Industry representatives invited to the status review would hear presentations by NASA and Aerospace Corp. on concepts and current mission models for the SSUS. MSFC planned to issue requests for proposals for Phase B (preliminary design definition) about 1 Oct., with contracts being issued in Feb. Plans were to have the SSUS ready for flight in Dec. 1979. (MSFC Release 76-166; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 46)
Every ruble spent on space research had been returned many times to the Soviet national economy, said Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov in a Tass interview during observations of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s space flight. Leonov was one of the two USSR participants in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and had been the first man to walk in space during a Voskhod 2 flight 18 Mar. 1965. He stated that 496 spacecraft had been launched from Soviet cosmodromes in the last 5 yrs, 35 of them communications satellites, 13 Meteor weather satellites, and several Prognoz science satellites, as well as about 400 in the Cosmos series. The long-functioning Salyut stations were the main line of Soviet space activity, Leonov said, carrying out research in cartography, geology, agriculture, forestry, and hydrology as only a few of the many fields of knowledge expanded by work on orbital stations. Leonov also stressed the importance of the Soviet-American Apollo-Soyuz test project. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6 Apr 76)
Goes 1, a new geostationary environmental satellite launched in Oct. 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), became operational, replacing Sms 1 above the equator over northern Brazil to provide forecasters with visual and infrared pictures of the western hemisphere, to monitor solar-flare activity, and to relay information from data-collection stations in remote areas. Sms 1 would be moved to standby status over the eastern Pacific south of Mexico; a prototype satellite, some of whose systems have degraded, it could still provide full operational data on an emergency basis. Sms 2, launched in Feb. 1975, was moved in Dec. from 115°W to 135°W to provide improved imagery of the Pacific in the Hawaiian Islands area. (NOAA Release 76-1)
Communications Satellite Corp., the international telecommunications consortium, had begun contract negotiations with U.S. manufacturers on building a new generation of comsats with a capacity of about 12 000 simultaneous telephone calls plus television, to meet growing demand for international communications expected by the early 1980s, the annual meeting of ComSat stockholders was told. Joseph V. Charyk, president of ComSat, noted that the 2 new Intelsat IV-A satellites scheduled for launch this year had a capacity of about 6250 simultaneous telephone calls, plus television; the first such satellite—Intelsat I, the 1965 Early Bird—could carry either 200 telephone calls or one TV channel. Charyk said negotiations had been held with Hughes Aircraft (maker of Intelsat IV), TRW Inc., and a division of Ford Motor Co. for construction of the new satellites. However, he said, ComSat’s share of future international satellite operations would depend on the outcome of its appeal from an FCC order of last Dec. calling for sharp reductions in rates. Had the FCC rates been in effect for all of 1975, ComSat profits would have been $1.60 a share rather than $4.62 a share, he said. (WPost, 12 May 76, D-9)
The organizational structure of a large earth-orbiting space station was the topic of a doctoral study at Fla. State Univ. for Dr. James Ragusa of Kennedy Space Center’s Science and Applications Office. The study was an offshoot of work on future space projects (with Gene McCoy of KSC’s Shuttle Payload Integration Office) before Dr. Ragusa left to work on his Ph.D. The topic was one about which little had been written, and was timely in that the structure should be included in plans for such a mission. Spacelab, with a 7-man crew, needed no complex organizational structure; a space colony with a projected population of thousands would require a government rather than an organizational structure. A space base housing 50 to 100 persons would bring together people of varying backgrounds for extended periods of time—the station being designed with a 10-yr operating life—and large-group behavior would be a factor in considering the best type of organization. Ragusa investigated the organizational structures used on submarines and destroyers, interviewing the submarine captains and taking cruises on the nuclear sub Nathanael Greene and the research sub Benjamin Franklin. Among those interviewed for the study were Dr. Wernher von Braun; Arthur Clarke, author of 2001 and father of the communications satellite; several astronauts; and Gene Roddenberry, creator of the TV series “Star Trek.” Ragusa found that the organization on Roddenberry’s U.S.S. Enterprise was modeled after that used on 18th century English ships, which in turn was based on that used on Phoenician ships 2500 years ago, in which the ship was considered an extension of the country itself and abided by the laws and traditions of the homeland; the captain was king, and his word was law. The structure best fitting the needs of a space base was the “total matrix model” with four levels of hierarchy, best for efficient and orderly management of the crew because of its adaptability. Of 8 models, the “Star Trek” structure ranked fifth because of its lack of flexibility and efficiency. (Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 5)
Dr. William Nordberg, 46, director of applications at GSFC, died of cancer after a 2-yr illness. A native of Austria, he had come to the U.S. in 1953 to work as an atmospheric geophysicist for the Army Signal Corps. As one of the scientists transferred from the Army to the newly formed NASA, he went to GSFC in 1959 as head of the physical measurement section in Satellite Applications Systems Div. and became Director of Applications in 1974. In 1975 he had received both the William T. Pecora Award and NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for outstanding contributions to applications of remote sensing of earth by spacecraft, honoring his work with the Landsat project, in which he had coordinated the work of 300 scientists from 38 countries in demonstrating satellite uses in disciplines such as agriculture, forestry, land use, marine resources and oceanography, mineral and oil exploitation, geology, and environmental impact. (Goddard News, Sept 76, 1; W Post, 5 Oct 76, C-6)
NASA announced establishment of a joint working group with the Agency for Inti. Development (AID) to explore further cooperative programs upon successful completion of the AIDSAT project. Final demonstration of AIDSAT came 30 Oct. in Haiti. NASA’s Ats 6 satellite showed people in 27 developing nations how space could improve their way of life, using small portable transmitter-receiver units to broadcast high-quality color TV directly to low-cost receivers in remote areas. Programs consisted of both filmed and live portions: on film, viewers saw a message from President Ford, followed by one of three films produced by NASA on communications technology, remote-sensing satellites (like Landsat), and prediction and relief in natural disasters. The live segment contained two half-hour programs; the first, originating in the host country, showed officials describing technological challenges and current efforts to meet them, and the second was a two-way question-and-answer session between senior officials in the host country and experts in Washington, D.C., discussing education, health, agriculture, and similar national concerns. Millions of viewers had seen what in many instances were the first color TV broadcasts in the host country. (NASA Release 76-189)
Having completed a yr of service to India’s Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE), Ats 6 began a 4-mo journey back to an orbital location over the Western Hemisphere to take part in experiments using direct broadcasting for education and health care. During its journey, it would be used by NASA in a project with the U.S. Agency for Inti. Development (AID) to demonstrate the potential of direct broadcasting to officials in more than 24 developing countries. The first set of demonstrations—known as AIDSAT, for AID space-age technology—would begin between 1 and 26 Aug. for 11 developing countries and one international conference; the program would consist of 3 films created especially for the purpose, one on communications technology for national development, one on use of satellites for natural resources monitoring, and one on use of satellites for disaster prediction and relief. After these films the host country would transmit a 30-min program originated in the terminal in each nation’s capital; then a 2-way discussion would be shown in which U.S. officials conversant with space technology and U.S. assistance would talk with representatives of the host country. President Ford would present an initial greeting, and astronaut Owen K. Garriott would be moderator of the first 5 programs. Of the 12 programs planned, those to Thailand, Pakistan, and Bangladesh were broadcast first, and subsequent ones were scheduled 9 Aug. to the United Arab Emirates, 10 Aug. to Oman, 16 Aug. to Jordan, 17 Aug. to Kenya, and 18 Aug. to Yemen. On 23 Aug. the program would address the Conference on Applied Science and Technology in the Arab World at Rabat, Morocco; programs to Libya, Sudan, and Morocco would be broadcast during the remainder of August. A second group of demonstrations would begin in late Sept., and 15 more countries in Africa, Central and South America, and the Caribbean had been invited to participate. (NASA Release 76-140)
Comsat General Corp. signed an agreement with the Water Resources Division, U.S. Department of Interior’s Geological Survey, to conduct a 6-mo joint evaluation of the use of satellites to transmit data from remote hydrological sensors to a central facility. Comsat General would provide 11 small data-collection platforms to receive and transmit the data via satellite to a central receive facility. The DCPs would be located near Survey sensors in the continental U.S.: 5 in the Pacific Northwest, 5 in eastern Pa., and one near Survey headquarters at Reston, Va. Central receiving station would be the ComSat station at Southbury, Conn., where the data would be stored on magnetic tape and accessed by the Survey on interconnecting terrestrial lines. The program would provide a chance to evaluate collection of environmental data by satellite under operational conditions; it would begin later in 1976 and conclude within 6 mo, subject to FCC approval. (ComSat Release CG 76-112)
Symphonie 2, the Franco-German telecommunications satellite that drifted out of its normal geostationary orbit late last month, was gradually repositioned by using its cold-gas stabilization system, Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported. French and German space technicians determined that the malfunction was caused by a still unidentified defect in one of 4 valves feeding the exhaust nozzles of the satellite’s hot-gas stabilization system. Transmissions normally handled by Symphonie 2 were shifted to Symphonie 1 while the repositioning went on; both satellites were reported working normally again. (Av Wk, 28 June 76, 11)
The first group of future cosmonauts from socialist countries had been welcomed at the USSR training center named for Yuri Gagarin, Maj. Gen. Georgy Beregovoy, director of the center, told a correspondent for the Tass news agency. The joint flights with Soviet cosmonauts would include representatives from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and the German Democratic Republic (the first three groups to arrive), Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania, and the joint flights were scheduled for 1978 to 1983. Beregovoy said the socialist countries had been cooperating for the past decade on the Intercosmos program, launching satellites and meteorological rockets and more than 20 experiments in various branches of science. He also mentioned the Apollo-Soyuz flight as a successful example of international cooperation in space. (FBIS, Tass in English, 24 Dec 76)
NASA announced plans for a seventh Lunar Science Conference to be held 15 to 19 March at JSC, bringing together scientists in geology, chemistry, physics, astronomy, engineering, and biology under joint sponsorship of JSC and the Lunar Science Institute of Houston. Discoveries about the moon would be applied to problems of the origin and early history of the solar system, for instance using lunar data to interpret craters and volcanoes photographed on the surfaces of Mercury and Mars. Other papers would discuss meteorites, satellites of Jupiter (about the size of earth’s moon), and use of earth-based telescopes to measure chemical composition of asteroids. Lunar science conferences had been held yearly since 1970, when the first such assembly heard scientific results from the Apollo 11 moon-landing mission. More than 700 scientists from as far away as Australia attended the 1975 conference. (NASA Release 76-25)
Interavia magazine printed a photograph of Dora, a solar, generator being manufactured by AEG-Telefunken under contract to the German Institute for Space Research to provide power for 1980s communications satellites. Dora was designed as a “variably deployable array,” meaning that it could begin its service life partially deployed; unfurled gradually at intervals, it could maintain a constant output over the years. It could also be folded down and brought back to earth at the end of a Spacelab mission. It consisted of two 22- by 2.8-m array panels carrying 46 000 solar cells. (Interavia, June 26, 504)
Communications via satellite was a science-fiction writer’s dream 30 yr ago, but within 2 decades after Arthur C. Clarke predicted it, the first comsat—Early Bird, launched 6 Apr. 1965 into synchronous orbit— began Operations 28 June 1965 and opened a new chapter in communications history. In an article in the Telecommunications Journal, Santiago Astrain, secretary general of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), viewed the past 10 yr, up to the new Intelsat IV-A, largest operational comsat to date. The brief history of INTELSAT summarized the organization’s development from 1960, when President Eisenhower called for the creation of a global communications system; after the United Nations passed a resolution supporting the concept, the U.S. Congress passed the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 that brought the Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) into being. On 20 Aug. 1964, 11 countries (representing 85% of the world’s telecommunications traffic) created an international consortium to be managed by ComSat on an interim basis. On 12 Feb. 73, the Definitive Agreements were signed; by the time they took effect, the number of member nations had increased to 80. Membership was open to all countries that were members of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU); any country, whether or not a member of INTELSAT, could have access to the system on a nondiscriminatory basis. Current planning was geared to meet a traffic demand for capacity to handle about 70 000 telephone channels by 1984; this would represent a 6-fold increase within 10 yr. Intelsat V satellites due to enter service in 1979 would provide more than 23 000 channels. As INTELSAT had the object of providing high-quality communications service, its policy had been to maintain a “spare” comsat in each ocean to make additional capacity always available; this had enabled the organization to provide domestic services at a reasonable cost. Since operations began in 1965, the number of countries actually participating in operations had increased from 5 to 64; the number of earth stations, from 5 to 90; and the number of antennas, from 5 to 115. (Telecommunications Jl, vol42, 672-677)
The Soviet Union would use artificial satellites and manned orbital stations to investigate dynamic processes in the ocean during the new 5-yr plan period, Tass reported. Soviet oceanologist Leonid Brekhovskikh in an interview forecast a growing number of experiments conducted jointly with other countries, among them a “polymode” experiment with the II .S. to study the nature of huge vertical formations in the ocean discovered by Soviet scientists in 1970. The USSR also planned a global satellite experiment called “pigap” for concurrent study of dynamic processes in the atmosphere and the ocean. (FBIS, Moscow Tass, U 1, 29 Jan 76)
First FRG-U.S. venture was the German research satellite GSR-A, launched in Nov. 1969 and titled Azur in orbit. a solar orbit that would put it between 44 million and 144 million km from the sun, 3 million km closer than its twin, Helios 1, launched 10 Dec. 1974. Each Helios carried 7 experiments of West German scientists and 3 from the U.S. The experiments would investigate solar processes and events such as coronal, solar-wind, and interplanetary fields and waves; cosmic rays, both solar and nonsolar; dust particles and zodiacal light; and celestial mechanics. Helios 2 was the first spacecraft carrying a detector for gamma-ray bursts in space, whose cause and source had not been identified since discovery in 1969. Combining Helios data with information from other satellites might pinpoint the direction of the sources and permit their identification with visible celestial objects. The Helios spacecraft weighed 376 kg, with a 1.75 m cylinder carrying conical solar arrays on each end that gave it a spool shape; with deployable booms extended, Helios 2 would measure 32 m tip to tip. The solar arrays would provide a minimum of 240 w at aphelion—much more when closer to the sun—to power the data handling and transmission. Scientists also hoped for more information on the unexpected concentration of micrometeorites found by Helios 1; about 15 times more of these particles were detected within 53 million km of the sun than had been observed near the earth. Cost of the 2 Helios missions was about $260 million, of which the German share was about $180 million for spacecraft units, 7 experiments, and command and data-acquisition expenses; mission control would be at the German Space Operations Center near Munich. The U.S. paid for the 2 launch vehicles and the 3 U.S. experiments, plus support services, a total of about $80 million. A third Helios had been considered for launch in 1980 to measure solar activity at the height of the 11-yr cycle and to study Comet Encke. (NASA Releases 75-317, 76-2; MOR S-823-76-02 [prelaunch] 7 Jan 76, [postlaunch] 23 Jan 76; NYT, 16 Jan 76, 27)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
Ceremonies at GSFC honored 45 members of the team responsible for NASA’S Delta rocket, the “workhorse” of the agency’s most dependable launching systems. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher and Deputy Administrator George M. Low participated in the event. Delta placed NASA’S first communications satellite (Echo 1) into orbit 12 Aug. 1960; through January 1976, 119 Deltas had been launched. The Delta’s reliability and economy had made it the primary vehicle for commercial spacecraft, international users, and operational meteorological systems. The number of reimbursable launches for non-NASA users had increased over the years; of the 11 Delta missions scheduled for 1976, all but 2 would be launched for foreign or commercial users on a reimbursable basis, better than 80% of the total. Delta’s payload capability had risen from 68 kg to 910 kg. As Dr. Fletcher remarked, “Delta is becoming a standard against which to measure the conduct of NASA’S business in the future.” (NASA Release 76-27)
The USSR launched Intercosmos 15 on 19 June, a Tass broadcast announced, as an example of “socialist countries’ cooperation” in space research. The spacecraft orbital parameters were 521-km apogee, 487-km perigee, 74° inclination, and 94.6-min period. Intercosmos 15 was designed to “test new systems and units,” including a telemetry system developed and manufactured with the participation of specialists from Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the German Democratic Republic, as well as the USSR. Satellite data would be transmitted to receiving stations in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and the GDR. (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 June 76)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization— awarded a 9-mo $75 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for development of improved vibration-test techniques for testing future Intelsat spacecraft, leading to reduced spacecraft weight and a lessening of spacecraft fatigue. (INTELSAT Release 76-1-M)
Beginning with the 1976 forest-fire season, a new satellitelinked monitoring system of 23 NASA-designed ground stations would monitor forest conditions throughout thousands of sq km in Calif.’s Region One redwood area, providing data every 3 hr to foresters in Sacramento by means of a geostationary weather satellite. The 90-kg self-powered stations developed by NASA’s Ames Research Center in cooperation with the state Division of Forestry would transmit continuous reports on wind speed and direction, air temperature, solar radiation, relative humidity, and the moisture content of forest litter such as pine needles and grass. Sensors to be added would measure rainfall and air pollution, including particulate matter and ozone concentration. The Synchronous Meteorological Satellite 2 (Sms 2) operated by NOAA from its vantage point over the equator would receive and relay the data. (JSC Roundup, 21 Feb 76, 3; NASA Release 76-28; ARC Release 76-07)
NASA announced that LeRC, the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Navy, and the Natl. Weather Service had successfully completed in Alaska a 3—wk demonstration of an all-weather ice-information system developed in response to a Congressional request to see if the Great Lakes could be kept open for shipping all year. Cargoes reshipped because their barges had been iced in or turned back by weather had incurred additional transportation costs estimated at between $30 and $50 million in 1975 alone. The demonstration—performed along the western and northern coasts of Alaska, a region having serious shipping problems caused by thick ice 60% of the time-—used a Coast Guard plane equipped with NASA’s side-looking airborne radar to obtain daily microwave imagery similar to black-and-white photography, that revealed the type and distribution of ice in any kind of weather regardless of dense cloudcover. The data on coastal shipping were relayed through a Goes satellite by way of Wallops Island to LeRC; after processing, the images were sent back through Canada’s CTS satellite to Alaska for the Navy’s ice interpreters to use in making navigation charts for vessels moving in offshore ice. The system had been used in the Arctic to aid the Coast Guard icebreaker Glacier in operating through ice in zero-visibility conditions. Use of the system had helped to keep the Great Lakes open for shipping for two full seasons for the first time in history, at an estimated saving of hundreds of millions of dollars each year; the 1976-77 shipping would be the third and final year of demonstration. (NASA Release 76-165)
The U.S. Air Force launched a Lockheed-built photoreconnaissance satellite into a polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB on a Titan IIIB-Agena D. Initial orbital elements were 342-km apogee, 132-km perigee, 96.4° inclination, and 89.2-min period. The spacecraft was a 3000-kg cylinder 8m long and 1.5m in diameter. The last previous satellite of this type, launched 22 March, had reentered 18 May. (Av Wk, 4 Oct 76, 26; USAF anno. 15 Sept 76; Sf March 1977, 117)
An around-the-world auto race planned for mid-1976 as part of the U.S. Bicentennial celebration would feature a 1914 Model T Ford, tracked by a NASA satellite from the starting point in Paris to its termination in New York City, NASA announced. The car, driven by Goddard Space Flight Center employee Robert H. Pickard, would carry a 13.6-kg electronics package that would transmit the car’s ground speed to the random-access measuring system (RAMS) carried on NASA’S Nimbus 6 meteorological satellite that covers the entire globe once every 12 hr. Nimbus 6 would relay information to GSFC through a ground station in Alaska. The auto race would demonstrate use of the RAMS system for ground tracking applications where transmissions could encounter various kinds of interference; normally, RAMS would collect data from instruments on moving platforms such as balloons or buoys to allow calculation of wind or sea-surface movements. Pickard, a car enthusiast, had worked in the space program since the Vanguard days and was presently project manager for the comsat-metesat system called GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellite). (NASA Release 76-23)
Switzerland and the U.K. became the first 2 countries to sign a protocol authorizing the European Space Agency to “undertake the exploitation phase” of its meteorological satellite Meteosat. The agreement, signed in Paris, would remain open until 30 September for signature by the other participants (Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden) and for other countries to participate. Meteosat, being developed for ESA by the Cosmos consortium with Aerospatiale (France) as prime contractor, was one of four current ESA applications programs; it covered the design, development, construction, launch, management, and control of a preoperational satellite. ESA’s responsibility for checking out Meteosat in orbit for the first 6 mo after launch (scheduled for the third quarter of 1977) would be extended by the protocol to include the subsequent 2.5-yr “exploitation phase” of the satellite to be carried out with meteorological authorities in the participating countries. Other ESA applications programs were OTS (telecommunications), MAROTS (maritime communications), and Aerosat (air traffic control). (ESA release 23 June 76)
The USSR launched the second operational satellite in its Statsionar 1 series, also known as Raduga (Rainbow), into a circular orbit at 35 900-km altitude, 0.3° inclination, and 1436-min period, Tass announced. Carrying retransmitting equipment for continuous telephone and telegraph communications, Raduga would also transmit color and black-and-white TV programs to Central Asia and Siberia. (UPI in NYT, 14 Sept 76, 28; Sf Mar 1977, 117)
The “hotline” between Washington, D.C. and Moscow had changed into a Direct Communications Link using two independent sets of orbiting satellites, and eliminating any actual wire between the two capitals, the Christian Science Monitor reported. A spokesman for the Army Communications Command at Ft. Huachuca, Ariz., where the U.S. portion of system was designed and built, said it could be put into use whenever diplomats from both countries made the final arrangements. The $ 15-million system would be located at Ft. Detrick, Md., near Washington, the spokesman said. (CSM, 15 Dec 76)
Johnson Space Center awarded a $96 000 contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. of Denver for a study of equipment needed to construct a solar-power satellite (SPS) in geosynchronous orbit, in or about 1990. The 9-mo contract called for conceptual design and system definition of equipment to support construction of large space systems in orbit, assuming use of the Space Shuttle, and for defining development and maintenance costs of such equipment. (JSC Release 76-62) —JSC selected Alpha Bldg. Corp. of Houston for negotiations leading to award of a $1 369 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract for construction support services at the Center, including minor construction and other site work—alteration of laboratory systems, facilities, utilities, roads, sewers, walks, etc.—required by space programs and normally for projects estimated at $10 000 or less. The contract would begin 1 December 1976 and end 30 November 1977, with the option for the government to extend the contract for two additional 1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-63) November 1976
Geos 3, the geodynamics experimental ocean satellite launched 9 Apr. 1975, completed 9 mo in orbit and the project was judged successful with respect to the prelaunch mission objectives. Problems with orbit definition and revised criteria for data distribution had delayed the release of large quantities of data, said a report by Charles W. Mathews, Associate Administrator for Applications at NASA, but the first batches would be shipped 30 Jan. to principal investigators, and subsequent batches would be released monthly thereafter. (MOR E-855-75-01 [postlaunch], 25 Feb 76)
A “tethered” satellite—suspended by a cable from the Space Shuttle orbiter’s cargo bay—could serve to deploy and control materials used in constructing a space station, or to transfer articles from one manned vehicle to another, said NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center. The orbiter could also “troll” a tethered satellite through a low-altitude earth orbit to explore the atmospheric region between 80 and 120 km above earth’s surface; previous exploration vehicles— sounding rockets and low-altitude satellites—could not remain in that region long enough for extensive studies before being forced back to earth by atmospheric drag and gravity. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory would aid NASA in system-dynamics studies for the tethered satellite system. MSFC would manage program development, integrate experiments, and support orbital operations. If the tethered system proved feasible, MSFC would begin spacecraft system design, and the first mission could be scheduled as early as 1980. (NASA Release 76-138)
The USAF launched an early-warning satellite from Cape Canaveral at 11 am EOT on a Titan IIIC. The satellite—product of the TRW/Aerojet Defense Support Program—was reported to be a replacement for a satellite launched 14 Dec. 1975 that malfunctioned. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 35 600 km; perigee, 35 600 km; inclination, 0.5°; period, 1433 min. DOD, which had 10 launches in 1975, had launched 7 so far in 1976. (SBD, 29 June 76, 6-F)
The French government halted operations of sounding-rocket and scientific satellite launchings from its base at Kourou, French Guiana, after 7 yr of activity that included launches of 275 rockets or balloons, many of them under U.S. government or National Science Foundation programs. The base had become a victim of European economic problems that had led to the abandonment of ELDO—the European Launcher Development Organization formed by several countries in July 1966—when the first launching in 1971 failed. The head of the operations division at Kourou said there was a complete lack of coordination among the countries, although France and its partners had spent about $500 million on the site and support facilities at Kourou. Space research would resume in about 4 yr with the launch of a 3/4-ton telecommunications satellite sponsored by the French government, under a new system in which each project would be under the management of one country. Ten European governments would contribute money, and the funds would be allocated in the form of contracts for each project. (W Post, 11 Jan 76, E 7)
An article in the Baltimore Sun magazine reported that more than 3000 amateur radio operators—“hams”—in 90 countries had pooled their efforts to design, build, and finance the ham satellite series known as OSCAR, for orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio. The first OSCAR rode into space from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 12 Dec. 1961, sixtieth anniversary of the first transatlantic wireless transmission, as a piggyback payload on the Thor-Agena carrying the USAF Discoverer 36 into orbit. Oscar 1 weighed about 4.5 kg and consisted of a battery, a small transistor, and an antenna packed into a metal case; constructed by radio hams working for companies building satellites, it operated on a tenth of a watt power and transmitted the greeting “hi” in Morse code before it stopped functioning 3 wk later. NASA agreed to provide launches as deadweight ballast for government satellites to advance public interest in space science, after the hams pointed out the OSCAR’s potential use in educational programs and emergency communications. In 1959 the hams had formed the Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. based in Washington and affiliated with the American Radio Relay League, national association of ham radio operators. After launch of Oscar 4, satellite activity shifted east, where AMSAT members working for GSFC and ComSat were eager to undertake assembly projects. By using volunteer efforts and parts donated as tax-deductible contributions by various companies, the hams could produce a satellite for about $60 000, compared to the commercial cost estimated at $2 million. Oscar 6, oldest active ham satellite, was about to celebrate its 4th anniversary; Oscar 7, most recent (and largest, at nearly 30 kg), had been in use for nearly 2 yr. Baltimore engineer Jack Colson, an employee of the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, had received an award as the first amateur to be in touch with hams in all 50 states; he took 8 mo to achieve this, 4 mo for Hawaii alone because the satellite path permitted communications with the islands for only 2 min every 3 wk. Colson had also talked with hams in 43 countries and had bounced signals off the moon; he estimated that his ham contacts over the past 25 yr numbered about 30 000. The 750 000 radio amateurs all over the world came from all walks of life and ranged in age from 8-yr-olds to elderly men and women; about 20 000 amateurs were joining the U.S. ham network every year, the article said. Use of the satellite was free to all hams, whether or not they belonged to an amateur organization; OSCARs had transmitted medical data, weather bulletins, and emergency communications such as search-and-rescue mission information. Although shortwave radio could outdo the satellite on sheer distance, its transmissions—unlike those of the satellite—could be upset by atmosphere conditions or solar emissions. To improve OSCAR’s time and distance limitations, AMSAT members were working on a new satellite that could transmit continuously over a greater geographical area for up to 10 hr, because of a higher elliptical orbit. Launch was planned for 1980. (B Sun Magazine, 29 Aug 76, 10) 30 August: The Peoples Republic of China launched its sixth satellite, referenced as China 6, from its facility at Shuang-Cheng-Tze into a highly elliptical orbit with 2147-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 69.1° inclination, and 108.7-min period. An announcement from the China press agency Hsinhua said the satellite was functioning normally, but gave no details on the spacecraft or its mission. (ATT, 31 Aug 76,7; SBD, 8 Dec 76, 203; SSR, 31 Aug 76, 31; SF, Feb 77, 78)
ESA announced acceptance of the first solid-propellant apogee boost motor produced in Europe—designed and made by SNIA-Viscosa of Italy in collaboration with SEP of France—for use in its Geos (geostationary scientific satellite). The motor, measuring 1.1 m long with maximum diameter of 0.7 m, weighed 305 kg, more than the remainder of the spacecraft, and would serve to inject the satellite into geostationary orbit from the elliptical transfer orbit provided by a Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The satellite was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral in April 1977. (ESA release 9 Nov 76)
Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International Corp. announced it had been awarded a $ 10.8-million contract by Lewis Research Center for 8 Atlas MA-5 propulsion systems, with an option for 2 additional systems. The contract would run through August 1978. The engines would be used to launch high-energy astronomical observatories (HEAO), or commercial comsats for the Communications Satellite Corporation on a reimbursable basis. Originally developed by Rocketdyne for the USAF’s first intercontinental ballistic missile, the Atlas had flown space missions since 1958 when it launched Echo, first U.S. comsat. Atlas had powered more than 400 payloads with launch reliability of more than 99%. (Rockwell Release RD-18)
The Air Force’s P76—5 satellite was successfully launched by NASA from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle at 0041 am PDT. The 72.6-kg spacecraft, designed to evaluate propagation effects of disturbed plasmas on radar and communications systems, was placed in a near-circular sun-synchronous orbit with apogee at 935 km and perigee at 863 km, inclination of 99.6°, and period of 105.9 min. The launch was requested by the Air Force Nov. 75 and agreed to by NASA 3 Dec. 1975, under a 1962 memorandum of understanding on joint NASA-DOD use of the Scout vehicle, and costs of the launch would he borne by the USAF. Mission objectives would be achieved, according to a postlaunch report. (MOR M-490-602-76-01, 21 Apr 76, [prelaunch] 5 May 76, [postlaunch] 24 Sept 76)
ESA announced that its council meeting in Paris 16 and 17 Dec. had approved a new program, Earthnet, in which ESA would centralize and coordinate European activities in reception, processing, distribution, and archiving of earth-resources satellite data. Earthnet would give European users access to data from NASA programs such as Landsat, Seasat, Nimbus-G, and the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission, to provide a basis for defining European requirements for future remote-sensing satellite programs. Earthnet would be integrated into existing data-reception and processing facilities at Fucino, Italy, and would use ESA’s computerized data center at Frascati, Italy, with an information-retrieval network RECON to disseminate information on the data available. (ESA release 21 Dec 76)
Gene Sivertson of Langley Research Center’s Space Systems Div. had developed a new idea for search and rescue' operations using passive reflectors with imaging or side-looking radar to locate persons in emergency situations. The passive reflectors could be rigid, inflatable, or erectable structures that would show up on a radar system as bright spots easily distinguishable from clutter signals of the terrain. The reflectors could be carried as standard equipment by aircraft, ships and small boats, earth vehicles, and individuals; different packages could be tailored to the user’s needs. The inflatable concept would use a balloon containing a reflector structure of aluminized mylar, with a small helium or hydrogen gas generator in the canister holding the mylar-saran balloon. Deployed in an emergency situation, the reflector would mark a distress site and provide a radar target. The concept had been field-tested in Mich, and Fla. with excellent test films as a result. Sivertson hoped to have the imaging radar on satellites with continuous global monitoring, and to test the system on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. (Langley Researcher, 9 July 76, 3)
The Air Force launched the first Block 5D advanced meteorological satellite from Vandenberg AFB on a Thor-Burner 2 at 1:01 am local time into an orbit with 848-km apogee, 818-km perigee, 98.6° inclination, and 101.5-min period. The RCA-built research satellite was a 450-kg cylinder 6.4m long and 1.7m in diameter. USAF later reported that a power-system failure had apparently occurred because no communications were coming from the Ams 1; no cause of the malfunction had been determined, and “chances of correcting it are grim,” USAF said. {SSR, 31 Oct 76, 31; SBD, 21 Sept 76, 24; Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 26)
Cloud-brightness images from orbiting satellites would enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to predict the difference between relatively “dry” hurricanes and destructively wet ones such as Agnes (1972), Fifi (1974), and Eloise (1975), said Dr. Neil Frank of the Dept, of Commerce’s National Hurricane Center. For years, said Dr. Frank, meteorologists had known that some hurricanes were wetter than others, with those having highest potential rainfall also highest in damage over land. A new technique would estimate hurricane-rainfall potential from cloud images calibrated with computer models of river-basin flooding; the technique would be “a predictive tool” for inclusion in hurricane warnings. Heavy rains from Fifi in 1974 caused one of the worst natural disasters of the Western Hemisphere when heavy rains brought unexpected flash flooding that killed thousands in and around Honduras. Besides killing 118 people, Agnes caused an estimated $2.1 billion in property damage from torrential rains and flooding; Eloise caused an estimated $200 million in property damage, again mainly from rain-caused flooding. The satellite technique was used retrospectively to estimate the rainfall from 7 hurricanes for which radar and rain-gauge measurements were available; results disclosed little or no relationship between the volume or intensity of a storm and its rainfall. However, the rainfall potential calculated by the new procedure for the 7 hurricanes in the study agreed well with actual experience. Although estimates obtained through the new technique were relative, not absolute, the NOAA scientists viewed the procedure as a valuable tool for developing nations, an inexpensive system to monitor rainfall and improve the meteorological basis of agricultural and water-management planning. (NOAA Release 76-158)
Discrepancies in forecasting the size of the 1976 Soviet grain crop underlined the difficulty of accurately predicting worldwide harvests and food needs, the Washington Post reported. The U.S. Dept, of Agriculture estimated 22 June that the USSR would produce 190 million tons of grain; other sources objected that the estimate was several millions of tons below the figure set by the Central Intelligence Agency and between 4 and 10 million tons higher than estimates by 2 private firms (Cargill Investor Services of Chicago, and Schnittker Associates of Washington). The size of the Soviet crop was a crucial statistic, the Post noted, because—if low enough—it could send world grain prices on a rapid rise; the price of grain would affect the U.S. economy, triggering higher food prices and adding to domestic inflation. The world had had no excess food stocks since 1972, so that faraway droughts or political developments affecting food trade could make U.S. grain prices fluctuate wildly. Government and industry had invested millions of dollars to get information from satellites, computer banks, private weather consultants, translations of foreign broadcasts, and tipsters, the Post said. Banks, shipping companies, railroads, and other enterprises in agricultural trade or investment had increased their research in crop data to be ready for price changes or sudden shifts in markets. Despite the flood of information, global agricultural predictions remained inexact. A satellite equipped for crop surveys swept across the Soviet Union last year and “helped government analysts assess a major Russian crop disaster,” the Post noted. The information, fed into complicated computer models that collated soil moisture and temperature data with other inputs, produced a projection of Soviet grain production; however, the computer models of the Dept, of Agriculture and the CIA last year produced differing estimates. (W Post, 8 July 76, A-2)
The “Historic Redstone Test Site” at MSFC, neglected since the final Redstone test firing in Oct. 1961, would be restored to its original appearance as an exhibit for visitors during the Bicentennial celebration, MSFC announced. The interim test stand, as it was called, was built by the U.S. Army in 1953 and used to test moderate-range Redstone rockets. On 31 Jan. 1958, a modified Redstone renamed Jupiter-C launched into orbit the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1. Another modification of the Redstone tested on the stand was the Mercury-Redstone, one of which powered the first U.S. manned space flight—that of Alan Shepard in May 1^61. The stand was the site of 364 test firings between 1953 and 196lRafter which it was retired from a space program that had become much more sophisticated. Painted in its original colors and designs, and with a Redstone borrowed from the Army Missile Command installed on it, the site would appear much as it did 15 yr ago in its new role as an historical exhibit. (MSFC Release 76-32)
U.S. intelligence sources reported the third failure of the USSR this year in testing an antisatellite system, when a Russian Hunter satellite failed to stay in orbit 21 July. The Hunter’s mission was to destroy the Cosmos 839 launched into orbit 12 days earlier; U.S. analysts did not know what was causing the Soviet problem. Soviet efforts to develop an antisatellite system dated back about 10 yr, with only 5 successful launches out of more than 20 attempts before testing stopped in 1971. All 3 attempts since testing resumed in Feb. 1976 had been failures, the U.S. intelligence sources said. The satellite-destroyer was reported to be about 8 m long and to weigh about 2.5 tons at launch; equipped with 5 main rocket engines, the interceptor was said to be able to close on a target at about 4 km per sec and to get as close as 30 m to the target before exploding on ground command. The Associated Press report noted that the U.S. had not tried to develop a similar system since the 1960s; Dr. Malcolm Currie, DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said last winter that “we are very much concerned about satellite vulnerability.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-2; C Trib, 27 July 76, 2)
NASA announced that the proceedings of its Nov. 1976 workshop on space battery technology were available from GSFC, where the sessions had been held annually since 1968. Batteries had proved to be the major limiting factor in long-life space systems used for research in communications, weather, and earth-resources detection and monitoring; current life expectancy for batteries was 3 to 7 yr, depending on orbital altitude. (Spacecraft in synchronous orbit at 35 000 km altitude derived power from electrochemical batteries charged by solar cells on the spacecraft surface; batteries on these craft, continuously in the sun except for two eclipse periods per year, would escape the charge-discharge cycling that wore out similar batteries carried on spacecraft circling the earth every 90 min at lower altitudes, discharging their power in the resultant periods of darkness.) NASA had begun the workshops to exchange information between manufacturers and users for increasing efficiency and lifetime of the batteries, resulting in improvements by industry in batteries used for heart pacemakers, aircraft, and consumer goods such as portable tape recorders, radios, and flashlights. Gerald Halpert, CSFC chairman of the battery workshop, said the Nov. session had reviewed a new technique of fabricating battery plates electrochemically at temperatures of 100°C, which would reduce the number of steps in the process and provide a more uniform product. Also discussed was a rechargeable nickel-hydrogen battery, a new product that could provide more energy per kg for larger systems, with storage capacities ranging from 25 to 100 ampere-hr. The nickel-hydrogen unit would be used for the first time on the Navigational Technology Satellite-2, part of the joint services research program for a global satellite system. Another topic was the special procedures developed at GSFC for battery improvement that had been implemented in industry for quality control and evaluation of the product. (NASA Release 76-200)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced that a team of fishermen, engineers, physicists, oceanographers, biologists, and computer specialists had used a satellite to find fish off the coast of Louisiana in a government-industry cooperative program begun by NOAA last year. Water turbidity, measured by Landsat sensors as variations in color, would reflect the distribution of fish; the fishing vessels, working with spotter aircraft, confirmed the presence of fish in most areas predicted by the Landsat data. This technique of locating concentrations of fish would aid in better understanding of coastal fishery ecology and better resources assessment and management, NOAA said. On 19 July, Landsat 1 had passed over a selected study area, sending multispectral scanner data to Goddard Space Flight Center; the data tapes were hand-carried to NASA’s Earth Resources Laboratory in La. for processing. Less than 21 hr after the scan, the spotter pilots and fishing-vessel captains were being called to check their findings with predicted locations. The satellite reports were valid, NOAA said. Installation of an operational system would require 3 to 5 yr to develop special computer programs and facilities. (NOAA Release 76-196; JSC Release 76—50; JSC Roundup, 10 Sept 76, 4)
Intelsat IV-A F-2, second in a series of improved commercial comsats, was launched from Cape Kennedy on an Atlas-Centaur at 6:56 pm EST (2356 GMT) into a transfer orbit at about 31 000-km apogee, aimed at a station over the Atlantic Ocean at 29.5°W which it should reach by April. Working as a backup to Intelsat IV-A F-l, the newly launched spacecraft would provide almost two thirds more communications capability than previous Intelsats, by increasing the number of transponders from 12 to 20 and by using an improved antenna system that permitted frequency reuse by beam separation. The east-pointed am used for transatlantic service would illuminate Europe and Africa; the same 320-mhz bandwidth would be reused in the west beam aimed at North and South America, doubling the usability of the frequency and the satellite’s capacity. The cylindrical spacecraft was about 7 m high and 2.38 m in diameter, with a solar panel about 2.8 m long; liftoff weight was 1515 kg, and in-orbit weight 825.5 kg. (NASA Release 76-8; MOR E-491-63 3-7 6-02, 12 Feb 76 [prelaunch], 25 Feb 76 [postlaunch])
A “Big Bird” reconnaissance satellite, built by Lockheed, was launched by the USAF from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., on a Titan HID. A previous Big Bird launched 4 Dec. 1975 had remained in orbit until 1 Apr. 1976. (Av Wk, 19 July 76, 243)
The board of governors of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that, at its recent meeting in The Hague 19—27 May, it adopted a 10-m class Standard B ground station to supplement the Standard A station long the foundation of INTELSAT’s global system. Currently, 114 Standard A ground stations with 30-m antennas were operating throughout the world, as well as 29 smaller stations used for domestic service, telemetry, tracking and control, monitoring, and limited telecommunications between 2 or 3 destinations. Broadest use of the Standard B station would be in developing countries that had limited telecommunications requirements. Under study for some years, the Standard B.station would use single-channel-per-carrier (SCPC) equipment that allowed routing of traffic on a circuit-by-circuit basis instead of in large groups or bundles, minimizing the capacity loss associated with smaller antennas; it also worked with voice activation, which would be mandatory, using satellite capacity for telephone service only when activated by voice signals. Adoption of the second standard for international service would mean a 40% drop in rates paid for use of the satellites, plus ability to route traffic to any ground stations equipped to receive the user’s signals, with no restriction on the total amount of traffic. Previously, the drain on satellite power limited small ground stations to providing service to only 1 or 2 other points. (INTELSAT Release 76-17-1) Viking 1 would scan and map the surface for 2 wk; its cameras would photograph the prime landing site near an ancient rift valley, and other instruments would measure surface temperatures and search the Mars atmosphere for signs of water. The new orbit would bring Viking over the planned landing site once each 24.6-hr Mars day (called a sol). The 2 wk of photographs and measurements were needed so that scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where the flight had been directed since launch in April 1975, could choose the safest and most interesting spot for their 4-ton bird to alight. The landing attempt would be the first U.S. try at putting a spacecraft down on another planet; the USSR had made 5 unmanned attempts, 3 on Venus and 2 on Mars. The 2 Venera spacecraft had survived on the surface long enough to send back 1 picture each; the third crashed. One Mars spacecraft had crashed, and the other was blown over after it landed by winds clocked at more than 300 kph. After Viking’s braking engine was fired, the main job of flight directors would be to navigate it into a path where its orbit would be lowered again, with apogee reduced from about 19 000 km to 12 500 km. The firing was successful 19 June, and the Viking neared the end of a 690-million-km voyage that began 10 mo ago. William J. O’Neill of JPL said the precision of the flight could be likened to “shooting a basketball in Los Angeles and putting it through a hoop in Madison Square Garden in New York City.” Viking was following a northeasterly path around Mars that would bring it within 1450 km of the planet’s surface; flight directors planned a second maneuver to bring it still closer over an area 20°N of the equator, called Chryse, where Viking would attempt to land 4 July, selected as a good place to search for signs of life or fossilized life that thrived when a river flowed there a billion years ago. Harold S. Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey, chief geologist for Viking, said that Chryse resembled California’s Death Valley or the water-worn dry valleys of Nevada or Wyoming, where ancient rivers overflowed their banks millions of years ago to deposit alluvial soils on the valley floors. Rock and soil in the Chryse valley appeared red from millions of years of iron oxide deposits brought down by the river overflow; Masursky and his colleagues hoped that the red soils would contain organic molecules, signs of a once-existent life on Mars. A photograph taken 19 June and released by JPL on Sunday, 20 June, showed the “awesome” Valles Marineris from about 360 000 km up— parallel canyons south of the Mars equator that, if extended together on earth, would reach from Calif, to Penna. The smaller was about 3 km deep, 64 km wide, and 645 km long; the larger was 6 km deep, 96 km wide, and more than 3200 km long. (Arizona’s Grand Canyon, largest on earth, is about 2 km deep, 21 km wide at its greatest breadth, and only 350 km long.) The northern hemisphere of Mars appeared covered with haze, which scientists said was probably from water vapor misting out of the cold surface as the sun warmed it during the longer summer days. Successful firing of the braking engine at 1:25 pm EDT Monday, 21 June, put Viking 1 into a lower orbit so that its cameras could begin to photograph steep slopes, craters, boulder fields, and other potential obstacles. On 27 June, Viking project manager James S. Martin announced that the 4 July landing was off; pictures of the primary landing area showed “too many unknowns,” and the site appeared too hazardous to risk landing without investigating other sites. As the Viking 1 cameras could not distinguish objects “smaller than a football field,” objects as yet invisible could endanger the landing. However, as there was no assurance of any hazard-free area roughly 20 km by 100 km anywhere on Mars, some scientists had wanted to go ahead with the planned landing. Previous closeups taken by Mariner 9 were not as detailed as those from Viking, and dangerous details of the primary landing site became more obvious with photos from Viking 1 coming in more clearly. The New York Times reported that the first alternative site was an area called Chryse Phoenicia, a basin about 30 km northwest of the original site; if that site appeared too rough, scientists would look at Tritonis Lacus, about 6400 km east of Chryse, although if this happened, the landing might be delayed until as late as the first wk of August. Project Manager Martin suggested delaying the Viking 1 landing, if it were not down by 25 July, until the Viking 2 (now 8 million km away) arrived in Mars orbit; possibly 2 Viking spacecraft might be orbiting simultaneously. JPL said flight tracking and control facilities there were insufficient to handle full operations of both spacecraft simultaneously, and a number of preorbital maneuvers for Viking 2 would be required starting about 27 July. John Noble Wilford said in the New York Times that the earliest possible Viking 1 landing would be 9 July, and other alternatives would take longer. Scientists, he said, were “dismayed by the rugged Martian terrain”—the primary landing area being heavily pocked with craters, steep escarpments, and a sprinkling of knoblike features probably remnants of erosion like that in the Grand Canyon. On 28 June, Viking 1 photographed a site about 300 km northwest of Chryse—the “northwest territory”—after pictures of the prime site showed it to be far more rugged than expected; the scientists wanted a landing as close as possible to the original site because they thought it offered the best chance of finding signs of existing or fossil life. The alternate site would be somewhat flatter and safer, but less interesting scientifically, O’Toole said in the Post 29 June. Photographs released 29 June at JPL showed a plateau in the Chryse valley originally picked as the Viking 1 landing site, where a curving and rugged coastline at the plateau’s base could have been formed only by an ocean-like surf. Pictures taken from an altitude of about 1450 km showed a crater with lava-flow traces more than 30 km wide, “a truly enormous scale” according to chief geologist Masursky. “The biggest lava flooding ... on earth are the basalt floods on Iceland, which are no bigger than a few kilometers across.” Temperature changes mapped by Viking were also dramatic: instruments on Viking registered differences of more than 60°C (140°F) between day and night in the same parts of the planet. Dr. Hugh H. Kieffer, atmospheric scientist on the Viking team, said that the atmosphere on Mars was almost perfectly transparent to sunlight, as little water was present to absorb it; “whatever sunlight reaches the planet gets right to the surface, which then radiates the heat back to the atmosphere to warm it up.” An instrument aboard Viking could tell when day broke on the Mars surface although it had no way of “seeing”; it measured water vapor in the atmosphere, and registered its presence when the sun warmed the permafrost that “literally pops [water] into the atmosphere when that sun hits the surface first thing in the morning,” according to Dr. Barney Farmer of JPL. Besides surveying possibilities for its own landing, Viking 1 was photographing potential landing sites for Viking 2 to give scientists an idea whether they might have to shift sites for that spacecraft also. (W Post, 12 June 76, A-12; 19 June, A-3; 20 June, A—1; 21 June, A-9; 22 June, A—17; 28 June, A-3; 29 June, C-4; 30 June, A-27; ATT, 21 June, 10; 28 June, 17; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 14)
Commercial supersonic transatlantic transport service began with the arrival of Concorde aircraft from London and Paris at Dulles airport near Washington, D.C. The Anglo-French plane had been barred from New York’s John F. Kennedy airport under a ruling by the Port Authority of N.Y. and N.J. after Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, British Airways Concorde rolling out at Dulles Airport near Washington, D.C., after first touchdown 24 May 1981. (Photo courtesy British Airways) Jr., granted limited scheduled flights into the U-S, for a trial period not to exceed 16 mo [see 5 Jan.-4 Feb.]. The Concordes arrived at Dulles 2 min apart, British Airways arriving at 11:54 am EDT and Air France at 11 ;56, taxiing into a nose-to-nose position in front of the main terminal building. About 8000 persons were on hand for the landing, many of them leaving their cars and walking in on the limited-access highway because of the traffic backup; of the crowd, airport officials estimated that only about 20 were there to protest the Concorde landings. The French flight carried 80 passengers, the British flight 75; both Air France and British Airways had limited passenger payloads to 80 on Concorde flights until they gained more experience with the aircraft’s fuel consumption. The two carriers had selected Monday for the inauguration of North Atlantic service because neither would ordinarily offer a Washington-bound flight that day. Air France planned 3-per-wk flights, leaving Paris on Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday and returning to Paris on Monday, Thursday, and Saturday. British Airways would offer 2 trips per wk, leaving London’s Heathrow on Thursday and Saturday and returning on Friday and Sunday, One-way fare London to Washington would be $633.60; Paris-Washington, $827. The difference would arise from fluctuations in currency exchange. The trip took 3 hr 50 min for the Air France plane, spending 2 hr 53 min at supersonic speeds on the way. The British plane timed on its return flight took 3 hr 57 min. The Federal Aviation Administration had instrumented the Dulles airport with 8 permanent and 5 portable recorder units to measure the perceived noise in decibels (pndh) for a data base on all airport noise and especially Concorde noise. {NYT, 25 May 76, 1; W Post, 25 May 76, A-1, Av Wk, 24 May 76, 27; 31 May 76, 22) universities were resource persons for 4 news briefings per day, each scheduled for an hr or more, and 5 science workshops, meeting in the morning and afternoon each day, with a wrapup session the afternoon of the third day. Topics discussed were Jupiter’s atmosphere and weather; magnetosphere and radiation belts; origins, characteristics, and composition of the planet and its moons; origin of life on the planet; and Pioneer 11 targeting toward Saturn upon its departure from the vicinity of Jupiter. Pioneer findings about Jupiter—characterized by low density and high mass, 318 times that of earth, containing three quarters of the planetary material in the solar system—included discovery that Jupiter’s Great Red Spot, three times the size of earth, was not the only such spot; several smaller ones detected in the atmospheric flow around Jupiter moved in and out of the area occupied by the Great Red Spot without losing their own identity. Pioneer measurements of Jupiter properties— internal heat, composition of its moons—permitted the first detailed calculations of the process that formed the planet. Its history was apparently that of a failed star: it went from a gas cloud to a body heated red-hot by gravitational contraction, then to a 4.5-billion-yr cooling, still in process, that made it resemble a “white dwarf.” The four planet-size inner moons—Jupiter’s “Galilean” satellites—proved scientifically the most interesting; they exhibited a regular density gradient and composition that constituted the best direct evidence for Jupiter’s history. The protostar phases deduced for both Jupiter and Saturn indicated that the outer solar system underwent 2 different periods of relatively high temperature. Jupiter had retained for 4 billion yr its primordial heat, which could be neither radiated nor conducted away because of the planet’s composition. A “new metal”—liquid metallic hydrogen, simplest of the alkaline metals—identified only inside Jupiter is thought to constitute the planet’s interior, beginning about of a quarter of the distance from the surface to the center. As the substance has low thermal conductivity and is opaque to radiated energy, the heat cannot be dissipated, and the temperature at Jupiter’s center is about 30 000°, 6 times that of the surface of the sun. As Jupiter’s liquid regions are too hot for life, living organisms would have to exist in its gaseous atmosphere. Between the temperatures for freezing and boiling water, Jupiter’s atmospheric pressure increases with depth from 5 times earth’s atmospheric pressure to 10 times. Pioneer data suggest slow atmosphere-turnover times of months or years that would permit survival of atmosphere-borne life, said Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma of the Univ. of Md. Jupiter was 1000 times as large a region for forming complex organic molecules as earth, and a wide variety of environments would be available. The origin of life on a planet would depend less on huge time periods than on how often nature mixed the proper ingredients in the proper environment, Dr. Ponnamperuma said; enough billions or trillions of attempts could produce a highly complex molecule able to replicate itself. The fact that Jupiter’s atmosphere might provide hospitable sites for life raised the problem of contamination of that atmosphere by earth organisms riding on atmosphere probes launched by the U.S. and other countries. Pioneer also found that Jupiter acted as a giant vacuum cleaner, sucking small dust particles from a vast region of space (comparatively little dust was present in the Asteroid Belt), and 170 times as many meteoroids were striking Jupiter’s atmosphere as struck the earth in areas of similar size. Concentrations of these particles at Jupiter would be the result of the planet’s enormous gravity field. Jupiter’s magnetosphere—a million times the volume of earth’s—was found to leak high-energy electrons; Jupiter was the major source of such electrons in the solar system, and the sun and Jupiter were the only known important sources of high-energy particles in the solar system. The energy of these particles was constantly increased by recirculation through the planet’s radiation belts, said Dr. James Van Allen of the Univ. of Iowa. Earthorbiting satellites and other spacecraft had detected Jupiter electrons as far away as Mercury, said Dr. John Simpson of the Univ. of Chicago; an input of more than 100 billion watts would be needed to maintain the observed energies. Jupiter was also known to be the strongest radio source in the sky, except for the sun; the massive radio bursts were caused by the moon Io moving through the Jovian magnetic field, said Dr. David Morrison of the Univ. of Hawaii. Scientific detective work revealed that the bursts occurred every 21 hr—half of Io’s orbital period—and one of 3 places on Jupiter’s visible surface had to face the earth, which Pioneer data proved to be true. (NASA Releases 76-80, 76-91; NYT, 31 May 76, 14)
NASA announced plans to launch a second maritime satellite (Marisat) for the Comsat General Corp. later this month, as part of a system to provide communications to the U.S. Navy, commercial shipping, and offshore industries. The first satellite of the system, Marisat 1, was successfully launched 19 Feb. into an orbit over the Atlantic at 15°W longitude, where it had provided UHF service to the Navy since 25 Mar. NASA hoped to inaugurate fulltime commercial voice and data communications, using both Marisats, by 1 July. A third satellite had been constructed as a spare. (NASA Release 76-83)
Agreements between the French government and the European Space Agency for use of launch facilities at Kourou, French Guiana, were signed in Paris by Michel d’Ornano, minister for industry and research, and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA. The Kourou facilities include the Guiana Space Centre belonging to France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and the Ariane launching site belonging to ESA that replaced the former equatorial base belonging to the defunct ELDO organization [see 11 Jan.]. The meeting of the European Space Conference in April 1975 had decided that all ESA member states would contribute to the costs of the Guiana space center until the end of 1980. Ariane (the ESA heavy launcher now under development) would provide Europe with a satellite launch capability of its own after 1980. (ESA newsletter, Aug 76, 2)
After a series of technical checks, the Ekran satellite launched in the USSR 26 Oct. had been activated, Tass annouced. Ekran, in synchronous orbit, had transmitted experimental television programs over “a vast territory in Siberia between the Surgut and Yakutsk meridians,” Tass said, describing the new service as a “gigantic telebridge.” USSR first deputy communications minister V. Shamshin said the new generation of comsats would provide a reliable and economical system of television communications throughout the Soviet Union. Ekran, whose transmitters were apparently more powerful than those of the Molniya series, would dispense with the need for 12-meter ground antennas used by the previous Orbita system, Tass said. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 5 Nov 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 6 Nov 76)
The Natl. Science Foundation announced that U.S. and Canadian astronomers had succeeded in using telescopes more than 800 km apart, linked by satellite, to simulate a telescope nearly as large as the earth. A radio telescope at the Natl. Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., had been linked through a joint U.S.-Canadian satellite to a radio telescope at the Algonquin Radio Observatory in Ontario, allowing the observers to review the results while the observations were in process. The technique would permit astronomers to measure the size and shape of a distant galaxy or quasar with a precision better than 1/1000 arcsec, equivalent to measuring the size and shape of a penny more than 4000 km distant. The satellite would transmit information at a rate equivalent to 10 000 simultaneous telephone calls; the large data rate would increase the sensitivity of measurements, allowing the study of very faint objects in space. Besides the principal investigator, Dr. George W. Swenson, Jr. of the Univ. of 111., the team included S.H. Knowles and W.B. Walton of NRL; N.W. Broten and D.N. Fort of Canada’s Natl. Research Council; K.I. Kellermann and Benno Rayhrer of NRAO; and J.L. Yen of the Univ. of Toronto. (NSF Release PR76-106)
Three satellites making simultaneous investigations of earth’s magnetic field had confirmed that long low-frequency waves spreading the disruptive effects of magnetic storms on earth had been generated far out in space by energetic particles from the sun, NOAA announced. Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, Calif., earlier in Dec., Dr. Joseph N. Barfield of NOAA, R.L. McPherron of UCLA, and W.J. Hughes of London’s Imperial College reported the waves might have practical uses in exploring for oil and minerals, and in aiding undersea communication with submarines, which now had to surface to make contact. Environmental satellites Sms 1 and Sms 2, with research satellite Ats 6, in geosynchronous orbit on a line along the earth’s equator, had carried magnetometers used to detect the low-frequency waves passing each satellite in a predicted order, the first use of multiple spacecraft to make such measurements simultaneously. Confirmation of the theory also identified the point of origin as the magnetosphere and the existence of a “resonance region” that amplified the wave frequency. The region was described as about 1200 km thick. (NOAA Release 76-281)
JSC announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Co. for negotiations leading to award of a contract, valued at about $970 000, funded by NASA and ERDA for the study of space-based solar-power systems. The 12-mo two-phase study would provide specific data on the most effective way to convert solar to electrical energy using satellites, and would determine where in space the various phases of a solar-power satellite should be constructed and assembled; the second phase would define weights and costs of a satellite system. The project would aim at providing uninterrupted energy beamed to earth from large satellites in fixed orbits at altitudes above 35 000 km. (JSC Release 76-69)
Newest international organization created to exploit space technology “for the benefit of mankind,” the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) was chartered in London after 4 yr of study and negotiation. A 1958 United Nations subgroup called IMCO—the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization—had been responsible for nautical matters of common concern to seafaring nations. The UN Secretariat first report on space activities and resources in 1972 noted IMCO’s interest in space for maritime purposes, particularly distress systems, safety of navigation and position determination, operation of maritime mobile services beyond the scope of existing methods, and improved maritime communications. IMCO proposed a new international maritime satellite system for exchange of telephone, telegraph, and facsimile messages and improvement of navigation. IMCO’s Maritime Safety Committee in March 1972 had formed a panel of experts to study and recommend a program of experiments and development work that would be necessary to form a new organization. The panel examined the financial, legal, technical, and operational problems of creating a new entity, reporting yearly to the safety committee. As the consensus favored formation of a new organization, the IMCO assembly resolved in November 1973 to convene an international conference early in 1975 to set up an international maritime satellite system. IMCO’s secretary general was to invite all UN member states and interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. The international conference, 23 April to 9 May 1975, was attended by delegates from 45 nations and observers from 15 international agencies and other organizations. The conference set up two working committees, one to discuss relationships between governments and their telecommunications and maritime entities and the distribution of powers between the member states and the INMARSAT council; the second working group would consider procurement and financial policy. The conference concluded that an international intergovernmental organization was needed to administer a worldwide maritime satellite system. It agreed to reconvene early in 1976, appointing an intersessional group to draft recommendations on four points: relationships between governments and designated entities, distribution of powers between assembly and council, type and number of appropriate international instruments, and procurement policies. The first conference concluded with a recommendation that all countries permit operation of ship stations (onboard terminals) in certain radio-frequency bands within harbor limits and other waters within national jurisdictions. As the first session ended, representatives of 13 Western European countries and the United States agreed on major elements of the organizational arrangements that would form the proposed system. The arrangements envisioned the designation by a government of an entity to assume its responsibilities with INMARSAT, vesting of management in a strong governing body with investors making policy in proportion to their use of the system, and a procurement policy awarding contracts on the basis of price, quality, and most favorable delivery time. These issues had been debated during the organization of INTELSAT. INMARSAT differed, however, because of the maritime interests involved (ship owners, maritime unions, national maritime ministries and regulatory bodies) and the presence of the USSR historically had favored international organizations composed of governments only, having been reluctant to enter “mixed” organizations involving states and private enterprises, such as INTELSAT. The working group’s first session in London in August 1975 included representatives of 37 countries and 8 international organizations. The U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement on the basic roles of governments and operational entities, adopted by the session, which also developed a procurement policy. At the second session in October 1975, 31 countries and 6 international organizations were represented; this session discussed membership rules, investments, and information policy. The third session, held in December 1975 at Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was attended by representatives of 26 countries and 4 international organizations. It set up two committees, one to deal with financial, the other with nonfinancial, matters. The U.S. representative commented on “the cooperative spirit” shown at the three sessions. The international conference resumed in London in February 1976 with representatives from 47 countries and 16 intergovernmental agencies and international organizations. Texts of two documents—a convention to be signed by governments, and an operating agreement to be signed by signatories (governments, or their designated entities)—were adopted in large measure, with some revisions. Three articles of the convention not decided were the maximum voting power of each council member, the question of permitting reservations to the convention, and the official and working languages to be used. The conference agreed to a third session to resolve these points, setting up a preparatory committee for the formal establishment of INMARSAT. The third session of the conference, called on Sept. 1, 1976, was attended by delegates from 47 countries and observers from Yugoslavia, as well as delegates from 23 international agencies. The delegates agreed that no reservations would be made to the convention or the operating agreement, and decided to omit the matter of language from the convention. Preconference negotiations had led to a consensus on the ceiling permissible on a council member’s vote, setting 25% of total voting participation as an upper limit; this wording was accepted by the conference. Observers noted significance in the languages in which the new convention was printed: English, French, Spanish, and Russian. (Stephen E. Doyle, INMARSAT . . . Origins and Structure, 13 April 77) As the long-awaited picture transmission from the Viking 2 landing site on Mars finally appeared at JPL, scientists were surprised to see rocks and more rocks in the Utopia region where they had expected steep sand dunes. Boulders were so numerous that driving a vehicle across the Utopia plain would be a challenge, Walter Sullivan wrote in the NYT. The scientists had hoped that the damper climate at the Viking 2 site might give more definite clues to organic life than the ambiguous reports from the Viking 1 lander experiments. They said they were delighted with the clarity of the photographs and the speed with which they were transmitted once the communications problem was solved. A tilt in the horizon appearing in the pictures meant either that one footpad of the lander was resting on a rock (according to Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, head of the surface-imaging experiment), or that the lander was on a slope (according to Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.). Martin expressed concern about getting the second lander back on schedule after the difficulties it had encountered on descent. Although communication had been reestablished with the orbiter’s main antenna after an unexplained stability problem had pointed its transmitters out of earth’s range for about 12 hr, the lander might have suffered from a rocky landing when one shock absorber failed to function. An apparent tear was visible in the rim of the 76.2-cm aluminum dish on the Viking 2 lander, which Martin said probably resulted from the landing, but did not affect the radio signals to earth. Only direct communication with the lander would show whether damage had occurred to the body and its electronics systems. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. pointed out that both Viking landing sites had been chosen purposely “for their blandness,” as free as possible from geological hazard; the rocks visible in the Viking 2 transmission were evidence of “an enormous exuberance of geological processes.” Meanwhile, two of Viking 1 ’s three biological instruments repeated their samplings of Mars soil from the plain of Chryse, with ambiguous results. The experiment that used nutrients to detect life processes in the soil registered about the same number of radioactive counts (suggesting that the nutrient was being metabolized) as the first trial had. The photosynthesis detector registered only a third as much activity as the first sample, however. The NYT pointed out that the Viking 2 lander would deploy its instruments in an environment different from that of Viking 1. Utopia, nearer the Martian north pole than Chryse, was expected to have a layer of water-containing permafrost underlying the surface; as the Martian summer was at its warmest in the Utopia region, scientists hoped for a better chance of life-identifying experiments at the Utopia site. Exobiologists had noted that, if Viking 2 results were more suggestive of life, they would feel encouraged; if the results were the same as those from Viking 1, this at least would show that the first reports were reliable. {NYT, 5 Sept 76, 1, 4-5; WStar, 5 Sept 76, A— 1; WPost, 5 Sept 76, An editorial in the NYT said the Viking engineers from government and private industry had needed luck to achieve two successful landings in two attempts; luck would have been inadequate without the “superb design and technical foresight” that had anticipated and forestalled many problems. {NYT, 6 Sept 76, 14) Project Manager Martin reported 5 Sept, that what had appeared to be a tear in an antenna was probably dirt, spattered up when Viking 2 landed. The successful uncaging of the Viking 2 seismometer met with cheers from the geophysicists on the project who had been marking time since the Viking 1 instrument failed to unlock. Dr. Nafi Toksoz, a seismologist from MIT, said that lack of data from more than one point on Mars would make triangulation (and precise location of seismic disturbances) impossible, but even one instrument might answer questions about the nature of the planet’s interior and the level of tectonic activity. He predicted that Mars would be “more active than the moon and less active than the earth.” {W Star, 6 Sept 76, A-3) As Viking 2 prepared to reach for soil samples, project scientists speculated on the possibility of mobile landers to explore the terrain and collect samples for study on earth. Dr. Elliott C. Morris of the U.S. Geological Survey said he felt like a child with nose pressed against a candy-store window, the “goodies forever beyond his reach.” Like the Soviet Lunokhods that moved about on the moon, Mars landers with wheels or tractor treads could be set down in a relatively flat area and sent into mountains, canyons, and craters far more dramatic than similar features on earth. Project Manager Martin noted that such a mission could be launched in 1981 to land on Mars the following year: a backup lander in storage at Martin Marietta’s Denver plant could be modified to make it mobile, and a spare orbiter was in storage at JPL, control center for the Viking missions managed by LaRC for NASA. Walter Sullivan of the NYT commented that the vivid detail in the panoramas transmitted from the cameras on the two landers had given the viewers the urge to go on over the horizon to see what lay beyond. (NYT, 7 Sept 76, 21) The first weather report from the Viking 2 lander disclosed that Mars weather was almost the same in the northern latitudes as in the tropics this time of year, except that winds in the northern regions shifted more often. Dr. Seymour L. Hess of Fla. State Univ., leader of the Viking weather team, said the findings were as predicted, the winds changing in patterns similar to those in similar regions on earth. Bitterly cold temperatures on the Utopia plains—warmer than at Chryse, where the nights were longer—were no colder than Arctic or Antarctic temperatures at night on earth. The soil at Utopia appeared red in the Viking 2 photographs, but not as red as the surface at Chryse. The red color resulted from oxidation of iron in the Martian soil, which had an iron content of 14%, richer in iron than almost any soil on earth. The Viking scientists theorized that the paler soil at Utopia resulted from the presence of water, which would wash out some of the redness by forming hydrates or sulfates with other minerals in the soil. (W Post, 8 Sept 76, A-7)
Aeronutronic Ford Corp. would probably win a $250-million contract to build Intelsat V, the next generation of seven global comsats owned by INTELSAT (the 94-nation Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization), said the New York Times. Scheduled for launch starting in 1979 to expand message-handling capacity of the INTELSAT network, particularly across the North Atlantic, Intelsat V would be first to use both a spatial separation technique used on Intelsat IV and a cross-polarization technique used on two ComSat domestic satellites leased to American Telephone & Telegraph and the General Telephone and Electronics Corp. INTELSAT’s board at its July meeting chose Aeronutronic for final negotiations over Hughes Aircraft, which had build all but one of the preceding generations of Intelsat spacecraft; other competitors eliminated earlier were TRW Systems (which had built one previous generation of the Intelsats) and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. All the competitors had selected West European or Japanese subcontractors. Unlike previous Intelsats, which were cylinders coated with solar cells, Intelsat V’s would be boxlike containers with flat solar-cell panels stretching from each side like windmills; weighing nearly a metric ton apiece, the spacecraft would be stabilized by a 3-axis system similar to those used on the Franco-German Symphonie satellites over the Atlantic Ocean, and on the U.S. domestic satellites built and operated by RCA. Each Intelsat V would carry 27 signal-transmitting transponders with capacity of 12 000 two-way telephone conversations, compared to 6000 through Intelsat IVA and 4000 through Intelsat IV; each satellite would also transmit color TV. Intelsat V would replace Intelsat IVA which had replaced the Intelsat IV, seven of which were in orbit above the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans. (NYT, 10 Aug 76, 37)
The 1976 summer Olympic games at Montreal 17 July-1 Aug. were the most widely telecast event in history, INTELSAT announced, having been viewed by more than 1 billion persons according to press estimates. Record use of the global system for satellite coverage included more than 930 transmissions during the games, more than 70 telecasts on some days. During peak periods satellites transmitted as many as 5 programs simultaneously across the Atlantic Ocean. The global television coverage used 2 Intelsats over the Atlantic, 1 over the Pacific, and 1 over the Indian Ocean; the 4 satellites sent 2585 half-channel hours of Olympic and related transmissions, more than twice the number of hours of the 1972 Olympics at Munich. Teleglobe Canada, the Canadian communications authority that arranged for the global services, used earth stations at Lake Cowichan, B.C., and Mill Village, N.S., as well as a transportable station at Montreal; other transmissions went through ComSatCorp’s Andover, Me., ground station. (INTELSAT Release 76-24-1)
The council of Intersputnik—the International Organization for Cosmic Telecommunications—ended its fifth meeting in Berlin after 4 days of deliberations. Attending were delegations from Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR; also attending were observers from the Inti. Organization for Radio and Television (OIRT), Intercosmos, and the Standing Commission for Post and Telecommunications (CEMA). The meeting adopted documents on the use of technical installations for transmitting TV, radio, telephone, telegraph, pictures, and data by satellite. (FBIS, ADN Inti. Service in German, 20 Sept 76)
NASA announced selection of Western Union Telegraph Co. and RCA Global Communications, Inc., for competitive negotiations leading to award of a single contract to provide tracking and data-relay satellite services (TDRSS) to support earth-orbiting spacecraft for 10 yr beginning in 1980. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage procurement of two relay satellites in synchronous earth orbit, plus groundterminal facilities to be located at White Sands, N.M. The system would support all of NASA’s scientific, applications, and manned spacecraft missions in earth orbit up to 5000-km altitude, including Space Shuttle, Spacelab, and the automated spacecraft which the Shuttle would insert into orbit in the 1980s. TDRSS, when fully operational, would provide coverage over 85 to 100% of each orbit as compared to a present average of 15%, and permit closing down many government-owned ground stations and leased communications circuits now needed to support earth-orbiting satellites in the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN); portions of the latter system would be retained only for synchronous satellites and those in higher altitude elliptical earth orbits. (NASA Release 76-158)
An article in Moscow’s Krasnaya Zvezda reviewed the increasing use of satellites for military communications, especially in the U.S. Space communications had become available in Britain, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Canada, Brazil, and Norway, as well as other countries, and though basically designed for commercial purposes “there is no doubt” that most of the channels were used by the military, the article said. As an example, the national system of space communications in Iran was said to be developed to provide guidance for combat aircraft. Not satisfied with the potential of commercial systems, the Pentagon and the NATO command had established communications satellites exclusively for military purposes, the article said, quoting U.S. News and World Report as saying that since 1960 “the Pentagon has sent 83 communications satellites . . . into orbit but has not got what it wanted. Of all these satellites only 13 still continue in orbit, and not all 13 are functioning normally.” The Soviet magazine also pointed out that 6 launches of DSCS-2 satellites had been planned, but 2 had been lost during launch and 2 more had broken down in orbit; the 2 currently operating were over the Pacific and the Atlantic at about 36 000 km, and another 6 had been ordered, the first pair due for launch in spring 1977. As press statements showed that two thirds of the military communications with foreign countries were going through commercial systems, “foreign observers” had concluded that the military systems had proven less reliable than Intelsat; the Pentagon had explained that requirements on military satellites were considerably higher, as they had to work with small mobile stations in widely scattered locations, needed increased protection against jamming, and must be durable to withstand possible combat effects. The Russian commentator said the U.S. had begun developing a third generation of military satellites—the DSCS-3—with launch scheduled for 1981, and that these new spacecraft would be powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators with longer working life and greater capacity. Elimination of bulky solar panels would also make the new craft more difficult to detect in orbit. After describing the Fleetsat-com and Afsatcom systems, the article pointed out that “the creation of a manned multipurpose transport spacecraft” [the U.S. Space Shuttle] would have a major impact on communications-satellite systems; such spacecraft would be able to launch large mass and capacity comsats, eliminating “complex operations and devices [needed to prepare] the satellite for work following its injection into orbit,” and would simplify technical servicing and repair of the comsats while in orbit. Although many technical problems remained, space facilities had become the basis of military communications abroad, the article concluded. (FBIS, Krasnaya Zvezda, 26 May 76, 3)
NASA announced that its Nimbus 6 weather satellite would be monitoring the cross-country progress of a 1914 Dodge participating in the Bicentennial world antique auto race that began 15 June in Istanbul, Turkey, and wound through 11 countries in Europe. Having crossed the Atlantic by ship, the four entrants—all American—were scheduled to rally
Lewis Research Center announced award of a $73.6 million contract to General Dynamics Corp. ’s Convair Div. for 8 Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles to be used in NASA missions over the next 4 yr. Launches would include Intelsat V comsats, High Energy Astronomical Observatory (HEAO) satellites, FLTSATCOM satellites for a worldwide DOD communications system, and the Pioneer Venus mission to provide details on the Venus atmosphere. The fixed-price incentive contract would run from 3 Sept. 1976 through Sept. 1980; work would be done at the contractor’s plant in San Diego, Calif. (NASA Release 76-154)
ESA announced award to European industry of two study contracts, one to define a large (about 900 kg) technological and experimental satellite in geostationary orbit, the other to define the communications payload for such a satellite. The 4-mo contracts, each valued at about $450 000 U.S., went to groups headed by Engins Matra and SNIAS of France for the spacecraft, and to a group headed by Germany’s AEG-Telefunken for the payload. The new satellite would be designed for launch by ESA’s Ariane, possibly on the fourth development flight scheduled for Oct. 1980; it would flight-test equipment and techniques as forerunner of a large platform carrying various communications payloads for direct and semidirect television and sound broadcasting and for propagation experiments in the 20- to 30-ghz range. The new system would differ from ESA’s OTS in offering new services required by countries without elaborate ground communications and broadcasting installations; it would carry four or more high-power TV channels for direct home reception, besides providing low-cost facilities for national telecommunications through small “thin route” terminals. (ESA release 1 Dec 76)
Further press comment on Soviet “hunter-killer” satellites appeared in the Chicago Tribune, Washington Post, and New York Times, prompted by reports of the piggyback launch of Cosmos 881 and 882 on 15 Dec. Columnist Nicholas von Hoffman noted Pentagon denials that the USSR had used laser beams to destroy an American satellite and claims that the Soviets had been practicing knockouts only on their own targets; but the physical safety of the U.S. was “more in jeopardy now than ever,” he concluded, adding that “of course, we’ll put our money into aggressive basic research efforts to stop the Russian hunter-killer satellites.” Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post described the launch and recovery of two Soviet satellites said by intelligence experts to be larger, newer versions of the hunter-killer craft, flown into orbit and back to base after circling the earth once, a move the experts said was to prevent China’s tracking the craft by radar. O’Toole said the Soviets were believed to have carried out 16 experiments in the past 9 yr in which unmanned spacecraft followed target satellites into space and blew themselves up to remove the targets from orbit; these tests stopped in 1971, but resumed in Feb. 1976 after the launches of China 5 and China 6. The two Soviet spacecraft followed an unusual flight path, similar to those taken by manned Soyuz satellites, and were also unusual in returning to earth after so brief a flight. The New York Times reported the launch on 27 Dec. of Cosmos 886, which “apparently attempted to intercept” Cosmos 880, launched 9 Dec. “The hunter satellite never came closer than one mile to its target . . . and finally disintegrated on its third orbit,” the NYT noted, adding that Cosmos 880 was still in orbit. The NYT story went on to describe the Cosmos 881 and 882 launch, “at first thought to have been such a test,” as actually connected with the manned space program. No effort had been made to interfere with U.S. space vehicles, and the 27 Dec. launch—the USSR’s fourth test of a satellite interceptor this year—had been classified as a failure by intelligence sources, the NYT said. (C Trib, 4 Dec 76, 1-7; W Post, 18 Dec 76, A—1; NYT, 31 Dec 76, A6)
The board of directors of Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) declared a quarterly dividend of 25 cents per share payable 15 Mar. to all shareholders of record at close of business 13 Feb. The group’s 22nd consecutive quarterly dividend would be the 7th at the 25-cent rate. (ComSat Release 76-1) system for providing solar power to the transmitter: a pair of accordion-pleated solar arrays to be extended by thin steel booms to a wingspan of 7.5 m each, that could provide 1 kw of power over Cts's 2-yr lifetime. A 3-axis stabilisation system would keep the panels pointed toward the sun for power while the satellite antennas aimed accurately at the center of target transmission areas, about a timezone wide. The large-diameter low-profile spacecraft would be turned over to the Canadian Department of Communications for operation after the spacecraft reached synchronous orbit. Apogee-motor firing at 3:41 pm £ST 20 Jan. put Cts into a synchronous orbit at 35 888 km altitude, with final station at 116°W over the equator reached 29 Jan. Cts was the result of a 5-yr international program of cooperation between NASA and CDC to pioneer in new methods of providing communications services by transmitting high-quality color TV and other data to small user-operated ground stations in remote areas. It carried a high-efficiency 200-w traveling-wave tube amplifier developed at LeHC that would operate at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than those of previous satellites, permitting the use of smaller and less expensive ground equipment, and in a new frequency band providing microwave signals in the 12-ghz region. In 1971, the World Administrative Radio Conference had begun assigning frequencies between 11 and 14 ghz and 18 and 30 ghz to signal-relay and broadcast satellites of the future, in hopes of averting a communications jam in orbit in the 1980s. The satellites could provide any country with a means of transmitting its own TV programs and settiifg up medical and educational consulting services in sparsely settled regions by using small, inexpensive—even portable— ground stations. (NASA Release 76-9, 75-316; MOR E-610-76-01 [prelaunch] 22 D^ii) 75, [postlaunch] 28 Jan 76, [postlaunch #2] 13 Feb 76; ESA news releases 16 Jan76,6 Feb 76; WStar, 18 Jan 76, A-2, 21 Jan 76, All; NYT, 30 Jan 76, C 11) 18 January; Ats 3, launched 5 Nov. 1967 primarily as a comsat, went into semiretirement::when the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration turnetj off its multicolor spin-scan cloud camera that had taken the first colof: photograph of the earth from space. During its 8 yr of orbiting 35 800 km in space synchronously with the earth’s rotation, Ats 3 helped prove the theory that continuous viewing of earth’s cloud-cover would prjovide meaningful weather information. Ats 3 transmitted thousands of photographs of hurricanes, tornado-bearing thunderstorms, and other life-threatening weather phenomena, including the timely warning of Hurricane Camille before its assault on the Gulf Coast in Aug. 1969. Besides weather pictures, Ats 3 had relayed live TV coverage of events such as the Apollo missions, Pope Paul’s visit to Colombia, and the 1968 Olympic games in Mexico City. Although superseded by more sophisticated geostationary spacecraft such as Sms l and 2 and Goes 1, which offered better visual transmission and provided nighttime imagery through infrared sensors, Ats 3 would continue to relay data as part of NOAA’s worldwide weather-facsimile broadcast system, and would be used by NASA in communications demonstrations such as medical and educational experiments. (NOAA Release 76-5)
Electricity from outer space to power homes and industry would be not only possible, but entirely probable, soon after the turn of the century, said Ralph I. LaRock of NASA Hq at a recent meeting held at Marshall Space Flight Center. LaRock, director of the Energy Technology Applications Division in NASA’s Office of Energy Programs, described a proposed satellite power system under study by NASA, industry, the Energy Research and Development Administration, and other groups. MSFC’s share of the study was aimed at defining overall systems requirements (including satellite structure, economical size and materials for the solar array, new technology needed in satellite and support systems, and transporting, erecting, and maintaining the system in space). LaRock said predictions of technology advancement during the 1980-1990 time period indicated a good chance of “our having a few solar-power satellites in operation by the turn of the century.” (MSFC Release 76-75)
The European Space Agency announced selection of General Electric Co. to produce and launch two satellites for the Aerosat program [see 8 Sept.], saying that the GE bid was “significantly below” that of the other two contenders, the RCA Corp. and TRW Inc. A GE spokesman estimated the value of the contract at $60 million, half to be spent in the U.S. and half to go to a consortium of foreign companies known as the Cosmos Group, which had formed a bidding team with GE. (NYT, 11 Sept 76, 33)
The U.S. Senate, by a vote of 78 to 6, confirmed the nomination of Dr. H. Guyford Stever to be director of the newly created Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House. Dr. Stever, director of the National Science Foundation, had been under criticism for NSF actions in reviewing applications for research grants; also, conservative senators had objected to social-science textbooks prepared under NSF auspices in the 4 yr that Dr. Stever headed that agency. The confirmation marked reestablishment of aWhite House science advisory post after its elimination by President Nixon early in 1973. On 7 Nov. 1957 President Eisenhower had announced appointment of Dr. James R. Killian as special assistant to the President for science and technology, whose prime role was to speed rocket and missile development in the wake of the first satellite a month earlier. Dr. George B, Kistiakowsky, who succeeded Dr. Killian, wrote later that the science advisory committee set up in the White House helped President Eisenhower make major military decisions. The Natl. Science and Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 11 May 1976 would also provide 4 new executive-branch agencies: the Office of Science and Technology Policy, whose director would advise the National Security Council upon request, but would mainly assist the Office of Management and Budget in decisions on funding federally supported R&D and would prepare an annual science and technology report for Congress as a counterpart of the State of the Union Message; the President’s Committee on Science and Technology, consisting of 8 to 14 specialists in a wide range of fields who would study for 2 yr and report on the nation’s science, engineering, and technology policies, and disband after submitting the report unless the President chose to continue it; the Federal Coordinating Council for Science, Engineering, and Technology, to deal with interagency problems, chaired by the Science Adviser; and the Intergovernmental Science, Engineering, and Technology Panel, consisting of the Science Adviser as chairman, the Director of the NSF, and at least 10 members representing state interests, to define civilian problems at state, regional, and local levels which could be resolved by science, engineering, and technology. Dr. Richard T. Atkinson, Deputy Director of NSF, would act as Director until the end of the present administration in January. (CR, 9 Aug 76, S 13954-13963; NYT, 6 Aug 76, Al; 10 Aug 76, A3; 15 Aug 76, 4-6; 24 Aug 76, 28)
Information from space satellites orbiting more than 900 km above the earth was being regularly evaluated in U.S. attempts to measure crops in the Soviet Union, the Peoples Republic of China, and other countries, officials of the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture said. The information had been incorporated with other data in a project known as the Large-Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) that had been going on since 1974 and would be completed by mid-1978. The disclosure of crop-watching appeared in a weekly issue of Foreign Agriculture published by the department’s Foreign Agricultural Service. {W Star, 30 Aug 76, A-5)
The Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that the Assembly of Parties meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, had confirmed the appointment of Santiago Astrain of Chile, since 1973 the secretary general of INTELSAT, as the first Director General of the international organization. The board of governors had appointed Astrain in July to serve a 6-yr term as Director General, beginning 31 Dec. 1976. The Director General would be responsible for implementing permanent management arrangements and for tasks such as implementing a new high-capacity satellite system to be known as Intelsat V in the late 1970s and early 1980s. About 200 delegates, representing 69 of INTELSAT’s 95 member countries, attended the Nairobi meeting. Elected were a chairman, Isaac Omolo Okero of Kenya, and a deputy chairman, Fernando Gaviria of Colombia. Vice chairmen elected to represent the five world regions were Romulo Villar Furtado of Brazil (The Americas); Joachim Jaenicke of the Federal Republic of Germany (W. Europe); Zika Ra-dojlovic of Yugoslavia (E. Europe and N. Asia); and Sribhumi Sukhanetr of Thailand (Asia and Australasia). The meeting also recognized the People’s Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of China, and welcomed the PRC to join INTELSAT. (INTELSAT Releases 76-28-1, 76-29-1; Satellite Pathways, ComSat, vol. 1 no. 7, Sept-Oct 76)
NASA announced plans to launch a third maritime satellite, Marisat-C, for Comsat General Corp. from Cape Canaveral on a Delta rocket 14 Oct. Marisat 1, launched 19 Feb., was in orbit over the Atlantic Ocean at 15°W; Marisat 2, launched 9 June, was in orbit over the mid-Pacific at 176.5°. The two Marisats currently provided communications services to the U.S. Navy as well as fulltime commercial voice and data communications to the maritime industry; Marisat-C, which would be in synchronous orbit over the Indian Ocean, would be used initially only by the Navy, which planned to lease UHF capacity it found to be surplus, Comsat General would reimburse NASA for the cost of launch vehicle, launch, and other administrative expenses, and would supply all ground-station support. (NASA Release 76-156) 18-20 Sc jo (ember: The Viking 2 lander signaled to mission scientists at JPL that its sample-collecting arm was working and had moved toward the x-ray instrument that would analyze the mineral content of the Mars soil. If the collector had delivered its sample and the analysis was proceeding, the signal expected on the next relay would confirm that the arm was available for further sampling. The mission scientists said they planned to instruct the arm to turn over a rock on the surface and take a sample haler prise - Sparc Shuttle Orbiler 101—on public display for the first time at Rockwell's Palmdale, Calif., facility, 17 Sept. 1981. (NASA 70-H-854) from the underlying soil that had not been exposed to lethal ultraviolet rays. Geologists had characterized the appearance of nearby soil structure as resembling “caliche,” a calcium carbonate crust formed on earth surfaces by evaporation of water that deposited mineral salts on the soil particles and cemented them together. The cementing action might increase the difficulty of dislodging a rock with the lander arm, but scientists noted the ease with which the arm had taken the first sample. As the content of that first Viking 2 sample so closely resembled that from the Viking 1, scientists wanted to try for a sample with different properties, especially some trace of carbon-based chemicals that would indicate life processes. The caliche sample would be taken 25 Sept, and the attempt to move a rock would be made 8 Oct., a 3-hr strategy meeting decided 20 Sept. Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said the x-ray instrument had never received its sample for analysis, so a sample for it would be dug 3 Oct. An editorial in the New York Times asked whether, in the absence of carbon compounds, the mission scientists should consider the possibility of Martian life based on some chemical other than carbon. (Mission Status Bulletin 42; ATT, 19 Sept 76, 29; 20 Sept 76, 32; W Post, 19 Sept 76, A12; 20 Sept 76, A-5; W Star, 19 Sept 76, A-2)
NASA announced plans for a 3-mo demonstration this summer of using Ats 6—known as the “teacher in the sky”—to help some of the world’s poorest people boost food production, improve health and nutrition, expand family planning, and raise income levels, through applications of remote sensing, space communications, and high-resolution aerial photography. The program, a joint effort of NASA and the Agency for International Development, would consist of both filmed and live portions broadcast to as many as 30 countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. AID would provide $3 million to finance the demonstration. At a UN conference in Nairobi 6 May on trade and development, Secretary of State Kissinger emphasized the use of satellite technology to improve cooperation between industrialized and developing nations; depending upon the response to the broadcasts, AID would be prepared to propose to Congress a long-range follow-up technology program. Ats-6 was completing a year-long program of instructional television for India; upon completion of this mission 31 July, NASA would move the satellite to a location over the Western Hemisphere where it would beam audio or audiovisual presentations in black and white or in color to special receivers on the ground. AID officials and NASA specialists would set up one transmitter-receiver unit in the capital of each participating country, and up to 5 receivers in outlying locations; each receiver terminal would be equipped with color-television monitors. The live portion of the demonstration would feature 2-way discussions between U.S. personalities and representatives of the recipient countries; a local program would be developed in the host country to demonstrate the communications abilities of the ATS. NASA would be responsible for moving the equipment from country to country and for operation of the satellite and associated equipment. (NASA Release 76—101)
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, professor of planetary science at California Institute of Technology and geologist by training, succeeded Dr. William H. Pickering as director of Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. After earning bachelor’s, master’s, and doctor’s degrees at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Murray became a geologist and later served in the Air Force. At the USAF Cambridge Research Lab., trying to expand knowledge of the earth’s shape and gravity field by the use of earth satellites, he became interested in space technology. First faculty appointee at Caltech in the field of planetary astronomy in 1960, Dr. Murray and Prof. James Westphal were in 1962 the first observers of infrared emission from an object outside the solar system (a star) and did infrared mapping of the moon, Venus, and Jupiter. Dr. Murray was the author or coauthor of 4 books and more than 60 scientific papers, including the recent book “Navigating the Future.” (Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1; Glendale News-Press, 1 Apr 76, 1; Montrose Ledger, 1 Apr 76, 1)
An environmental satellite operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had used its capability of measuring ocean temperatures to help fishermen on the Calif, coast find tuna and salmon. A pilot project using satellite imagery to locate areas of “upwelling” off the coast—areas where cold nutrient-rich water would rise from the bottom to the surface—had shown that these areas were favored by the fish, and the fishermen could save time and fuel by using the data to locate them. NOAA’s polar-orbiting satellite passing over the coast twice daily would use visual and infrared sensors to relay data including sea-surface temperatures to earth, where images of thermal fronts indicated upwelling areas. The fronts transferred to navigation charts would be available to fishermen at northern Calif, ports. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service conducted the research through a NOAA-supported sea grant program at Humboldt State Univ.; the technique would be applicable to fishing industry in many parts of the world. (NOAA Release 76-10)
A giant Air Force antenna at Hamilton, Mass., that had shared in transatlantic communications with the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England by way of moon reflections would be dismantled and moved to Westford, Mass., for use by the Lincoln Laboratory of MIT in radar studies of earth’s upper atmosphere, the AFSC Newsreview announced. The big dish, nearly 46 m in diameter, had been used by the USAF Geophysics Laboratory since 1962 for ionospheric and radioastronomy studies, as well as in auroral studies using satellite beacons. Continuing USAF research at Hamilton’s Sagamore Hill Observatory would use the facility’s 25.6-m antenna and smaller receivers. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 76, 10) October 1976
NASA announced that a task team headed by Marshall Space Flight Center, and including representatives from Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, would assist the Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) in evaluating industry proposals for validating the development of the Space Shuttle interim upper stage (lUS). The IUS, an expendable solid-fuel rocket stage capable of launching one or more spacecraft, would be carried into low earth orbit in the bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter; after deployment, it would be fired to carry the spacecraft into orbits of from 800 to 35 000 km, or to earth-escape trajectories for interplanetary missions. The basic IUS developed to meet DOD objectives would be altered as needed to meet NASA-unique requirements (planetary missions, or economical delivery of several smaller satellites). MSFC would be responsible for establishing the NASA-unique requirements; its task team would be responsible for planning and coordinating NASA’s IUS activities; KSC would be responsible for IUS launch operations, and JSC for lUS-orbiter integration and flight operations. The Air Force was expected to award a contract for IUS development by Sept. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-89)
NOAA announced award of a $1 441 116 contract extension to Management and Technical Services Co., Daytona Beach, Fla., for technical support in operating NOAA’s geostationary environmental satellite system. The extension would continue the company’s work in processing and distributing environmental data. Two GOES satellites at altitudes of 35 800 km were transmitting imagery and other information to receiving stations at Wallops, Va., and Suitland, Md., for communication to NOAA centers in Washington, D.C., Miami, Kansas City, and San Francisco. (NOAA Release 76-227)
