Comsat General Corp. announced that the U.S. Navy had agreed to extend its use of three Marisat satellites for an additional 2.5yr, ending in 1981, at a cost of about $138 million [see During June]. The Navy had begun using the Atlantic Marisat in March 1976, the Pacific satellite in June 1976, and the Indian Ocean satellite in Jan. 1977. Each of the three Marisats had a design life of 5yr and could operate in three frequencies: UHF (ultrahigh frequency) for Navy service, and the L-band and CJband for commercial maritime users. The Navy had leased all UHF capacity in all three Marisats for communications between its own fixed and mobile terminals. The Marisat system was owned and operated by four companies under a joint-venture arrangement approved by the Federal Communications Commission: Comsat General, which acted as system manager, with nearly 87% ownership; RCA Global Communications; Western Union Inti.; and ITT World Communications. (Comsat General Release CG 77-3; WSJ, July 29/77, 6)
A NASA earth resources monitoring satellite, Landsat 1, had experienced a malfunction in band 1 of its multispectral scanner on Mar. 3, AvWk reported. Although the malfunction affected only band 1 (a green spectral band identifying sunlight reflected from green plants), NASA had shut down the entire scanner pending a safety investigation by controllers. Landsat 1 had performed satisfactorily since its 1973 launch. (AvWk, Mar 14/77, 16)
The Naval Research Reviews reported on satellite use in the oceanic biology program of the Office of Naval Research, covering biodeterioration (growth of fouling and boring organisms), sound in the ocean (marine mammals), dangerous marine organisms, and special projects. Sound in the sea, second major research area in the program, had centered on whales and seals, especially sounds produced by whales. Navy scientists had implanted radio transmitters in large whales such as blues, fins, and grays, to track them by boat, plane, or satellite. Knowledge of whale behavior and movements would be valuable to designers and operators of naval equipment. (NR Rev, Sept 77, 6) •
X-ray sensors on the U.K.’s Ariel satellite had detected an explosion of “catastrophic dimensions” in the constellation Ophiuchus [the Serpent-Bearer], the NY Times reported. Similar sensors on Heao 1, the U.S. high-energy astronomy observatory launched Aug. 12, had made the same observation. Dr. Daniel A. Schwartz of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics said intensity of x-rays from that area increased a thousandfold in the past 2wk, making it the second strongest, source in the sky (that in the constellation Scorpius, a continuous source of x-rays, was the strongest). No star of comparable brilliance appeared in previous photographs of the region. Ariel had first detected the x-rays Aug. 31; Heao 1 began recording the source Sept. 7. An observatory in Australia that had received data on the explosion had also recorded it in visible light; Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Laboratory said that a nova was rarely observed at widely separated wavelengths such as those of visible light and x-rays. (NYT, Sept 17/77, B8)
A television relay satellite 22 000 miles in space was the focus of an experiment Jan. 25 in using TV transmissions to conduct judicial proceedings, reducing the travel time and cost of witnesses and lawyers, and to increase the efficiency of the courts, the New York Times reported. The project, result of a yr’s planning between the Univ. of Maryland law school in Baltimore and that of Ohio Northern in Lima, was only partly successful because the yr-old communications technology satellite Cts orbiting over the equator south of Denver repeatedly sent to Baltimore the jagged horizontal lines of TV “snow” during the closing arguments of the mock hearing at Lima. Also, the voice-activated TV cameras, two at each location to cover the two pairs of lawyers and judges, would take over the projection screen whenever anyone wearing a lapel microphone coughed or cleared his throat. The Maryland Center for Public Broadcasting, which sponsored the experiment, had paid nothing for use of the system, and the Cts project leader (Herbert Nunelly of Westinghouse Electric Corp.) operating the teleconference for NASA said he could not compute the cost of an hour’s or day’s use of the satellite. The American Bar Assn, had approved the mock appeals hearing before Judge Joseph F. Weis, Jr., of the U.S Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, and three lawyers before whom law school students were arguing the case. Judge Weis’s ABA project director, Howard Primer of Chicago, cited several actual trials conducted with TV assistance. (NYT, Jan 26/77, B-l)
NASA announced that Det Norske Meteorological Institute in Oslo, Norway, had asked that the Nimbus 6 satellite help it track a huge oil slick resulting from an oil well blowout in the North Sea. By May 16 the Norwegians would put 5 random-access measurement-system (RAMS) buoys into the oil slick to send environmental information to the spacecraft. Goddard Space Flight Center engineer William W. Conant, noting that similar buoys earlier this year had helped the U.S. Coast Guard track an oil slick off Nantucket Sound, said NASA would support the Norwegian effort by transmitting locations of all the buoys twice daily for 30 days, adding “We don’t normally provide daily teletype information.” For more than a yr, the Norwegians had been tracking ice drift in the Spitzbergen region north of Norway, using a RAMS system as an accurate method of tracking in all weather. (NASA Release 77-30)
NASA launched Palapa 2 (formerly Palapa-B), an Indonesian telecommunications satellite, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral on a Delta at 2316 GMT, into a transfer orbit with 36 499km apogee, 231.2km perigee, and inclination of 24.6°. Palapa 2, second Indonesian domestic comsat, would use its apogee kick motor Mar. 12 to move into synchronous orbit above the Indian Ocean. Forty ground stations throughout the archipelago would link the islands with the 2 satellites, each capable of handling 4000 phone calls or 12 simultaneous color TV channels. (MORs M-492-208-77-02, [prelaunch] Feb 2/77, [postlaunch] Apr 12/77; NASA Release 77-23; FBIS, Jakarta Domestic Service in Indonesia, Mar 11/77)
NASA announced award of what Aviation Week called “the largest NASA contract ever issued for an unmanned space program” to Western Union Space Communications Co., TRW Systems, and Harris Electronics Systems Div. for development of the tracking and data-relay satellite system (TDRSS) aimed at replacing present ground stations by offering orbital-communications coverage for 85 to 100% of spacecraft orbit, compared to 15% coverage now available from ground-based facilities. The system would consist of two specialized relay spacecraft in synchronous earth orbit plus a ground terminal at White Sands, N.M., supporting 20 or more satellites orbiting at up to 5000km altitude. The lOyr contract at $79.6 million per yr would include work on spacecraft and ground stations, as well as all operating costs. TRW would be prime manufacturer under subcontract with WU to build six spacecraft plus components for a seventh, using technology developed for the FltSatCom spacecraft and hardware used in WU’s Westar domestic comsats; Harris Electronics would build the White Sands station and provide antenna components. Missions using the TDRSS would include scientific, applications, and manned satellites such as Space Shuttle, Spacelab, and Shuttle-launched spacecraft scheduled for the 1980s. (A v Wk, Jan 3/77, 14; NASA Release 76-213)
ESA and Canada’s Centre for Remote Sensing (CCRS) announced they had signed an agreement to cooperate in studying remote-sensing applications, developing microwave remote sensing, and improving ground stations for processing satellite data. (ESA release, Mar 21/77)
RCA (formerly the Radio Corporation of America) observed the 17th anniversary of the first weather picture received from space through the first Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS), Today newspaper reported. The 26011b TIROS delivered “a pretty shabby product compared to today’s images from space,” RCA admitted. The company had since built a series of 24 other weather watchers that had taken 3.5 million pictures and logged more than 7 billion miles in orbit. Managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the spacecraft had gone from pinpointing major storms to predicting runoff from snowmelt, helping ships navigate through icefields, and assisting commercial fishermen to find promising areas for their efforts. RCA was currently developing a fourth-generation TIROS. (Today, May 1/77, 18A)
FBIS said the USSR in 1978 would install a second generation of laser long-distance satellite rangefinders usable in daylight, increasing the range to 40,000km with an accuracy of ± 10cm. USSR engineers were working in Czechoslovakia on the new rangefinder. The report said Intercosmos engineers from Hungary, East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR had built a rangefinder measuring distances up to 3000km accurate up to ±5m; however, it could operate only at night. Ground stations in Poland, Egypt, Bolivia, India, and Cuba had used the device. (FBIS, Inti Serv in Russian, Oct 24/77)
NASA noted that Landsat 1, first satellite to focus specifically on earth and its natural resources, had completed its 5th yr in orbit. Launched July 23, 1972, with a life expectancy of only lyr, Landsat had monitored air and water pollution, geological resources, agricultural production, and potential water supply. Dr. Wernher von Braun had predicted that this program alone could give the U.S. “a return exceeding its total space program investment.” (NASA Release 77-150)
During May: Natl. Research Council’s News Report said a committee chaired by MIT’s Wilbur B. Davenport, Jr., had recommended that NASA resume support of comsat services research and development but stay out of the business of operating such services. The committee said that agency support of an operational program of public service satellite communications would “obscure the real costs of the public service”; agencies that needed to use or provide such services “would not be faced with the hard reality of determining whether a program is worthy of execution when compared with its actual cost,” the report said. (NRC News Report, May 77, 1)
The new administration of President Jimmy Carter was reevaluating the NASA budget submitted by President Ford, and would study the possibility of increases, however marginal, in that budget, Defense/Space Daily reported. NASA’s energy program, budgeted at $4.5 million in FY 1958 ($1 million to study satellite solar power and $3.5 million for energy technology that could be transferred to ERDA), would probably be recommended for increase within the next few weeks, the report said. (D/SD, Feb 2/77, 185)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics using data from NASA’s Uhuru satellite had discovered what seemed to be “superclusters” of galaxies more than 150 million light-years in diameter, bounded by areas of extremely hot gas acting as x-ray sources. The mass of gas required to produce x-rays would be 5 to 10 times greater than all material seen at other wavelengths, and would suffice to bind the galaxies into superclusters. Primarily hydrogen and helium, the gas was thought to be “primordial material” from an explosion that created the universe. In the debate over origins, “open universe” theorists supported the idea of a big bang 20 billion yr ago expanding outward forever; “closed universe” advocates said gravitational collapse would halt expansion and the material would fall back on itself, perhaps to repeat the cycle. Traditional optical and radio techniques had not found enough material in space to supply the gravity needed to “close” the universe; the new data indicated the missing mass might exist as vast amounts of hot gas between galaxies. Uhuru, first of a series of small astronomical satellites (SAS) for studying cosmic x-rays, had been launched Dec. 12,1970, as Explorer 42. The astronomers had noted the x-ray emissions while compiling the fourth Uhuru catalog from observations in the early 1970s. The project was managed for NASA by Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Release 77-138)
Direct-readout equipment for GOES, the geostationary operational environmental satellite, installed in the USAF global weather center at Offutt AFB, Neb., to support Air Force meteorology requirements, would improve the center’s forecasting and accuracy, AvWk reported. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
Nature reported that a May 13 meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in London had discussed Mars’s moons Phobos and Deimos, the 100th anniversary of whose discovery would occur in Aug. Observations, both ground-based and from satellites, had revealed oddities: Phobos, the only satellite in earth’s solar system that circled its central body faster than that body could spin on its axis, would appear to an observer on the planet’s surface to rise in the west and set in the east, whereas its fellow Deimos would appear to rise in the east and set in the west like earth’s moon. Also, the orbit of Phobos was coming nearer to the surface of Mars (a body approaching within 8700km would be pulled apart by differential tidal forces, the article said). A Soviet astrophysicist, I.S. Shklovsky, had claimed in the 1950s that the low density of Phobos indicated it was a hollow artificial satellite produced by an advanced civilization on Mars. Viking spacecraft images had shown that the moons were blackish gray rather than the red of Mars, indicating different composition; astronomer Joe Veverka of Cornell Univ. concluded that the moons had originated in the asteroid belt. Viking had found that the lOkm-diameter Stickney crater on Phobos covered 40% of the maximum diameter of Phobos itself. The two Mars moons had almost identical shapes (triaxial ellipsoids) and both rotated synchronously with their orbital periods and their long axes pointing directly at Mars (Nature, June 30/77, 758)
Telesat Canada expected to award contracts in Nov. 1977 for three commercial telecommunications satellites, the Wall Street Journal reported. The new comsats would use higher frequency bands than the three Telesat Canada satellites now providing television, telephone, and message communications throughout Canada. First of the high-frequency comsats would be delivered early in 1980 and launched later that yr. (WSJ, Feb 15/77, 3)
Dr. Albert Rango of GSFC and Dr. K.I. Itten of the Univ. of Zurich announced that orbiting earth satellites could monitor winter snowpacks and their runoff as accurately as ground-based or airborne observations, NASA reported. Their findings appeared in the journal Nordic Hydrology. Comparing costs and relative accuracy of ground, airborne, and satellite measurements, the two scientists decided that the use of NASA’s Landsat earth resources monitoring satellite and the Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s environmental satellite Noaa 2 would provide timely and accurate information at lower cost than the alternatives. (NASA Release 77-52)
Prof. James L. Elliot of Cornell Univ. reported sighting a large number of objects—possible satellites of Uranus, the seventh planet—while he was using the 91cm telescope on NASA’s Kuiper Airborne Observatory flying above the Indian Ocean. Another U.S. astronomer, Dr. Robert Millis of the Lowell Observatory in Ariz., reported similar observations while viewing Uranus from Perth in Australia. Each of the scientists claimed that the planet might have as many as 100 satellites ranging from 18 to 24mi in diameter. If confirmed, the new observations would give Uranus more satellites than any other planet in the solar system. (NYT, Mar 3/77, 77; C Trib, Mar 12/77)
The quality of information from the Voyagers would greatly surpass that of earlier missions, said Philip Abelson in Science magazine. “A decade ago the level of knowledge concerning the planets and their satellites was such that almost any arm-waving explanation would fit the facts. This is no longer true.” Citing the potential of 5 of the 11 instruments, Abelson noted the Voyager cameras could “achieve a resolution and observing time at Jupiter better by a factor of 40 than those of the Pioneer spacecraft. . . . The radio infrared, visible, and ultraviolet instruments can all participate in a mutually reinforcing fashion.” (Science, Sept 9/77, 1858)
NASA launched two international satellites, the U.S. ISEE-A and ESA’s ISEE-B, on a single Delta rocket at 9:53am EDT (1353hr GMT) from ETR at Cape Canaveral into a highly elliptical orbit ranging from about 138,000km apogee to 280km perigee, 28.7° inclination, and 2.4-day period. The ISEEs had separated an hr after launch, the A craft (/see 1) spin axis perpendicular to the ecliptic and the B spacecraft (Isee 2) spin axis parallel to the ecliptic to permit magnetometer calibration and boom extension. The satellites would measure earth’s environment, assisted by a third spacecraft ISEE-C scheduled for launch in 1978. (NASA Release 77-123; ESA Release Oct. 24/77; MOR S-862-77-01/02 [prelaunch] Oct 11/77, [postlaunch] Oct 25/77; WPost, Oct 23/77, A13; W Star, Oct 23/77, A-2)
Two balloonists attempting a transatlantic crossing from Bar Harbor, Maine, on or about Sept. 19 would carry a lightweight satellite-tracking beacon like the one that helped save Maxie Anderson and Ben Abruzzo when their balloon ditched near Iceland on Sept. 12. The FAA had required Charles E. Reinhard and Charles A. Stephenson to carry the device as an air traffic control aid and in case of a need for search and rescue. This type of beacon had previously gone around the world on a polar flight, and another rode a 33ft sailboat on a 600mi trip through the Bermuda Triangle east of Fla., both successfully tracked by a Nimbus satellite. The balloonists would cover the cost of the beacon; NASA would take no part except for use of the satellite link and ground systems, which would operate 24hr anyway. (NASA Release 77-194)
Nature magazine reported further on the recognition of ring systems around the planet Uranus announced earlier by Dr. James L. Elliot of Cornell Univ. [see March 31]. The occultation (shutting off from view) by Uranus of a bright object (star SAO 158687 in Libra) had been predicted by the Royal Observatory at Greenwich as visible only from an area on earth extending from equatorial Africa across the Indian Ocean to western Australia. No useful observations of a Uranian occultation had been made before; astronomers considered such observations important because they could furnish data on the size of the planet or stellar object, on limb darkening, and on extent and composition of any atmosphere, as well as an accurate measurement of the object’s position, valuable in calculations of celestial mechanics. Heavy rain at Johannesburg prevented observations there on March 10, but astronomers on the Kuiper observatory plane flying over the southern Indian Ocean east of Kerguelen Is. were able to see an occultation lasting about 25min with secondary occultations lasting 8 to 9min before and after. Observers at Madras and Perth also viewed the event and decided independently that the extended occultation resulted from satellites forming a belt about 48 000km from the center of Uranus. The belt was apparently circular, lying in the plane of the planet’s equator, and about 12 000km wide. Nature reported that Dr. Elliot was continuing detailed study of the event, and that direct observation of the belts might be possible with a sufficiently large telescope. (Nature, April 14/77, 587)
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
The Washington Post reported on Sputnik 7's 20th anniversary as observed in the Soviet Union. Sputnik had set off a “search for nationhood in the United States even as it seemed to confirm it in the Soviet Union . . . Ask any Soviet citizen above the age of 24 and each can tell you exactly where they were and what they were doing when they heard ... a Soviet satellite was in orbit.” The U.S. search ended “in a symbolic and reeil sense” with the moon landing 8.5yr ago. However, the certainty of power that Sputnik gave the USSR “has never quite materialized out of the void of space.” The A-2, early main launch vehicle for the USSR “civilian” program, was still that today. U.S. experts in the joint Apollo-Soyuz project had been “dismayed by the crudeness of Soviet space hardware”: one compared the Soyuz craft to a “hot water radiator ... it works, but that’s about all you can say for it.” An aviation weekly, interviewing the experts, said they rated the Soyuz with the Mercury capsule, first U.S. manned spacecraft. “Their scientists are every bit as good as ours,” said one U.S. physicist, “but the technical gap is still huge.” The article noted that the U.S. had dropped its space medicine program in the early 1970s but the USSR had kept on with its, and had maintained large space stations in orbit since 1971 manned with crews up to 63 days at a time. The Soviet space program had had less trouble than the U.S. program “because of the closed nature of the system ... no citizens groups or congressional critics to question the need for a manned space program.” Competition for limited resources was the same in both countries, but “lack of public debate allowed managers luxuries of continuity not available to their counterparts in a democracy.” (WPost, Oct 4/77, A-l)
NASA announced plans to launch NATO III-B, second in a new series of comsats to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Jan. 27 as NASA’s first launch of 1977. The three spacecraft in the Phase III series, funded entirely by NATO, were built by Ford Aerospace; the third would be launched in 1978. The Delta rocket provided by Goddard Space Flight Center that would put NATO III-B in orbit had successfully launched three previous NATO satellites: Nato II-A and -B, in March 1970 and Feb. 1971, and Nato III-A in April 1976. (NASA Release 77-5)
NASA announced it had agreed with the St. Regis Paper Co. in N.Y. to use the Landsat for monitoring from 900km (560mi) commercial timberlands owned by the company over a 5-state area in Fla., Ga., Ala., Miss., and La. St. Regis would use the satellite data to manage its timberland. JSC would manage development of an automatic system for classifying forested areas, to identify kinds of trees, estimate timber volume, and detect changes in health or growth of the forests, combining the new system with existing data from aerial photography and ground surveys. Software and techniques from this first major undertaking between NASA and a private company would be in the public domain, to benefit other forest-resource managers. Past cooperative uses of Landsat had been between NASA and other U.S. or foreign government agencies. (NASA Release 77-226; JSC Release 77-73)
TROPEX, an international tropical weather experiment sponsored by the Soviet Union, would use USSR satellites with research vessels from some of the 70 participating countries to gather data on atmospheric conditions, the FBIS reported. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 22/77)
Industrial exploration had made sweeping changes in today’s society, ranging from thumbnail-size computers to Space Shuttles operating with the regularity of commercial airlines, Rockwell Inti, chairman W.F. Rockwell, Jr., told the annual Explorers Club dinner in New York City. A microprocessor small enough to balance on the end of a thumb could compute 10 times faster than a 30-ton device introduced in 1946, and would cost $15 to $20, compared to the millions of dollars that the old computer cost, he said. Forecasting the potential of the Shuttle, being developed largely by Rockwell for NASA, he reviewed possible payloads including solar power satellites and navsats; he ended by comparing explorers setting out in search of new discoveries and new knowledge with the explorers in industry searching to improve products and service. (Rockwell Release R-18)
The W Post said that the U.S. had “quietly decided” to build a device for destroying enemy satellites in space: a small (ft-Iong, 8in-dia) heat-sensing vehicle “resembling a tomato can” without explosives but relying on collision at thousands of mph to accomplish its purpose. The Post said the USAF had “carefully camouflaged” this step in a Sept. 8 release announcing award to Vought Corp. of a $58.7 million contract “for development and test of hardware in support of the Space Defense Technology Program.” A 1967 treaty between the U.S and USSR had prohibited both nations from orbiting any object “carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction. . both sides had apparently decided this did not outlaw shooting at their own target satellites. U.S. military officials deduced that certain USSR launches were tests of hunter-killer satellites with non-nuclear charges to blow up on approach to a target. William J. Perry, DOD research chief, told the Post that the U.S. could either build antisatellite weapons also, or provide more protection for U.S. satellites. The DOD had begun on defensive measures such as making satellite wiring less vulnerable, but had also decided on offensive measures as shown in the Vought contract. The small highly maneuverable U.S. device would have sensors allowing it to home in on slight temperature variations between a target spacecraft and its surroundings; it would be so light that a single launch vehicle could carry several into effective orbit. (WPost, Sept 23/77, Al)
NASA announced that a disaster simulation in Texas using the communications technology satellite—world’s most powerful comsat—had turned into an actual emergency operation providing communications between Red Cross headquarters in Washington, D.C., and flood-stricken Johnstown, Pa. ComSatCorp and the Red Cross had set up an experiment to demonstrate emergency use of satellites in natural disasters; the Texas results had led Red Cross officials to ask for assistance in the actual emergency at Johnstown. The Cts equipment transferred from Houston to Johnston July 23 and set up at a vocational high school near the Univ. of Pittsburgh was a portable station with a 4ft antenna to send and receive signals to and from the synchronous satellite orbiting over the equator just west of South America. During the emergency it had sent messages through the Cts to ComSat offices in Clarksburg, Md., connected by land line to Washington. The disaster-related communications included requests for medical and physician services, supplies and administrative services, and transmission of situation maps. Johnstown’s residents also could use the Cts link to communicate with relatives around the U.S. when the Red Cross was not using the lines. The emergency had preempted Canadian and U.S. experiments scheduled for July 25-26. (NASA Release 77-157)
NOAA reported it had used two of its operational environmental satellites with NASA’s Landsat 2 to obtain imagery that could give early warning of river ice melts causing ice jams and flooding. David F. McGinnis, Jr., and Stanley R. Schneider of NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service (NESS) had studied the Ottawa River separating Quebec and Ontario provinces and joining the St. Lawrence River below Ottawa and Montreal over 12 days in April 1976 to find which sections were covered with ice. By the end of the period, all but three of the 14 sections studied had been free of obstructing ice. Disappearance of ice monitored by the team in the Chaudiere River of SW Quebec had resulted from hydraulic transport rather than melting, which had occurred in the Ottawa River because of the blocking effect of dams, islands, and sharp bends in the river. (NOAA Release 77-145)
Earth-orbiting satellites had improved forecasts of water availability and warned of impending low water supply as a valuable tool to water management agencies in Arizona, California, Colorado, and Oregon, NASA announced. Other cooperating agencies included the U.S. Geological Survey, the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, and the Bonneville Power Administration. The 4 states had begun a combined 4yr operational program using NASA Landsat earth resources satellites and Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites to produce imagery of the snow lines along the Sierra Nevada that was faster and less expensive than conventional aerial surveys. Satellites also offered repeated mapping of the same snow cover area with a relatively constant perspective. A continuing drought in the western U.S. had resulted from below-normal snowfalls in the mountains, source of stream flow water supplies; ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 ORIGINAL PAGE [8 OF POOR QUALITY Landsat images of the same area of the Sierra Nevada show the difference in snowcover between Feb. 1975 and Feb. 1977. The 1977 snowline was 2000ft higher than in 1975, ayr of near-normal snowfall. Lake Tahoe is in the center of both pictures. (NASA 77-H-225, -226) reservoirs on the western slopes of the mountains had already dried up. Some areas had experienced drought for a longer period than others; Calif, had been hardest hit, with minimal snowfall in the Sierra Nevada for the second consecutive yr. (NASA Release 77-91) * ESA announced it had completed a revised program of switching on and testing the Geos satellite launched Apr, 20, since a malfunction of the launch vehicle had prevented the spacecraft from achieving its intended geostationary orbit. The 7 experiments were reported operational, and the two 20m booms had been extended to 2.5m without difficulty. Although the satellite could transmit 8hr of data a day, only half would be outside 5 earth radii (where the experiments had been designed to operate). The booms should deploy fully during the upcoming wk; the journal Nature called for prompt launch of the backup Geos. (ESA anno May 6/77; Nature, May 5/77, 8; May 12/77, 100)
The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) reported it would proceed with its plan to buy back its common stock [see Nov. 11], noting that the FCC had authorized it to borrow $25 million to finance part of the cost of the repurchase. A letter to stockholders said the corporation would contest FCC’s attempt to make it put more money in an escrow fund for possible repayments to customers, because it said the FCC’s action was “neither lawful nor appropriate.” (ComSatCorp Releases 77-31, 77-32)
strumented surface and transmit its findings to earth stations. After a silence of nearly lOyr, its revival was a puzzle to NASA officials who were checking circuit drawings still available. After notifying MSFC of the occurrence, GSFC network operations had sent a command from Australia’s Orroral station to turn off the satellite’s AM beacon, only to find that the FM beacon was also working. The transmitters, operating when the vehicle was in full sunlight, were sending strong signals; the network group had recorded signal strengths of both transmitters before commanding them off. (MSFC Release 77-130)
The U.S. Dept, of Defense had begun development of plans to wage war in outer space, the Washington Post reported, and had contracted with six manufacturers to study ways of letting its satellites sound an alarm if approached, sound another alarm if attacked, and defend itself from an enemy satellite that approached too close. Quoting “knowledgeable sources . . . close to the Pentagon,” the Post said the USSR’s resumption last year of hunter-killer satellite testing after a 5yr hiatus had caused growing concern over the threat of war in space. The Pentagon presently had at least a dozen comsats in orbit linking U.S. military bases, ships, and aircraft around the world, and another dozen navigation satellites to guide Navy surface ships and submarines. A killer satellite launched by an enemy could knock out the entire U.S. defense communications system within a wk, according to the Post account, and the Pentagon had considered putting an entire array of comsats in orbit and turning off their radios until needed: “With their radios off,” said a source, “the opposition couldn’t track their radio beacons. And if they can’t track them they can’t find them.” No one had forecast a war in space within the next lOyr, the Post added, but the Pentagon planned to be prepared after that. Asked if the U.S. could fight a war on earth today if it had lost its satellites in space, a source replied: “Not successfully.” (W Post, Jan 10/77, A-26)
Today reported that Congress had approved June 20 the largest NASA budget in nearly lOyr, including new starts on three major programs. In conference committee, the House (which had cut $20.7 million requested by NASA to begin work on an unmanned 1982 Jupiter probe) had agreed with the Senate on $17.7 million for the project, which NASA said was enough to start with. The budget also contained $36 million for the large orbiting telescope, a frequently delayed major scientific project, and $26.6 million for Landsat-D, fourth of a series of earth monitoring satellites. The newspaper said the only real disagreement was over the Jupiter mission, which Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) wanted to kill [see June 10] because of its eventual cost, estimated to reach $435 million by the time it was scheduled for launch in 1983. The House conferees had finally accepted the Senate’s figure. Planned to take advantage of a favorable alignment of the earth with Jupiter in 1982, the mission would not only be the first to orbit Jupiter but would also drop a probe into the planet’s atmosphere. During its 20mo in orbit, the mission would also view Jupiter’s moons at close range. [Today, July 21/77, 20A)
A KSC spokesman said work was proceeding slowly on dismantling the Delta vehicle that had lost one of its solid-fuel rocket boosters May 18 while waiting on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Today newspaper reported. The second stage of the Delta had already been removed to clear the way for detaching the boosters from the Erst stage and then removing the first stage, damaged when one of the 9 boosters crashed 12ft through a support platform. The accident, which interrupted an ESA comsat launch scheduled for June, had also delayed launch of a U.S. weather satellite. {Today, May 25/77, 12A)
ESA announced it had postponed launch of its experimental comsat OTS (orbital test satellite) originally scheduled ta go June 16. The spacecraft had left Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport May 9 headed for prelaunch checkout at ETR; it had not been mounted on its launch vehicle at the time when one of the solid-fuel booster rockets fell off and damaged the first stage [see May 19]. An inquiry into the April 20 malfunction of a Delta carrying ESA’s GEOS had already delayed the OTS launch for at least a wk. (ESA release May 24/77)
MSFC announced that the state of Georgia would be first in the nation to have its own Landsat digital-analysis system, under a contract between the Georgia Institute of Technology and MSFC enabling state planners to assess land-resources usage and to monitor changes, and to set up a standard data base for a statewide land-use program. The two Landsat satellites now in near-polar orbit would provide images and recorded magnetic tape transmitted to a ground receiving station. A data-retrieval system developed by Johnson Space Center would help in establishing a state organization structure to distribute the data to regional, county, and local users. A local official could find out how a tract as small as 10 acres was being used, merely by dialing a central computer at Ga. Tech and getting a printout by telephone into a local terminal. (MSFC Release 77-8)
NASA launched Intelsat IVA F-5 from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur that exploded less than a minute after launch, dropping the 33321b spacecraft into the Atlantic Ocean. This Intelsat and an identical craft scheduled for launch in Nov. were to replace two Intelsat IVs now in orbit over the Indian Ocean and provide 6000 telephone channels and 2 television channels for use by 40 countries, compared to 4000 telephone and 2 TV channels offered by the Intelsat IV spacecraft. At 60sec into the flight a range safety officer destroyed the secondary Centaur stage which had separated prematurely from the Atlas. Failure of the $49.4 mission was similar to the Sept. 13 explosion of a Delta rocket carrying a $42 million orbital test satellite (OTS) NASA was launching for ESA. (NASA Release 77-214; W Post, Sept 30/77, A-3) An investigation concluded that a leak in the high-pressure gas generator system had ignited combustibles in the Atlas 35sec after launch, damaging engine components and terminating the flight. (MOR E-491-633-77-04 [postlaunch] Jan 5/78)
NASA issued requests for proposals from industry to design and manufacture the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) recently approved by the U.S. and the Netherlands. Scheduled for launch in March 1981, the observatory would use a telescope furnished by the U.S., a spacecraft built by the Netherlands, and a control facility supplied by the United Kingdom. The IRAS in a 900km polar orbit would survey the entire sky for a yr, at infrared wavelengths not usable by earth-based telescopes because of atmospheric interference, to study stars forming and at the end of their life cycle. JPL would manage the project and would design and operate a facility to produce an infrared sky map and a catalog containing up to 1 million infrared sources. NASA’s Ames Research Center would be responsible for the 60m-aperture infrared telescope. Prof. Gerry Neugebauer of the Calif. Inst, of Technology (operating JPL for NASA) would head the U.S. scientific team, working with as many as 500 U.S., Dutch, and U.K. scientists, engineers, and technicians. Industry proposals were due by Mar. 1, with contractor selection later in 1977. (NASA Release 77-33)
MSFC announced it had issued requests for proposals to build a tethered satellite system for launch on an orbiting Space Shuttle. The idea had been to provide long-duration measurement, observation, or performance time in earth’s atmosphere between 80 and 120km altitude, where density would be insufficient to support the flight of aircraft or balloons, but too thick for free-flying satellites. Exploration here had been limited to short-term flight of sounding rockets or low-level satellites. One concept had been to use a 100km cable to “troll” a tethered satellite from an orbiting Shuttle; the pull of gravity, with constant tension on the cable, would keep the captive craft at the end of its string, oriented toward earth. Typical missions for a tethered satellite would be global mapping of earth’s magnetic or gravity fields; cargo transfer between space vehicles; retrieval of satellites or space debris without Shuttle maneuvering; transfer of large amounts of energy to a remote experiment, or from a remote (possibly hazardous) power source to a space station. MSFC would manage tethered satellite activity for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-82)
Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency announced that launch of a three-stage “N” rocket carrying an engineering test satellite had been postponed to Feb. 14 because of trouble in the control system of the rocket’s first stage. Launch had been scheduled originally for Feb. 6 from the space center at Tanegashima Is. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Feb 10/77)
JSC reported it had signed a contract valued at $200K with American Airline’s maintenance and engineering center at Tulsa, Okla., for maintenance and operations support of NASA’s Boeing 747 Shuttle-carrier aircraft NASA 905. Work would be done primarily at DFRC, site of the first atmospheric and glide-flight landing tests of the Shuttle or-biter. Eventual value of the contract could reach $806K. (JSC Release 77-13) During February: Japan, one of five countries that previously had agreed to be major investors in a $200 million international maritime satellite organization (Inmarsat), had declined to participate in a preparatory committee set up to act until formal documents were ratified, AvWk reported. Forty countries would be Inmarsat members; besides Japan, the other four major shareholders were to be the U.S., the U.K., the USSR, and Norway. The preparatory committee had met in London in Jan. under sponsorship of the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization, an arm of the UN, and had set up three panels: one on satellite-system parameters; one on economic, marketing, and financial matters; and one on organization procedures, all of which were to meet in the interval before the next committee meeting set for Oct. 1977. Japan gave no reason for withdrawing. {AvWk, Feb 7/77, 23) March l: NASA announced the first use of a link between the communications technology satellite Cts and the portable earth terminal (PET): a teleconference between Housing and Urban Development Secretary Patricia Roberts Harris in Washington, D.C., and a group of California mayors at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif. Mrs. Harris conferred with the mayors from the PET bus parked outside the HUD building. Cts, a joint effort between the Canadian Dept, of Communications and NASA, had been built and integrated by Canada; NASA provided the 200w transmitter and developed the PET at Lewis Research Center. The PET bus, based at LeRC, would travel around the U.S. demonstrating how to save money through teleconferencing. (NASA Release 77-40)
NASA announced it would participate in a joint agro-environmental monitoring system that would improve crop management in the state of Virginia through knowledge gained from the automated data-collection and processing systems developed for satellite and space-exploration programs. Funded by Wallops Flight Center at Wallops Island, Va., and by the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. at Blacksburg, a network of data collection stations would automatically track “degree-day” units necessary for the emerging of certain insects or diseases; when a certain total was reached, the system would alert a farmer to spray his crop. Savings would result from reduced use of insecticides during less effective periods, reduced possibility of pollution, and fewer requirements for labor and equipment. Loyd C. Parker, Wallops project manager, said design work was complete and by early spring the five monitoring stations and central computer should be ready for use. (NASA Release 77-6)
The Univ. of Toyko’s Inst, of Space and Aeronautical Science launched a 13kg experimental satellite called Tansei 3 from the Uchinoura space center into an orbit with 3940km apogee, 826km perigee, using a 3-stage MU-3H rocket developed at the university. The rocket, used in preparation for next yr’s launch of Japan’s 5th aurora-observation satellite, was 23.8m long and weighed 49 tons. The MST-3 satellite, 7th launched by the university and 9th by Japan, carried control equipment for testing and would sent back scientific data for an estimated 15 days. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 10/77)
NASA announced it had reached an agreement with the Navajo Tribal Council in Ariz. for a 2-yr project to use Landsat data for an automated resource inventory of the 16-million-acre reservation in the southwest U.S. The tribe had asked NASA whether satellite and aerial remote sensing could help solve inventory and multiple-use management problems including range rehabilitation, timber, agriculture, harvest prediction, and wildlife counts. Phase one of the project would demonstrate how Land-sat data could apply to specific tribal needs and changes in resources; phase two would include training of tribal personnel and setting up an operational system at Navajo headquarters. The Navajo would assist other tribes to realize the benefits of satellite information systems. (NASA Release 77-223)
NASA announced it would join the Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Land Management in using Landsat, the earth resources monitoring satellite, to inventory wild land resources (major streams, ground cover and vegetation types, reservoirs, and fire hazards) in south central Alaska, northwestern Arizona, and southwestern Idaho. The project would examine each of the 3 different regional ecologies for about lyr. During the 3yr project, the BLM and NASA would set up an automated inventory system to provide accurate and timely data on BLM land as another example of Landsat usefulness in solving public and private resource-oriented problems. (NASA Release 77-37)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had resumed the atmospheric variability experiments (AVE) begun in 1964 to study processes associated with the onset and development of severe storms. Originally conducted to aid in scheduling Saturn rocket firings at MSFC, the experiments were designed to detect unusual weather conditions common to different localities before sever^ storms occurred, to improve short-term predictions based on data from weather balloons, weather satellites, and ground-observation posts. Sixth of the AVE series recently conducted over 24hr in an area including Texas, Alabama, Illinois, and North Dakota had monitored severe storms with hail and tornadoes in Missouri and western Tennessee, and a frontal system with low-pressure disturbances in Alabama. (MSFC Release 77-122) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NO' rr m' PAG1 llL INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Recent photographs of the inner Martian satellite Phobos, obtained by the Viking 1 orbiter in Feb., had revealed “the nature of that satellite in unprecedented detail,” said Scientific American. Earlier pictures by Mariner 9 or the Viking 2 orbiter were at a distance of 880km; the new pictures were taken at a distance of 660km to as little as 100km, with resolution that permitted distinguishing objects smaller than 10m across. The surface of Phobos was known to be pitted with craters from the impact of meteorites; the new images showed chains of irregular craters like those seen on the surface of the moon, although Phobos’s crater chains paralleled the plane of its orbit around Mars. Pictures from Viking 2 had shown grooves on Phobos concentrated near its northern pole; the new pictures defined the grooves as crater chains possibly caused by objects hundreds of meters across. Further study of the images should reveal more about the nature of Phobos, the magazine said. (SciAm, Apr 77, 57)
NASA reported that its Nimbus 6 had helped rescue from the Atlantic off Iceland a 2-man balloon crew attempting a transatlantic flight. The balloonists—Maxie Anderson, 44, and Ben Abruzzo, 47 — were unharmed after an after-sunset pickup Sept. 12 by a USAF helicopter. They had lifted off Sept. 9 near Bedford, Mass., carrying a compact satellite-tracking unit giving out signals received by the satellite and relayed to GSFC, which plotted the balloon’s location and forwarded it to the control center at Bedford. The balloon ran into a snowstorm that blew it off course and broke radio contact; it splashed down 1930km (1200mi) short of its target in France. The crew owned the balloon, gondola, and tracking equipment, the latter purchased from a commercial firm. GSFC had cooperated earlier in search-and-rescue tests of the tracking unit. (NASA Release 77-190)
DOD would request $2.77 billion for space-related activities in FY 1978, $478.5 million more than its FY 1977 appropriation, Defense Daily reported. The increase, resulting from procurement of the Navstar global positioning satellite system and increased DOD activity on the Space Shuttle, would include costs of ground security at JSC and KSC for defense-related Shuttle payloads. DOD had planned to use the Shuttle for critical manned military observations, and had agreed on a formula to reimburse NASA for launching military payloads. (DD, Mar 15/77, 57)
The U.S. Air Force launched a pair of “jam-proof’ Triple-7 defense satellite communications system spacecraft from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 10:27am on a Martin Marietta Titan 3C booster, largest developed by the USAF, into an elliptical parking orbit with 35 943km (22 333mi) apogee, 285km (177mi) perigee, and 26.6° inclination. At 5:30pm the USAF confirmed that the two 13001b spacecraft had separated and had been fired by the Titan third stage into stationary orbit at about 22 300mi where they would remain for 2mo above the Galapagos Islands in the Pacific for system checkout. The two satellites (fourth attempt in 6yr to launch a Triple-7 package, but only the second successful one), with a DSCS already in orbit and another pair scheduled for launch in November, would form a global communications network that the USAF had been trying to establish for several yr. A Titan 3C malfunction in 1975 had prevented an earlier pair of spacecraft from achieving orbit. {Today, May 12/77, 12A; May 13/77, 1A; C Trib, May 14/77, 1-9; NYT, May 11/77, 19; AvWk, May 16/77, 19)
NASA reported it had scheduled 25 launches in 1978, 11 on Deltas and 8 on Atlas Centaurs. It would provide support for 3 Atlas-F launches from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. KSC would launch 10 of the Deltas and all the Atlas Centaurs; one Delta would go from the Western Test Range at VAB. Paying customers would subsidize 15 launches: ESA, ComSatCorp, the U.S. Navy, Japan, NOAA, the U.K., and Canada. Whereas most of its 1977 launches were in the area of applications (communications, environmental, navigation, meteorological, earth resources, or geodetic), its 1978 mission would divide between applications and scientific missions almost equally. Scheduled in Jan. would be Intelsat IV-A F-3 for ComSatCorp, FltSatCom-A for the Navy, and its own IUE; the Intelsat IV-A F-6 would follow in Feb. March would see launch of NASA’s Landsat-C and Japan’s experimental broadcast satellite BSE. In April NASA would launch its own heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM) and Comstar-C, as well as the backup OTS for ESA. May would see 4 launches: GOES-C, and NASA’s TIROS-N, Pioneer Venus-A, and SeaSat-A. Scheduled in June would be GEOS-B for ESA and a backup satellite for Japan. In July NASA would launch from Wallops on a Scout the UK-6 to measure radiation particles, and from KSC its own ISEE-C. August would see launch of NASA’s Nimbus-G and Pioneer Venus-B. In Sept. NASA would launch NOAA-A; a navsat for the Navy; and comsat NATO-IIIC. NASA would launch its own HEAO-B in Oct. Two launches set for Nov. would be Canada’s Telesat-D and FltSatCom-B for the Navy. George F. Page, KSC’s director for expendable vehicles, noted that the center’s workload would be heavy with a schedule calling for 3 launches in Jan. and 2 each in some other months. (NASA Release 77-256; KSC Release 211-77) •
Defense had been at odds over the Mojave desert airspace, and “the military is winning,” the paper said. Twice in the past 6mo a B-l bomber had narrowly missed the multimillion-dollar tracking antennas, and over the past yr USAF planes with electronic devices had been jamming space signals to and from Goldstone. In the July 8 incident, all bombs from the USAF planes had fallen no more than half a mile from the 5 big-dish antennas serving as the sole links to satellites in orbit around the earth, the sun, and the planet Mars and to one spacecraft headed for the planet Saturn. The commandant of the Marine base at El Toro, where the planes came from, had grounded the pilots for 2wk, blaming the incident on “navigation error” and misreading of the target. However, on July 22, the B-l bomber that had previously buzzed the Goldstone station flew with its chase plane low over the heads of station technicians to check the sky for radio interference from other military craft. According to JPL officials, the B-l was “far off the course it normally flies on a test run.” Fighter planes from the Georgia air force base had interfered “no fewer than 60 times” with Goldstone radio links to its space vehicles. Last Oct. a fighter pilot had “accidentally” turned on an electronic device and disrupted contact with the Viking orbiter at Mars for more than an hour. Had the spacecraft been in a maneuver or an emergency, the mission would have been lost, the Viking scientists said. {Today, Aug 20/77, 1A) NASA later reported the gyro was working and data transmission was satisfactory. The boom, which was supposed to deploy 53min into the flight, had not extended and locked. To determine its position, controllers 12hr after launch had activated a plasma instrument on the scan platform and combined its readings relative to a known axis and the direction of the solar wind (data supplied by GSFC) to show that the boom had extended to within 2° of full deployment. JPL reported Aug. 22 that the spacecraft had been stable since 3pm EDT Aug. 20, except for a pitch and yaw disturbance at 5am Aug. 21; flight controllers were investigating. It reported Aug. 25 that the craft had undergone another disturbance like that of Aug. 21; controllers had ruled out the propulsion module’s having bumped the spacecraft. On the morning of Aug. 29, JPL calibrated the sun sensors and removed the dust cover on the infrared interferometer spectrometer. It had tried Aug. 26 to move the science boom to the locked position, but the computer system had aborted the command, showing that a problem existed. Controllers tried jettisoning the dust cover while reorienting the spacecraft, to jolt the assembly enough to open the boom hinge and lock it into position, but this was unsuccessful. JPL had decided to put Voyager 2 on hold to allow controllers to concentrate on the launch of the other Voyager Sept. 5. (Voyager mission status bulletins 3 through 6)
The Dept, of Commerce announced that 2 oceanographic research ships and 4 aircraft had scanned the Gulf of Mexico during Oct. to demonstrate measurement of ocean properties using satellite-borne instrumentation. Dr. Warren Hovis, director of NOAA’s satellite experiment laboratory, said the program was a preliminary to launch in 1978 of the Nimbus-G with a coastal-zone color scanner. The joint NASA-NOAA tests had used aircraft equipped with models of the scanner to record data that could be confirmed by surface measurements taken on the ships. (NOAA Release 77-265)
A yr-long (Dec. 1978-Nov. 1979) international program of global atmospheric research using Soviet and U.S. satellites would attempt to construct a model of the atmosphere, Tass reported. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 29/77)
NASA announced it would join with Canada in a 3-day meeting Nov. 29-Dec. 1 to assess performance of Cts, world’s most powerful comsat, now in orbit for nearly 2yr. The meeting would hear experimenters discuss their results and the social, technical, and economic aspects of CTS-type comsats. Canada and the U.S. had shared time on Cts, which used a LeRC-developed transmitter tube to operate in a new frequency band at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than those of other comsats, making it possible to use smaller and less expensive ground receivers. Cts had permitted 2-way TV and voice contact experiments for health, education, business, and similar purposes. Besides managing all U.S. experiments on Cts. LeRC had also used a portable earth terminal in an over-the-road van resembling a TV studio to connect the satellite with local events to be broadcast. (NASA Release 77-237)
The WPost reported that 9 USSR ships would join U.S. ships during June in “Polimode,” a joint study of ocean currents in the so-called Bermuda Triangle where numbers of ships over the years had disappeared without trace, inspiring best-selling books on the subject. A USSR research team had detected by satellite “powerful whirl formations” extending hundreds of miles and resembling cyclones on land, the Washington Post said. Tass, the Soviet news agency, said the formations apparently reached from the surface to a depth of several thousand yards. (WPost, Parade, May 15/77, 6)
NASA announced it would join EPA and the Univ. of Md. in sponsoring a conference on the use of remote sensing to solve Chesapeake Bay ecological problems. The 80 participants would discuss use of satellites (particularly NASA’s earth resources monitoring satellite Landsat) to obtain information on land use, resources exploitation, and pollution. (NASA Release 77-70)
NASA announced it had ended an aerial survey of the Pacific Ocean along the west coast of the U.S. that was an operational prelude to the use of SeaSat-A, the oceanographic satellite scheduled for launch in May 1978. The survey had used high-flying NASA aircraft to test four sensors from SeaSat-A: a synthetic aperture imaging radar, a wind-field scatterometer, a scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer, and a radar altimeter. The mission was a rehearsal in research cooperation that scientists would need when SeaSat became operational. (NASA Release 77-62)
India and the Soviet Union had reached agreement on coordinating their satellite systems, said the Indian news agency Samachar, as reported by the Foreign Broadcast Information Service. The agreement resulted from a recent visit to Moscow by a team of experts from India’s Ministry of Communications and Department of Space. The problem arose because of possible interference between the proposed India domestic comsat Insat, to be placed in geostationary orbit over the Indian Ocean, and existing or proposed satellite systems of the USSR. The aim of the talks was to ensure avoidance of satellite interference through discussion of the technical aspects of the systems, including the distance between satellites. Satellites already in operation in that area included those of the Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization, Indonesia, and others. (FBIS, Delhi Patriot, Dec 26/76, 1)
ESA announced that the U.S. delegation to an Aerosat Council meeting in Washington, D.C., Sept. 15-16, had notified it that lack of funds would prevent the Federal Aviation Administration from proceeding with the program as contemplated. The Aerosat memorandum of understanding had provided that ESA, the government of Canada, and a U.S. company (ComSatCorp was selected in 1974) would proceed with development, production, launch, and operation of the satellite, with ESA and the FAA (leasing from the U.S. firm) using the comsat capability in equal portions. (ESA Release Sept 19/77)
NOAA reported that airline passengers between Miami and Latin America could enjoy smoother flights because of satellite weather images. Lineas Aereos Nicaragua (LANICA) and 8 other carriers were sharing Goes 2 weather photos of the area from the southeastern U.S. into South America, including all of the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea. A LANICA official said that, until now, the airlines had little idea of the location of storms; now they could avoid them, or use the windflow to save time and fuel. (NOAA Release 77-247)
The Communications Satellite Corporation announced that its earth stations in Andover, Maine; Etam, W.Va.; and Jamesburg, Calif., had operated with two TV channels in each of four Intelsat satellites to transmit coverage of President Jimmy Carter’s inauguration to about 70 countries around the world. Total transmit-receive time for the satellite TV coverage was 61-1/6 half-channel hr. The European Broadcasting Union (EBU), the U.S. Information Agency (USIA), the Armed Forces Radio and TV Service, and other organizations had reached audiences in both western and eastern Europe through the ComSat network. Countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia, and Australia had seen inaugural events transmitted either live or on film and videotape news services transmitted by the satellites. (ComSat Release 77-8)
NASA announced it had established a fare structure for Space Shuttle payloads on flights scheduled to begin in 1980. Depending on the weight and volume of cargo, the price would run from less them $10 000 to more than $21 million. Other factors would be the optional services desired and whether the payload would go on a reserved basis or as a standby. Costing $10 000 or less would be the “getaway special” (GAS), a small research package weighing less than 2001b, self-contained, with a volume of less than 5ft3, flying on a space-available basis. The $21-million fare would be for a payload using the full capacity of the Shuttle on a reservation basis by non-U.S. government customers. Lesser charges would apply to customers sharing flights with other customers; those willing to fly on a standby basis; and those having made a substantial investment in Space Transportation System development (e.g., The European Space Agency, its member nations, and Canada). Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA had set the prices to encourage Shuttle use by making costs attractive but still recovering operating expenses. Commercial and foreign users would pay fees covering depreciation of facilities and equipment, and amortization of or-biters. The pricing plan would undergo review in 3yr to make any necessary adjustments, Lee said; it contained provisions for cost increases due to inflation. NASA prices would include space in the Shuttle, with standard services such as design review, safety review, flight plans, transmission of payload data, and services of a 3-man crew. Optional services, costing more, would include special training, upper stages and services, special mission kits, revisit or retrieval of satellites, or any special equipment. (NASA Release 77-173)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA administrator, announced that the planetary probes scheduled for launch Aug. 20 and Sept. 1 would be named Voyager 1 and Voyager 2. The two craft would view Jupiter, Saturn, and their respective satellite systems, and might also look at Uranus and Neptune. JPL had designed and built both probes. In March 1979 Voyager 1 would pass within 357 000km of Jupiter, the solar system’s largest planet, and go on to rendezvous with Saturn in Nov. 1980, passing within 209 000km of the ringed planet’s cloud tops and within 6430km of Titan, Saturn’s largest moon and the only satellite in the solar system known to have an atmosphere. (NASA Release 77-41)
Av Wk reported the Inti. Telecommunications Union’s frequency board had distributed to its 100-plus member nations the technical details of a USSR plan to launch 7 geostationary Volna satellites for global maritime and air communications service. Members questioning possible interference with existing or projected systems had until Jan. 9 to respond. The 7 spacecraft would work in separate systems: numbers 2, 4, and 6 would each operate in 4 frequency bands, 2 allocated exclusively for mobile maritime service and 2 for mobile aeronautical service. Numbers 1, 3, 5, and 7 would also use these bands, plus a 240-400mc band now used by the US Navy for its maritime service which the Volnas would use for land-mobile service. The Volna proposal did not include fixed shore terminals, although USSR officials had said the system would be a national rather than international system. {AvWk, Nov 14/77, 20)
Reductions made by the House subcommittee on defense appropriations in funding for the defense satellite communications system (DSCS) and the USAF/Navy Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) program would force the DOD to lease its communications channels from commercial carriers, AvWk charged. The subcommittee had eliminated the DOD’s entire $60-million request for R&D funds to proceed with a contract awarded in Feb. to General Electric for a qualification model and two flight-demonstration DSCS-3 satellites. It also had denied money for a fourth and fifth FltSatCom satellite to be built under a contract awarded to TRW in 1972; the Navy had been leasing capacity since March 1976 on the Marisat system managed by Comsat General. The subcommittee, headed by Rep. George Mahon (D-Tex), had advocated continued leasing despite DOD testimony that leasing would be more expensive, and had refused the funds requested for two other DOD satellite systems: it had rejected outright DOD’s international global-positioning system to be built by Rockwell, and had reduced the $83.2 million requested by the USAF for a Hughes-built satellite data system by more than half, postponing procurement of a fifth spacecraft. (AvWk, June 6/77, 60)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its second free flight at Edwards AFB in Calif., a 5min unpowered glide from about 24 000ft altitude, during which it reached a speed of more than 330mph and performed several maneuvers to test its handling before air brakes slowed it to a landing at 250mph. Separation from the Boeing 747 carrier was delayed 3min because a power failure at DFRC made mission control in Houston lose radio contact; the delay caused no problems. For about 50min before separation, pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly took turns at the controls and the computer to monitor the orbiter’s behavior at various speeds. Pilots of the 747 were Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Thomas C. McMurtry. The flight had been postponed from Aug. 30 because of a tropical storm [see Sept. 1]; a third test was set for late Sept. (Postflight rpt, free fit 2, SpSh orbiter ALT; WPost, Sept 14/77, A6) September 13-November 9: NASA announced that the Delta vehicle on which it had launched ESA’s orbital test satellite OTS at 7:21pm Sept. 13 from ETR had exploded 54sec after liftoff. The booster and 5 strap-on motors [see Sept. 7] had performed properly before the explosion. On Sept. 14 John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for spaceflight, had appointed a failure review board whose investigation concluded from flight data analysis, photo records, and “substantial” vehicle debris recovered near the launch site that the no. 1 strap-on motor had failed from causes unknown. NASA had scheduled an OTS backup launch for April 1978. (MOR M-492-210-77-01 [postlaunch] Nov 9/77; NASA newsrm rept Sept 14/77; W Post, Sept 14/77, A9; NASA Release 77-193)
NASA launched the Navy’s Transat spacecraft at 9:52pm PDT from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle into an orbit with 600.7nmi apogee, 572.6nmi perigee, 89.9° inclination, and 106.9min period. The spacecraft, a modified Transit navigation satellite, would join 5 others in a system being used by U.S. Navy and other ships for global navigation, as the first to carry 2 modified transponders with a capability called Satrack to support Trident (fleet ballistic missile) development. Built by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, Transat would receive, translate, and relay NavStar global-positioning signals simulating a Trident missile in flight, to evaluate Satrack procedures before using them in Trident test flights and to check out Satrack processing at JHU/APL. NASA had agreed with DOD in Jan. 1970 to launch Scouts, carrying 15 Transit satellites and 3 Transit Improvement Program (TIP) satellites so far, the Navy to reimburse NASA for the launch vehicles, launch services, and mission support. The Transit system normally operated 5 satellites, with 2 on standby. (Langley Researcher, Nov 28/77, 2; MOR M-490-601-77-03 [prelaunch] Sept 30/77) NASA’s launch participation was judged successful as of Nov. 8-10. (MOR M-490-601-77-03 [postlaunch] Nov 15/77) •
NASA announced it would launch no earlier than May 25 GOES-B, second in a series funded by NOAA to meet DOC requirements for a geostationary operational environmental satellite system. Sms 1 and Sms 2, prototypes funded by NASA and still in orbit, had been launched in May 1974 and Feb. 1975; Goes 1, first operational spacecraft funded by NOAA, was launched Oct. 1975. GOES-B would augment existing coverage of earth weather and would become part of the global atmospheric research program (GARP). (MOR E-608-77-04 [prelaunch] May 24/77)
MSFC announced award of a $695 000 contract to Rockwell Inti. Space Div., Downey, Calif., for a study of solar power satellite systems. The study would identify and suggest solutions for technical and social problems that might occur in harnessing solar energy from space. (MSFC Release 77-73) During April: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, reported that Kingswood Sprott, Jr., had broken his own world class hot air balloon altitude record March 26 when he reached 41 000ft over Lakeland, Fla. The previous record set March 26, 1977, also by Sprott, had been 38 789ft. (NAA newsletter Apr 77)
The Washington Post reported that Charles Kowal of the Calif. Inst, of Technology had discovered “something out there in space that orbits the sun roughly 2 million miles out once every 115 yr or so,” but had not “the slightest idea” what it was. “You might say it’s a miniplanet,” far too small to be a conventional planet but as big as some asteroids, about 100 to 400mi in diameter; “It really doesn’t resemble anything else. It is definitely not a satellite of any planet or a comet. . . .” Kowal, a veteran at discovering new objects in the solar system, had detected the 13th moon of Jupiter and another object that might be the 14th; he had located the latest unusual body while working with the 48in telescope at Mt. Palomar Oct. 18-19 and had been trying to establish its orbit so that other astronomers could check it out. Researchers would need 2 or 3wk to determine the orbit, lying beyond Saturn and possibly both inside and outside the orbit of Uranus, “maybe going out as far as Neptune,” between 1.3 million and 2.7 million miles from the sun. If the object should be defined as a planet, Kowal by tradition would have the privilege of naming it. Final decision on whether or not it was a planet would be made by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory in Cambridge, Mass. (WPost, Nov 9/77, A-17)
Press reports said a 23 9001b solid-fuel rocket had fallen off a Delta launch vehicle standing on its pad at KSC May 18 awaiting the mid-June launch of ESA’s high-frequency communications test satellite (CTS). In its 12ft fall, the booster had plunged through a platform and damaged the Delta’s liquid-oxygen tank; the entire assembly would have to b£ removed for repairs. Cause was probably failure of one of the attachments holding the motor in place, a spokesman said; an investigation was under way. The Delta had on its first stage 9 of the solid-fuel boosters, each more than 36ft tall and 4ft in diameter, normally jettisoned about a minute and a half into flight. (Today, May 19/77, 8A; photo, 1A; AvWk, May 23/77, 27)
The W. Post reported that the leader of a USSR expedition on the first surface ship to reach the North Pole had told a news conference that his major problem was deciding when the ship had reached its destination. Soviet Minister of Merchant Marine Timofey B. Guzhenko said that, as the ship neared the pole Aug. 17, fog had made sun readings impossible; the polar daylight obscured the stars; and magnetic compasses were worthless when they “began to jump at the pole.” The vessel’s officers had to spend several hr determining whether they had reached the pole. They finally relied on a satellite navigation system accurate within about 800yd, and made two passes through the ice floes to make sure they had reached their goal. The crew of the 13-day 3582mi expedition on the nuclear-powered icebreaker Arktika had planted a Soviet flag and capsule containing a copy of the USSR constitution to mark their accomplishment. (WPost, Aug 28/77, A24)
NASA launched from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle the second in a series of three communications satellites for use by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, into an orbit with 35,797km preliminary apogee, 35 777km perigee, 1436.2min period, and 2.6° orbital inclination. The cylindrical Nato IIIB spacecraft had a covering of solar cells for power generation and was gyrostabilized, providing stability for the antenna system which would counter-rotate to point to the earth at all times. All active communications components were redundant, having an identical backup part on board. After fifth apogee, about 48hr after launch, firing of an apogee motor would put Nato IIIB into a circular synchronous orbit at about 35 900km altitude, where its onboard reaction-control system would take it to a predetermined location. The U.S. Air Force’s satellite-control facility would operate these activities on behalf of NATO, which had funded three Phase III comsats built by Ford Aerospace to replace the Nato II satellites in the NATO integrated communications systems. (NASA Release 77-5; Spacewarn SPX-280; Sf Satellite Digest, July-Aug 77, 298)
The Pentagon had been working on an interceptor spacecraft capable of knocking Soviet satellites out of orbit, DOD officials told Congress. The Washington Post reported that the program, begun under President Ford, had aimed at producing weapons to protect U.S. space systems from attacks by foreign satellites. (WPost, Mar 30/77, A-8)
ARC announced that 7 U.S. biological experiments launched Aug. 3 on the USSR’s Cosmos 936 had landed by parachute in Siberia Aug. 22. The Soviet satellite also carried experiments from France, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and East Germany. Five of the U.S. experiments had followed up those on the first cooperative U.S.-USSR biological satellite Cosmos 782 launched in Nov. 1975; 4 of them had Soviet coinvestigators, and all of them used some Soviet scientific or technical assistance. The last U.S. biosat was Biosatellite 3, launched in 1969; without the Soviet flight opportunity, the U.S. biology experiments would have to wait for Shuttle flights in the 1980s. (ARC Release 77-37; NASA Release 77-169)
NASA reported that Goddard Space Flight Center engineers had tracked a sailboat through the Bermuda Triangle to test the use of satellites for small craft search-and-rescue missions. Signals from a small transmitter on the vessel, relayed by meteorological satellite Nimbus 6 and applications technology satellite Ats 1, allowed GSFC controllers to monitor the ship’s position. The experiment also successfully tested a push-button distress-alarm system designed by retired NASA engineer James L. Baker. (NASA Release 77-72)
Strategic arms limitation might suffer another blow, the Washington Post said in a column by Victor Zorza, from the USSR’s test of a killer satellite viewed by the U.S. as a new weapon intended to deactivate U.S. observation satellites if and when the Soviets decided to launch a first strike. Zorza noted that current agreements did not cover hunter-killer satellites; by the time a new agreement was reached, both powers might have passed another point of no return in the arms race. (W Post, May 11/77, A21)
The W Post reported conflict between the USAF and NASA not only over use of the Mojave desert area [see Aug. 20] but also over use of radio frequencies that NASA considered the key to contacting alien intelligences, and that the Air Force wanted for a satellite global-navigation system. The USAF wanted to use a band scientists called the “waterhole,” in which hydrogen and oxygen radiate natural radio signals into space (the combination of the two into water had given the band the name), thought to be the area in which alien civilizations might conduct a dialogue in space. The USAF had selected these frequencies for navigation signals as carrying less interference. Should the USAF have a navigation-satellite network in place by 1984, its signals would drown out any other signals on those frequencies. (fV Post, Aug 29/77, Al)
President Carter had suggested the U.S. and USSR “forgo the opportunity to arm satellite bodies and also forgo the opportunity to destroy observation satellites,” the W Post reported. Recent Soviet antisatellite experiments had alarmed Pentagon officials, who revealed that the U.S. military space program budget for FY 1978 was $478 million greater than the FY 1977 appropriation. (W Post, Mar 10/77, A-ll)
NASA launched a 280kg (6201b) geostationary meteorological satellite (GMS) for Japan from Cape Canaveral at 10:56 EDT on a Delta vehicle into an elliptical orbit, to be boosted at third apogee into a geosynchronous orbit at about 35 500km altitude over the equator south of Tokyo. Gms 1, known as Himawari in Japan, was that country’s contribution to GARP, the global atmospheric research project sponsored by the Inti. Council of Scientific Unions and the World Meteorological Organization. The cylindrical craft had carried a visible infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) and a space environment monitor to identify and photograph weather patterns from Hawaii to Pakistan and detect solar energy activity that might disrupt communications on earth. More than half the world’s tropical storms had begun in the western Pacific and eastern Indian Ocean, said Kazuo Watanabe, project manager for Japan’s national space development agency; Gms 1 could provide detailed weather photos and other data every 30min to give instant Warning of typhoons in the area. Watanabe noted that Japan had been depending on data from a U.S. satellite in polar orbit that furnished images only twice a day. (NASA Release 77-110; MOR M-492-101-77-01 [prelaunch] July 12/77; Hughes Aircraft Co. release July 12/77; NYT, July 15/77, A-8; W Post, July 15/77, A-22)
NASA announced plans to launch the first Italian experimental comsat Sirio on or about Aug. 17 from ETR on a Delta vehicle. A large segment of Italian industry interested in space technology had worked on the spacecraft and would use the experience for future international space programs. In synchronous orbit over the equator off the west coast of Africa, the comsat would transmit voice, data, and TV in the superhigh frequency (SHF) range from Europe to North America; its experimenters would study propagation of SHF during adverse weather conditions including rain, snow, and fog. Use of SHF had become necessary because conventional frequencies were overcrowded. Italy’s research agency, Consiglio Nazionale della Richerche (CNR), had contracted with NASA for launch and support services until the craft reached its station 30 to 45 days after launch. The name Sirio was an acronym for Satellite Italiano Ricerca Industrial Orientata (industrial research-oriented Italian satellite). (NASA Release 77-152)
ESA announced that NASA would launch the orbital test satellite OTS, ESA’s first comsat, from Cape Canaveral Sept. 13 or 14 on a Delta. The European launcher Ariane would launch the operational European comsat system to follow OTS between 1981 and 1990, carrying domestic telephone, telegraph, and telex traffic besides relaying Eurovision TV. OTS would operate in the 11- and 14-GHz bands, an advantage over the European 4- and 6-GHz links subject to radio interference in regional service. OTS’s original June launch date had slipped because a motor prematurely separated from the vehicle sitting on a launch stand in May. NASA had redesigned the bolt that failed, and had replaced the damaged motor and vehicle booster. (ESA Release Sept 7/77; MOR M-492-210-77-01 [prelaunch] Sept 8/77; NASA Release 77-168)
MSFC announced that NASA had selected Martin Marietta Corp. and Ball Brothers Research Corp. for negotiations of fixed-price contracts for parallel $290 000 definition studies of a Shuttle tethered satellite system [see May 27]. MSFC would manage the studies for the NASA Hq Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-181)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced it would award to a British company, AERE Hartwell, a 15mo $71 540 fixed-price contract to develop low-pressure, nickel-hydrogen power cells that would use a lanthanum-alloy member both as hydrogen reservoir and as negative electrode. Use of lanthanum would lower pressure in the cells, reduce the heat dissipated during discharge, and reduce the volume of cell density. If successfully developed, the cells would operate at a maximum pressure of about 6 atmospheres and would have a minimum life of 500 charge-discharge cycles when used in synchronous-satellite applications. (INTELSAT Release 77-1-M)
Comsat General, wholly owned subsidiary of the Communications Satellite Corp., announced that former FAA administrator Dr. John L. McLucas had been elected president and a member of the board of directors. ComSatCorp. president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk said the subsidiary would benefit from Dr. McLucas’s “long and distinguished career as administrator, engineer, and scientist.” Holding a Ph.D in physics and electrical engineering from Penn. State Univ., Dr. McLucas had been president of the Mitre Corp. before serving as assistant secretary general for scientific affairs of NATO, undersecretary and secretary of the Air Force, and FAA administrator before April 1977. Programs engaged in by Comsat General included Marisat (maritime satellite communications), Comstar (domestic satcoms), and Satellite Business Systems, in which it shared with IBM and Aetna Casualty plans for a U.S. domestic satcom system. (CGC Release 77-2)
GSFC controllers and Navy meteorologists at the U.S. Navy Fleet Weather Facility in Suitland, Md., had used since 1971 a microwave radiometer on weather satellite Nimbus 5 to track an Antarctic iceberg the size of Rhode Island, NASA reported. Satellite tracking had allowed Navy forecasters to minimize ice damage to ships in polar ice fields. (NASA Release 77-68)
NASA launched the first high-energy astronomy observatory, HEAO-A, from ETR on an Atlas Centaur at 2:29am EDT into a near circular orbit with 456.3km apogee, 431.4km perigee, 93.5min period, and 22.75° inclination. Heao 1, nearly 19ft long and nearly 9ft in diameter, weighting 56261b at liftoff (including 29601b of experiments and an 8311b separation system), had a 6mo design lifetime but would carry enough consumables and orbit at an altitude to allow extension of its mission up to lyr. It would operate in 2 modes, pointing and scanning: its batteries would point continuously at the sun as the vehicle moved l°/day in the ecliptic longitude, and its detectors would scan in wide circles perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic. TRW had built the spacecraft equipment module (SEM) containing all the subsystems used by all the experiments for operation and control, and a mission unique experiment module (EM) filling the requirements of each payload segment. Dr. Fred Speer, HEAO manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, said the spacecraft, rotating end over end, would survey the entire sky within its 6mo lifetime. This launch was the first in a three mission program to study x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays emitted by stellar sources, the other launches to be in 1978 and 1979. The HEAOs would carry large and heavy scientific instruments needed for observations at the high-energy and low-flux levels of these phenomena. Estimated cost of the 3 observatories was $237 million. The original plan in 1968 had been to launch a 40ft vehicle weighing 22 0001b; budget problems had reduced the size of the undertaking. However, the x-ray detector built by NRL as 1 of 4 experiments carried by Heao 1 was the largest instrument ever flown on an unmanned satellite, weighing almost 10001b. The NRL package, called the large area x-ray survey, was a 7-module array 20 times as large as any of its predecessors that would map the sky by recording incident x-ray fluxes and would determine the spectrum, time, and intensity variations of newfound x-ray sources. NRL’s Dr. Herbert Friedman noted that known x-ray sources now numbered about 200; Heao 1 might increase the list to several thousand. Celestial sources of x-ray emission included white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes, products of stellar catastrophe, as well as quasars and radio galaxies; also, a class of ministars almost too small for detection by the biggest optical telescopes might emit radiation 10 000 times as great as all the radiant energy of earth’s sun. The other experiments on Heao 1 were a scanning-modulation collimator to make parallel observations, using instruments designed by Harvard and MIT, to pinpoint locations of sources and determine their structure; a cosmic x-ray experiment designed by NASA and CalTech, to look for diffuse x-rays or cosmic rays; and another experiment from MIT and the Univ. of Calif. San Diego, to look for hard x-rays and low-energy gamma rays. NASA planned a guest observer program for this mission, participants to be selected from responses to a “Dear Colleague” letter issued by the Office of Space Sciences. A malfunctioning rate gyro had delayed the planned June 30 launch; the Bendix-built instrument had been removed and returned to the manufacturer March 31, but further similar delays occurred [see July 26]. Early data from orbit showed spacecraft systems and experiments were operating normally. (NASA Releases 77-45, 77-56, 77-71, 77-83, 77-87; OSS rept S-832-77-01 [prelaunch] May 16/77, July 29/77; MOR S-832-77-01 [postlaunch] Aug 12/77, Apr 3/78; MSFC Releases 77-32, 77-64, 77-107, 77-142; KSC Releases 85-77,140-77; Spacewarn SPX-284; NYT, Apr 10/77, 23; Aug 13/77, 33; NRL Release 23-8-77S)
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert A. Frosch, and Chairman A.B. Wolff of the Netherlands Agency for Aerospace Programs had signed a memorandum of understanding on the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) project, a cooperative undertaking in which the United Kingdom would also share under a separate agreement. An earth-orbiting observatory built by the Netherlands and scheduled for launch in 1981 would carry a cryogenically cooled IR telescope furnished by the U.S. and a package furnished by the U.K. for command, control, and data acquisition. Nearly 500 scientists, engineers, and technicians from the participating nations would join in the first survey of the entire sky at infrared wavelengths undetectable by earth-based telescopes obscured by the atmosphere. The mission would have a lyr lifetime. Ames Research Center would manage the telescope, built by Belli Bros. Research Corp.; JPL would have U.S. project management responsibility. (NASA Release 77-210) •
Columnist Jack Anderson reported in Today that a Senate subcommittee had asked the Pentagon for military equipment, including planes, radar, sensors, and satellites, to be used in the “battle against drug abuse.” Senators Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) and Charles Percy (R-Ill.) had sent a private letter to Defense Secy. Harold Brown saying that drug abuse was costing the U.S. $17 billion a yr and that more than 5000 Americans were dying each yr from drug abuse. DOD alone had the vehicles needed to pursue and overtake the drug traffickers, the senators said, calling the fight against drugs a “war.” “When fighting a war,” they added, “you use the best resources available and make every effort to win. This is not being done.” A spokesman for the Pentagon said an answer was being prepared. {Today, Apr 21/77, 16A)
The Netherlands had “finally decided” at the end of 1976 to join the U.S. and ESA in financing a second astronomy satellite (IRAS, the infrared astronomy satellite), but not all its citizens were enthusiastic over the anticipated expense, said a report in Nature magazine. Starting with a preliminary definition study in Jan. 1975, followed by 13 proposals for experiments in response to a NASA announcement, a U.S. study team of 11 astronomers had begun discussion with Dutch colleagues on the scientific program and had reached agreement at the beginning of 1976. NASA had expected signing of a memorandum of understanding between the U.S. and the Netherlands by July 1976; the Dutch government had agreed in principle in July, but it had taken 6mo to find the money for the project. The U.S. and the Netherlands would each pay about 110 million guilders, and the United Kingdom Science Research Council, which had taken active part in the U.S.-Dutch negotiations, would contribute 10 million guilders. Plans were to launch IRAS from the Western Test Range in the spring of 1981, to trace and map about 10 million infrared sources. Dutch associations of scientific workers had protested in 1974 against further space activity, especially in behalf of underdeveloped countries lacking means to take advantage of such effort. (Nature, Jan 20/77, 202)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
NASA announced publication of a “space photo album”: an atlas-size book containing 400 images of earth’s natural and cultural features taken by the Landsat earth resources satellite, most of the pictures in full color and near full-page size. Authors were three scientists from GSFC (Drs. Nicholas M. Short, Paul D. Lowman, and Stanley C. Freden) and Dr. William A. Finch, Jr., from San Diego State Univ. Designed as a reference, a textbook, a teachers’ guide, and a supplemental tool for research specialists, the book devoted 40% of its content to images of the 50 United States but included images from all over the world, and repeated some standard views to show seasonal changes. The pictures had a grid-number system for quick location of geological and geographical features described in the captions. The book included sections telling the story of the Landsat program, its systems, applications, and accomplishments, and a supplemental teacher’s guide with glossary and suggestions for classroom use. (NASA Release 77-14)
NASA announced that GSFC and Marshall Space Flight Center would join the USAF in solving a yrs old problem of comsat makers and users: flying in a synchronous orbit at about 34 500km (22 OOOmi) altitude, the comsats routinely encountered electrically charged particles from the magnetosphere that built up static electricity on the spacecraft surface, causing arcing that could damage solar-power cells and thermal insulation, interfere with signal transmission, and switch spacecraft functions erroneously. The joint project called SCATHA (satellite charging at high altitudes) would obtain specific data on the phenomenon. The USAF planned to launch a satellite in Jan. 1979 to study electrostatics at geostationary orbit. MSFC would provide 3 light ion-mass spectrometers to measure speed, temperature, and density of low-energy ions and detect their points of origin. GSFC would provide two instruments, one to measure space electric fields, the other to measure space magnetic fields. (NASA Release 77-183; MSFC Release 77-164)
Rockwell Intl.’s B-l division announced it had made significant savings in awarding a contract to Honeywell Inc.’s avionics division for equipment to test electronic systems on the USAF B-l strategic bomber. B-l division president Bastian Hello said the new equipment would use large amounts of off-the-shelf items and would be able to test a wide range of systems supplied by Rockwell, Boeing, and the AIL division of Cutler Hammer. The contract would direct Boeing and AIL to get test equipment from Honeywell under separate purchasing agreements. Rockwell should receive first deliveries of the equipment in 1978. The USAF would use the test equipment to maintain B-l operations; Boeing (offensive-avionics integrator) and AIL (defensive-avionics contractor) would use the equipment in supplying electronic instruments to the program. (Rockwell Release LA-6) June 16—Aug. 18: NASA launched Goes 2, second in a series of geostationary operational environmental satellites, from the Eastern Test Range at 6:51am EDT June 16 on a Delta vehicle into a transfer orbit. On second apogee the boost motor fired at 11:26pm EDT to put the spacecraft in a nominal orbit where it would move to a position specified by NOAA at 75 °W, and be turned over to NOAA for operations in about 30 days. Orbital elements were 36 859km apogee, 188.6km perigee, 23.7° inclination, and 651.8-min period. NASA announced on Aug. 18 that it had turned Goes 2 over to NOAA for operational use on July 29 at 1600Z. NASA engineers had completed a planned orbital checkout to ensure proper operation, having moved the satellite to 66.5 °W over the equator where most of the tests occurred. Of the original 801b of hydrazine carried for stationkeeping, more than 671b remained unused. The engineers had found minor problems in the data-handling equipment used to relay signals from earth-based data-collection platforms, and in the x-ray section of the solar-environment monitor; the data-collection problem had resulted from interference by VHF equipment that could be turned off for most of the mission, but the x-ray problem arose from faulty cabling that might require more calibrations. Goes 2 was officially certified as successful on Aug. 5-15, having achieved its mission objectives. (MOR E-608-77-05 [postlaunch] June 20/77, [postlaunch] Aug 18/77)
Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency planned to launch 2 satellites in 1978 to replace missions that failed during 1976, AvWk reported. Scheduled for Feb. 1978 was an ionospheric-research mission to replace an identical craft that malfunctioned in orbit in March 1976. An x-ray research satellite similar to a mission that failed during launch Feb. 4, 1976, might lift off in Aug. or Sept. 1978. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 26)
INTELSAT announced that Paraguay had become the 97th member of the organization on July 18, and the 22nd nation in the western hemisphere to join. Paraguay’s ANTELCO (Administracion National de Telecomunicaciones) had signed the operating agreement. Created in 1964, INTELSAT claimed to provide more than half the world’s transoceanic telecommunications and domestic communications for 9 countries through its global satellite system. (INTELSAT Release 77-19-1)
NASA announced it had commanded the Viking 1 lander on Mars to dig a ft-deep trench in the surface and bring up soil samples to use in finding out more about the complex chemistry of the planet. The sequence, which would continue through March 15, would include pictures taken by the lander to show mission controllers how the digging progressed. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory had sent commands to the Viking 1 lander Feb. 10 and would start the Viking 2 lander’s digging sequence about Feb. 16. Viking 7’s orbiter would make a series of close passes near Mars’s satellite Phobos to take pictures and measure its temperature, while observing the effect of its gravity on the course of the spacecraft. Afterward, mission controllers would drop the orbiter to about 300km altitude over Mars from the current close-approach altitude of 1500km. (NASA Release 77-24; JPL Release Feb 10/77)
NASA announced it had selected Ball Bros. Research Corp., Boulder, Colo., to negotiate a $13.8 million contract for the telescope system on the infrared astronomy satellite (IRAS), a joint U.S.-Netherlands mission to survey the celestial sphere in the infrared spectrum. The U.S. would provide a large cryogenically cooled instrument and the Netherlands would provide the spacecraft and would supervise integration. NASA would launch IRAS from WTR early in 1981 on a Delta for its yr-long scientific mission. The Ball Bros, contract would cover design, fabrication, test, and launch support for the telescope, plus spares, an engineering model, and ground-support equipment. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory would manage the project, and Ames Research Center would be responsible for the telescope system (NASA Release 77-154)
MSFC announced award of a 1-yr $450 540 contract to Sperry Univac, Washington, D.C., for on-site maintenance of the center’s Univac 1108 computer system. (MSFC Release 77-69) of scientific data. Although ESA officials had hoped to delay the orbit change until after a meeting of Geos experimenters scheduled for April 26, the spacecraft’s anomalous transfer orbit, caused by a malfunction during launch Apr. 20, had endangered its solar cell power supply. (ESA Release Apr 25/77) ESA officials and Geos satellite experimenters during a meeting April 26 at the European space operations center in Darmstadt agreed on a sequence for experiment activation and boom deployment. After increasing satellite “visibility” at the Odenwald ground station near ESOC by moving the Geos 1 apogee from 90°E to 35 °E, controllers planned to extend the short radial booms completely and the long booms to 10cm. If this ploy worked, the 20m-long radial booms would extend completely Apr. 30 to help establish the satellite’s moment-of-inertia ratio and dynamic stability. (ESA Release Apr 27/77) Scientists of Geos 1 believed its new orbit, whose apogee was high as that of the intended orbit, could salvage most of its scientific objectives, Nature reported. The new path would put Geos 1 where ESA had planned to orbit its spare “qualifications” geosynchronous satellite in 1979; launch costs had made use of the spare unlikely, the report said. (.Nature, Apr 28/77, 767)
The future of Japan’s space program was not a sure thing, the Wall Street Journal said. Those who had claimed that a program of launching satellites for resource-rich, technology-poor nations would increase Japan’s technological growth and ensure a supply of raw materials had met with complaints that the program wasted tax money and that Japan should have relied on the U.S. and NASA to orbit the payloads. Japan’s space agency would have to convince official and public skeptics of the program’s value, the paper said. {WSJ, Mar 29/77, 44)
INTELSAT reported that the Peoples Republic of China on Aug. 16 had become the 98th member of the organization. Peking’s Administration of Long Distance Telecommunications had signed the operating agreement, making the PRC the 28th Asian nation to join INTELSAT. China, which had used INTELSAT since 1972, currently had 3 ground stations, 2 near Peking and 1 near Shanghai. It currently operated 23 full-time satellite circuits on the INTELSAT system and was using TV capacity on an as-needed basis. (INTELSAT Release 77-20-1)
Soviet satellites might help predict the cotton harvest in South Transcaucasia, Tass reported, through enhanced photographs of the regional cotton crop. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 29/77)
FBIS reported that the USSR had signed an agreement with Intersputnik, an international organization formed by 9 socialist countries in 1971, that the group would work out of Moscow and create favorable conditions for its activity in the USSR. Organizers of Intersputnik to use satellites and ground stations for international communications were Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, the USSR, and Czechoslovakia. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 16/77)
FBIS reported a Tass interview with Boris Petrov, chairman of the Intercosmos council, on the high points of the program, including cooperation with capitalist countries in exploration of space. France 1 lyr ago was the first capitalist country to cooperate; India’s satellite Aryabhata had orbited on a Soviet booster 2yr ago; Soviet-Swedish cooperation was developing; and the U.S. and USSR would work together on space biology, medicine, meteorology, environment, and the moon and planets. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 16/77)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
Launch preparations had begun for the 2-spacecraft mission to outer planets Jupiter and Saturn scheduled for late summer 1977, KSC announced. The center described them as “almost a replay” of the Mars Viking launches in 1975. Launch date for the first Mariner Jupiter/Saturn (MJS) at complex 41 would be Aug. 20, with the second scheduled 10 days later. Preparation for two major launches within a 10-day timeframe had required “the choreography of an intricate ballet,” the center said. Checkout of the Titan Centaur rockets 6 and 7 was in progress; operations personnel expected arrival Apr. 11 of a pathfinder spacecraft to be used for pad tests, along with 2 flight craft expected Apr. 25 and May 23. The MJS spacecraft would weigh 3 times more than the Pioneer 10 and 11 that reached Saturn in 1973 and 1974, respectively, and would carry additional instrumentation such as narrow- and high-resolution wide-angle TV cameras, cosmic-ray detectors, and infrared spectrometers and radiometers to study the outer planets and satellites. John Noble Wilford reported in the NYT that the new vehicles would have a new name—either Voyager or Discovery—fitting the new design for outer planet environments characterized by pale sunlight and great radio distances. The new craft looked like “a giant round ear,” Wilford said, consisting of a dish antenna with struts and booms resembling spider legs. The powerful lightweight radio-transmitter tubes that had been the major problem in building the spacecraft had arrived from the contractor a year behind schedule, reducing the time for “life tests” of their durability and performance. Each of the spacecraft would also carry a 3-computer system to handle failures during flight, in view of the 2.5hr required for round-trip radio signals between earth and Saturn. Trajectories chosen should provide data on particles and magnetic currents (magnetosphere) around Jupiter and Saturn, and if possible Uranus; on the atmospheres of those planets, believed to have gaseous rather than solid surfaces; and on the surfaces of any solid moons of the outer planets. The Uranus encounter would occur in Jan. 1986, nearly 8.5yr after launch from earth. (KSC Release 65-77; NYT, Feb 22/77, 15)
NASA might undertake a Cosmic Background Explorer satellite program, AvWk reported. The satellite would examine the character of cosmic background radiation claimed by many scientists to prove the big-bang theory of the universe’s formation. (A v Wk, Mar 7/77, 11)
The Natl. Aeronautic and Atmospheric Administration announced it would conduct a pilot project this summer with the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture to improve accuracy of crop forecasting, based largely on the amount of solar radiation, available moisture, and air temperatures for a given area. Using devices on NOAA spacecraft to measure cloud cover and relate it to the amount of sunlight reaching ground-based pyranometers, NOAA and USDA investigators would compare hourly readings from the Goes 1 geostationary satellite with measurements from a network of pyranometers across the Great Plains, to determine the amount of solar energy available to crops in any given period. The researchers emphasized solar energy as a vital factor in plant photosynthesis and in evapotranspiration (loss of water directly from the soil by evaporation and from plants by transpiration). A Great Plains Agricultural Council representing land grant colleges in Texas, N.M., Okla., Colo., Kans., Nebr., S.D., N.D., Wyo., and Mont., and the USDA agencies serving those states had requested the pilot project as an aid in the production of corn, wheat, and sorghum. (NOAA Release 77-122)
NASA launched the ESA Meteosat at 8:35pm EST from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle into a synchronous transfer orbit with 37 001km apogee, 147km perigee, and 27.5° inclination. The apogee boost motor fired at 1:19 pm EST Nov. 23 to begin maneuvering it to a position on the Greenwich meridian at 0° longitude above the equator, where it would provide long-range forecasting coverage to Europe, the Near East, and Africa for at least 3yr. The cylindrical craft 3.2m long and 2.1m in diameter weighed 697kg at launch and 300kg in orbit; its payload was a telescope radiometer to observe earth and cloud formations, providing relay and transmission of meteorological data. The World Meteorological Organization had set up a chain of 5 such satellites, 1 European, 1 Soviet, 1 Japanese, and 2 U.S. Besides transmitting to user stations the data from a center at Darmstadt, West Germany, Meteosat would relay Atlantic Ocean images from the U.S. Goes. (NASA Release 77-230; MOR M-492-102-77-01 [prelaunch] Nov 16/77, [postlaunch] Feb 28/78; KSC Spaceport News Nov 11/77,1; ESA releases Nov 3/77, Nov 16/77, Nov 23/77)
The Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced plans to use a new tool—satellite pictures—in establishing hunting regulations for Canada geese and other arctic-nesting game birds. Wildlife managers in Canada and the U.S. would use imagery from the Noaa 5 polar-orbiting satellite, showing snow and ice conditions in traditional nesting areas too remote for on-site inspection, to monitor habitat conditions. Identification of probable areas of castastrophic or outstanding goose production would enable managers to impose restrictions to prevent overkill of birds or to bring the populations to levels suitable for hunting. Factors affecting the nesting of arctic geese would include the timely disappearance of snow and ice, and availability of melt water to allow rearing of young; late seasons or adverse weather could prevent nesting or reduce clutch or brood sizes. (Dept, of Commerce/NOAA Release 77-13)
The NY Times reported an announcement by Hughes Aircraft Company that Telesat Canada had chosen it to negotiate a contract for a new generation of Anik comsats operating at frequencies of 12 and 14 billion cycles per second, to replace in the 1980s the 4- and 6-billion-cps now the standard for national and international communications systems. The higher frequencies would ease radiocommunications crowding in 22 300 mile altitude equatorial orbits, and would expand the number of satellite-communications channels to approach the number available on terrestrial microwave and cable links. Telesat Canada, which had operated that country’s domestic comsat system since 1972, said that two rival companies—RCA’s Astroelectronics Div. and GE’s Space Division—remained in the running with Hughes for award of the contract, which could go as high as $50 million. RCA had built the Satcoms used by the U.S., and GE had built a direct-broadcast comsat for Japan. The NYT said the electronics industry had been watching the competition closely because the same three companies had been vying to build 3 data-transmission satellites for Satellite Business Systems in the U.S. (NYT, Aug 17/77, 49)
At least 7 defense contractors had performed studies on space defense systems, Aerospace Daily reported, predicting that spending on this activity would double in the upcoming federal budget (from $61 million to $126 million in FY 1978, and double again to $265 million in FY 1979). In its concern for detection of hostile satellites, especially in the infrared frequencies, the Dept, of Defense had officially confirmed four USSR intercept launches last yr. DOD considered comsats and early-warning satellites in synchronous orbits most vulnerable; the USAF was also concerned about its reconnaissance satellites, especially the Big Bird, only one of which is normally in orbit at a time. Contractors working on the problem were Science Applications, Inc., doing a $60 000 study of charge-coupled device (CCD) sensors for a terminal optical-warning system; Rockwell Inti., with a $50 000 study of potential maneuvers for the NavStar global-positioning satellite to be used for guidance aid in tactical-weapons delivery; TRW, Inc., a $50 000 study to identify maneuvering possibilities for the AfSatCom (USAF sat-com) system; and three other firms studying standby survival launch capabilities applicable to all USAF missions (Hughes, $250 000; Boeing, $250 000; and Lockheed, $100 000). The Air Force also reported that Westinghouse had made a $50 000 study of an impact sensor to detect attacks with non-nuclear pellet warheads against a spacecraft in orbit. (ASD, Feb 1/77, 158)
The USAF launched the Navy’s navigation technology satellite Nts 2 from Vandenberg AFB on an Atlas F booster into a 12hr circular orbit of 63° inclination at about 11 600mi altitude. First of a system to be called NavStar, the Nts 2 carried two cesium-beam time standards (atomic clocks) to produce precise time signals and 14 solar-cell experiments for its builder, the Naval Research Laboratory. The joint-service NavStar system upon completion would consist of 24 satellites (8 in each of 3 circular-orbit planes) to provide users with longitude, latitude, and altitude information around the clock in any weather. It would give a customer his location within 33ft, his speed within about 4in/sec, and the correct time. Uses of NavStar would include tactical-missile navigation and precision delivery of weapons; aid to space, air, land, and sea travel; grid mapping and geodetic surveys; aerial rendezvous and refueling; and search-and-rescue operations. The USAF had announced plans to launch five of its own satellites later in 1977 and 1978 for NavStar testing. (D/SBD, June 20/77, 279; June 27/77, 320; AvWk, Oct 11/76, 47; NRL Release 20-7-77C; AFSC Newsreview, Aug 77, 3)
NASA announced it would launch on or about May 28 a new environmental monitoring satellite GOES-B, latest in a series to be operated by NOAA, to keep watch over the eastern half of the U.S. and the Atlantic Ocean, just in time for this yr’s hurricane season. Built like the first three in the series by Ford Aerospace Corp., GOES-B would replace Goes 1 as NOAA’s east coast satellite at about 75°W; Goes 1 would move to standby status at about 105°W. (NASA Release 77-88)
The W. Post reported that the latest test of a satellite-destruction weapon conducted by the USSR despite an appeal by President Carter had apparently ended in failure. In a test May 23, first by the USSR in about 5mo, the Soviet interceptor spacecraft had missed the target satellite by about 50mi, according to U.S. intelligence sources. The officials said that, without knowing the objectives of a test, it would be hard to assess results, but the consensus was that the operation had failed. Five USSR tests in the past 18mo had failed to destroy a target satellite; the attempts had not been aimed at any U.S. satellites but were confined to their own. Both nations had used observation satellites to monitor each other’s military activities, including strategic-weapons testing, missile-base construction, and similar indicators. Still in the research stage was a U.S. system to knock out Soviet satellites, with first flight tests at least 3yr away and first deployment estimated in about 5yr. (WPost, June 1/77, A-21)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it would accept proposals for a study contract to define possibilities of receiving electrical energy from the sun in large quantities for use on earth, through a concept called Satellite Power Systems, consisting of a number of spacecraft in stationary orbit using photovoltaic or solar-thermal power instrumentation to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy, convert that to microwave energy, transmit it to earth stations for conversion back to electrical energy, and distribute the power to users. Other NASA studies had established the technical and economic feasibility of satellite power systems, but an agreement between NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration would result in additional data on key issues and critical areas, and the ability of the concept to deal with these issues and areas. MSFC would accept proposals for the study through Jan. 24. (MSFC Release 77-1)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
Pressures from inside and outside the scientific community might result in restricting the freedom of inquiry that had enabled science to flourish since the Renaissance, the annual meeting of the Am. Assn, for the Advancement of Science heard. Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times that a session on the role of science as the key to man’s political future had as discussion leaders George W. Ball, senior director of Lehman Bros, investment bankers; Lord Zuckerman, former chief science adviser to the British government; and Charles J. Hitch, president of Resources for the Future, Inc., of Washington, D.C. The panel cited controversies in the Cambridge, Mass., city council over regulating use of genetic material in that city’s research laboratories; the Calif, legislature’s proposal to regulate research on genetic hybrids; and other attempts to control the directions of research. The panel expressed the feeling that checks and balances within the scientific community should be able to deal with such problems, and said that misgivings about “too much knowledge” harked back to prehistoric and classical times when mankind feared probing into nature’s secrets. Although restraints on export of equipment and knowledge might delay the spread of nuclear weapons, Ball noted that the only real control would be “to create a climate where nations don’t find it [nuclear weaponry] useful.” (NYT, Feb 23/71, B-4) The satellite, a 1.41m-diameter cylinder 93cm long, carried a transmit-ter/receiver and five small rockets for attitude control, orbital shift, and speed adjustment. At about 6:45 pm local time, the satellite (called Kiku 2 in orbit) reached an elliptical transfer orbit with 191km perigee and apogee of about 36 000km, the altitude at which it would go into synchronous orbit within a few days. Its synchronous station would be at 130°E over Indonesia, the announcement said. This was the third satellite orbited by the agency and the tenth by Japan. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 23/77; NYT, Feb 25/77, A7; CSM, Feb 24/77, 2) NSDA officials announced Feb. 25 that Kiku 2 would change orbit a day early, on its seventh pass over the Indian Ocean, as data from tracking stations in Japan and on Christmas Is. had confirmed its success in elliptical orbit. The satellite would reach station by March 5 if all went well, the announcement said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 25/77) The NY Times carried a Feb. 26 item from Associated Press confirming that “Japan’s first experimental stationary satellite” had shifted to a circular orbit. (NYT, Feb 27/77, 7) NSDA announced Feb. 27 that Kiku 2’s apogee motor ignited at 2:32 pm local time on Feb. 26 to move the satellite from an elliptical to a circular orbit with apogee of 35 756km and perigee of 34 034km, close to preflight predictions and fast enough to permit drift to its permanent station over Indonesia at 35 800km altitude. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 27/77)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) announced it would buy back 1.5 million shares of its common stock for $37 cash per share until Dec. 6. The organization had decided on the repurchase as a preliminary step in possible future acquisitions, and a restructuring of its accounts to show a substantial debt, as the FCC had indicated its rate making would be based on such a debt in the organization’s capital structure. ComSatCorp emphasized that it was currently debt free. (ComSatCorp Release 77-28)
Television programs beamed by satellite to the whole world were unwelcome to some delegates at the Vienna meeting of the UN Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, the W. Post reported. Its reprint of a London Observer article said that the major technical problem remaining for global TV transmission was overcrowded frequencies, but political problems remained. A majority of UN members including the Soviet bloc had pressed for regulation of TV transmission, claiming the right to intervene between their citizens and the broadcasts they could receive. The Soviet group objected to “propaganda” especially on its Eastern European borders where “Western TV programs, soap operas and all, are often more welcome than the home product.” Developing countries unable to afford their own TV broadcasts claimed that unrestricted foreign TV from satellites would result in “cultural imperialism.” The delegates seemed to want data from satellites scanning the earth to be generally available, but differed over what should go to whom. A U.S. satellite detecting a new Soviet oil field might have to ask permission before reporting the find; discovery by any satellite-operating nation of resources (uranium, for instance) in a developing country might start a “gold rush” by major powers wanting to “help” that country exploit those resources. The committee agreed to formulate guidelines for UN General Assembly approval, but western European and North American nations wanted to prevent anything resembling censorship. Because of a Belgrade conference in session “only a few hundred miles further east,” the Soviet bloc also was sensitive to any measures that could be interpreted as infringing human rights or the free exchange of information. (W Post, July 10/77, A-14)
NASA announced that, because of recent flight and checkout problems, it had revised the launch schedule of its Delta rockets: GOES-B, June 16; GMS (Japan’s meteorological satellite), July 14; Sirio (Italian comsat), Aug. 11; OTS/ESA (comsat), Sept. 8; ISEE-A/B, Oct. 13; Meteosat (ESA metesat), Nov. 3; and CS (Japanese comsat), Dec. 12. (NASA Release 77-123)
NASA announced it had used Landsat, the earth resources monitoring satellite, to inventory irrigation systems in Nebraska. The 12 000 central-pivot irrigation systems proved easily recognizable by their circular shape in photos from Landsat’s 1480km-altitude orbit. Annual inventory of the irrigation systems had become necessary when the number of central-pivot sites increased by 40 to 60% each yr, affecting property values, land use, and fuel and water allocation. Landsat had proved the cheapest way to acquire an accurate and timely inventory. (NASA Release 77-38)
Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency announced rescheduling to Feb. 23 of the launch of a 3-stage N rocket carrying the first geostationary meteorological satellite to be orbited by Japan. The launch had been postponed because of trouble with the system controlling the rocket’s first stage. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 21/77)
NASA launched Italy’s first experimental domestic comsat SIRIO from ETR at 7:50pm EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37 670km apogee, 229.7km perigee, and 23° inclination. At 10:57am EDT on Aug. 27, its apogee boost motor fired it into a near-circular orbit where it would drift by Sept. 8 to a station on the equator above the west coast of Africa at about 15°W. NASA would transfer operation to the Telespazio VHF/SHF control center at Fucino, Italy, about 45 days after launch. Italy’s National Research Council (CNR) would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle and support services, estimated at $15.7 million, as agreed in March 1975. The Satellite Italiano Richerche Industriale Orientata (industrial research-oriented Italian satellite), 2m (6.5ft) high and 1.4m (4.6ft) in diameter, weighing 398kg (8781b) at liftoff, would transmit TV and voice data at super high frequencies (SHF) from Europe to North America in adverse weather conditions. The project had begun in 1969 as part of an ELDO program, specifically to carry out a communications experiment in the 12 and 18GHz bands proposed by Prof. Francesco Carassa of Milan Polytechnic Inst. The idea of using higher frequency ranges (30 to 60GHz) because of overcrowding on conventional frequencies had offered the advantages of greatly increased traffic in communications, less interference with present ground and satellite communications, and the use of small ground terminals. The Compagnia Industriale Aerospaziale (CIA) had designed and developed the spacecraft and was responsible for system management and orbit operations. Defense/Space Daily said the original Aug. 17 launch date had slipped because of possible interference between the SIRIO antenna and the third-stage system that might hinder separation. The NY Times said that “adverse wind conditions” Aug. 16 that delayed a test launch of the Navy’s Trident missile had automatically postponed the SIRIO launch. AvWk said that the SIRIO launch was important to Italy not only technically but also politically: it said NASA officials believed major changes would have occurred in the Italian government if the spacecraft had failed. (NASA Release 77-152; KSC Release 140-77; MOR 492-209-77-01 [prelaunch] Aug 9/77, [postlaunch] Nov 9/77; D/SD, Aug 22/77, 275; NYT, Aug 17/77, A-ll; A VWk, Sept 5/77, 23)
FBIS carried an announcement by Tass that the USSR had launched “this morning” the French satellite Signe 3, product of a 2yr collaboration between the Toulouse Space Research Center and the USSR’s Space Research Inst, of the Academy of Sciences. The spacecraft had carried French-made instruments to observe ultraviolet emission from the sun; objective of the mission was to continue study of “already discovered sources of gamma radiation in galaxies and also to replenish the catalog of stars.” The announcement said that originally the French were to design the spacecraft and provide the equipment, while the USSR ensured launch; however, “the Soviet colleagues suggested so many design novelties . . . that it is actually more correct to regard the Signe 3 as a Soviet-French satellite,” according to French project director Antoine Miosi. This launch had begun a second decade of USSR-French cooperation in space exploration: Soviet spacecraft had carried French-made instruments, and the French Araks experiment had orbited a Soviet electron accelerator to study polar lights. (FBIS, Tass in English, June 17/77)
The United States planned to orbit in 1983 a 9080kg 645cm telescope that would observe images almost to the edge of space and the beginning of time, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. “Without the blurring of the atmosphere,” said Dr. John Bahcall of Princeton Univ.’s Institute for Advanced Study, “we would be able to see things that are 10 times smaller than we have seen, or 10 times farther away. It would be like reading the writing on a quarter that we could only tell was round before.” If approved by Congress, the $435 million Space Telescope would be carried from earth by astronauts manning the Space Shuttle. The telescope would investigate quasars radiating thousands of times the energy generated by ordinary stars of the same size, and would observe the birth of stars, map nearby planets and galaxies, and compute distances to the nearest stars. In addition to optics half the size of Mount Palomar’s, the Space Telescope would carry lenses and instruments to scan ultraviolet and infrared spectra not accessible to earthbound telescopes because of atmospheric blockage. The telescope would relay its views to earth using geostationary satellites over the U.S. NASA would send Shuttle astronauts to the telescope every 5yr to replace wornout or damaged parts. (W Post, Jan 21/77, C-24)
ERDA announced that the longest space mission ever planned—a lOyr trip by two Voyager spacecraft to the outer planets—would get power from RTGs (radioisotope thermoelectric generators) developed by ERDA as successors to nuclear systems that had powered earlier missions to Mars and Jupiter. ERDA’s predecessor, the Atomic Energy Commission, had begun the research on nuclear power for space missions. ERDA plans included developing high-efficiency thermoelectric materials and dynamic converters for NASA missions such as a Jupiter orbiter in 1982 or a Mars rover in 1984, and DOD satellites in the 1980s. (ERDA Release NF-77-20)
