ESA and INTELSAT had prepared a joint offer of Marecs (formerly Marots) satellites, plus maritime packages on Intelsat V comsats, for an international joint-venture attempt to set up a pre-Inmarsat maritime-communications system for the early 1980s, Aerospace Daily reported. The joint venture of Europe’s 17-nation Eutelsat group and other countries, including Japan and the Soviet Union, had accounted for about 74% of Inmarsat shares. The U.S., with 17%, had not participated. At its July meeting, the joint group indicated preference for a space system consisting of three Marecs satellites dedicated to maritime communications, plus maritime packages to be added to the last three of the seven planned Intelsat Vs. If costs or other factors made the option unsatisfactory, the joint venture had two others: a four-Marecs system, or a combination of two dedicated Intelsat spacecraft and three Intelsat V maritime packages. (An option using four dedicated Intelsat satellites was no longer under consideration.) INTELSAT’s board of governors at its mid-Sept. meeting would decide on pricing and other details, and the joint venture would receive the ESA-INTELSAT proposals at its late-September meeting. (A/D, Aug 23/78, 234)
Defense/Space Business Daily reported that the United Nations had presented its Peace Medal to Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, at NASA Hq in recognition of NASA assistance to a recent conference on technical cooperation among developing countries in Buenos Aires, Argentina [see Aug. 30]. UN Undersecretary-General Bohdan Lewan-dowski presented the medal and a letter of appreciation from Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim for NASA’s offer of the Cts satellite to the UN for communications between UN Hq in NYC and the conference. (NASA photo 78-H-625; D/SBD, Oct 17/78, 200)
Av Wk reported that engineers suspected a hot-gas system leak in the sustainer engine of the USAF/General Dynamics Atlas F launch vehicle as the cause of overtemperatures registered during recent DOD NavStar launches from Vandenberg AFB. Overtemperatures in the boat-tail area of the Atlas F (recorded in telemetry from the launches of NavStar 1 in Feb. and NavStar 2 in May) had forced postponement for at least 14days of SeaSat-A’s launch from Vandenberg. Rockwell Intl.’s Rocketdyne Div. had test-fired the engine to determine whether a leak in the sustainer engine’s hot gas system was responsible, and to pinpoint the location of the leak. They also had hot-fired sustainer-engine gas generators as part of the investigation. General Dynamics had monitored aerodynamic flow around the Atlas F during flight for hot gas from the exhaust plume impinging on the boattail. Temperatures in the boattail had climbed earlier than expected during the NavStar launches; in one launch, that area had become hot enough to melt insulation on copper wires, causing failure of some onboard instruments and intermittent operation of others. NASA had increased insulation on some wire bundles in SeaSat-A’s Atlas F; more insulation around other rocket’s components might also be added. Additional instruments installed in the launch vehicle should obtain more details on temperature and pressure conditions in the boattail area during launch, program officials noted. They had not decided whether to postpone launch of the third NavStar satellite, planned for Aug. (AvWk, June 12/78, 18)
FBIS reported that the USSR and India had signed a protocol for launch of a second India satellite. The two countries were working on a flying model of the spacecraft and preparing ground stations. Representatives of the USSR Academy of Sciences and India’s outer-space exploration organization had discussed satellite plans for several yr. The second India spacecraft, like the first, would be launched from Soviet territory, and the carrier rocket and launching complex would be provided gratis by the USSR. (FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 3/78)
The W Star reported that spokesmen for four government agencies using portable nuclear-power generators could not respond immediately to charges that the federal government lacked adequate control over the use or whereabouts of such devices. Charges came from members of the House Commerce Committee who said the public had not been informed of potential hazards to health, safety, and the environment posed by the devices or how they were used. Committee members had sent President Carter a letter asking for a public accounting of portable nuclear devices used by the U.S. around the world. Of major concern was a device called SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) generating from any of three radioactive and highly toxic fuels—cesium, strontium, or plutonium—heat that the device could transform into electricity for satellites or other remote power needs. Designed in the early 1960s primarily as a power source for space satellites, SNAPs had later been applied to terrestrial uses including a CIA project in which a SNAP, left on a Himalayan mountain to monitor China’s missile testing, was apparently buried by an avalanche. After a 1964 mishap when an Air Force spy satellite powered by a SNAP reentered and burned over the Indian Ocean, spreading radioactive fallout over a wide area, DOD had ordered manufacture of SNAPs in case-hardened containers that would remain intact if a satellite carrying one should fall from orbit. In 1968, a rocket launching another spy satellite from Vandenberg AFB had misfired and dropped two SNAP generators into the Pacific just off the southern Calif, coast; a 6mo search had recovered the SNAPs. (W Star, May 17/78, A-18)
NASA announced the successful launch of Landsat 3 (formerly Landsat-C), third of a series, from WTR at 12:54pm EST on March 5. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 913.96km; perigee, 897.3km; period, 103.108min; and inclination, 99.134°. Landsat was part of a U.S. program to develop remote sensing for improved earth resources management. The total program included development of remote-sensing instruments; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; and a spaceflight program. Landsat 3 carried two piggyback payloads, the larger (approximately 34kg) being a plasma-interaction experiment (PIX) by Lewis Research Center to measure plasma-coupling current and negative-voltage breakdown of a Solar-array segment and a gold-plated steel disk. Objective of PIX was to. establish design guidelines, materials, devices, and test methods for controlling detrimental interactions between high-voltage systems and the space-plasma environment. The PIX would remain attached to the second stage of the Delta vehicle. The second piggyback payload, the 27.3kg Amsat Oscar communications-relay satellite built by radio amateurs, ejected from the second stage approximately 12.3min after Delta separation from Landsat 3, would be available to amateur operators for science education, communications experiments, and search-and-rescue systems tests. The Oscar D carried two communications transponders having 1 to 2 watts of power output, and was magnetically stabilized. Changes in the Landsat 3 payload included alteration of the return-beam vidicon system to produce higher resolution panchromatic images for detailed ground mapping, and inclusion in the multispectral scanner (MSS) of a fifth band in the emitted terrestrial infrared radiation region. Objective of the MSS was to acquire multispectral high-spatial-resolution (80m) images of solar radiation reflected from earth’s surface, emitted infrared-radiation images of 240m resolution, and panachromatic RBV images of 40m resolution. The MSS would obtain contiguous images about once every 18 days, weather permitting. The multispectral images would aid research and operations demonstrations in agriculture and forestry resources, mineral and land resources, land use, water resources, marine resources, cartography, and the environment. Applications would include surveying land use; measuring factors causing stress on crops and forest; inventorying crops and forests; assessing crop vigor and health; classifying areas by geological or geomorphic characteristics; delineating promising areas for mineral exploration; determining water-runoff patterns and extent of snowcover; monitoring population movements and environmental hazards to man; mapping sea ice; and analyzing shorelines. Demonstration projects called Applications Systems Verification and Transfer (ASVT), focusing on landcover inventory for federal, regional, state, and private users, would also use Landsat 3 data. The Landsat-C spacecraft (basically a Nimbus design modified to accommodate Landsat instruments and mission requirements) had the following parameters: weight, 90kg; mission margin, 51.4kg; stabilization type, 3-axis earth-oriented; stabilization accuracy, 0.7° pointing error, 0.04° per sec rate; average power available for experiments, 375 watts; thermal range, 10 to 30C; data storage capacity, 60min of video data (25.2 million bits). Launch vehicle was a 2-stage Thor Delta approximately 116ft long and 8ft in maximum body diameter. The first stage was a McDonnell Douglas extended long-tank Thor booster incorporating 9 strap-on Thiokol Castor II solid-fuel rocket motors; second stage was powered by the TRW TR-201 liquid-fuel pressure-fed engine gimbal-mounted to control pitch and yaw through second-stage burn. A nitrogen gas-system using 8 fixed nozzles provided roll control during powered and coast flight, as well as pitch and yaw control after second-stage cutoff. Two fixed nozzles fed from the propellant-tank helium-pressurization system provided retrothrust after spacecraft separation. Total cost of the Landsat program (excluding costs of the launch vehicles, and including tracking and data network-systems support) would be $43.9 million through 1979. (MOR E-641-78-03 [postlaunch] Mar 8/78, [prelaunch] Feb 22/78)
Av Wk reported that the Carter administration had planned an intensive $400- to $500-million program of killer satellite technology to overcome the USSR’s 10-yr lead. The USAF Flight Test Center at Edwards AFB, Calif., announced it had sought proposals for an air-launched space booster usable in an antisatellite program. Vought Corp. had undertaken work on killer-satellite technology under a $58.7-million contract. Such a non-nuclear warhead system could consist of small rocket tubes clustered around an optical-sensor package containing a small digital computer; this device would use the rocket-propulsion tubes as the kill mechanism. In the antiballistic-missile mode, a warhead’s terminal homing device would detect the target, and the computer would govern maneuvers by firing the tube-mounted rockets. Once the device approached within range of the target, the rocket tubes would separate and fire into the path of the object, destroying it. President Carter revealed that the U.S., in addition to the “hot-metal” kill mechanism, had been working on lasers as possible spaceborne defense against Soviet killer-satellite attacks. At the same time the USSR had pushed forward with laser-equipped killer-satellite systems, the U.S. had jeopardized its negotiating position in upcoming killer-satellite limitation talks by failing to convene a cabinet-level interagency group to decide between State Dept, and DOD negotiating strategies, marked by differences in opinion on verification and on impact on U.S. systems proposals. (AvWk, Feb 6/78, 18)
NASA announced it had accepted the review board’s final report on failure of the Delta launch vehicle carrying ESA’s orbital test satellite OTS-A that exploded after liftoff from Cape Canaveral Sept. 13, 1977. The review board had concluded that the failure resulted from a defect in the propellant of the solid-fuel strap-on Castor IV motor No. 1: either incomplete mixing and curing of propellant ingredients, or introduction of a contaminant, most likely water. The board’s findings had led to changing the design of the Castor IV solid-fuel rocket motor by putting additional insulation between the propellant and motor case to protect against such defects. NASA had also revised procedures for mixing and curing the propellant, and had improved the contractor and government test, inspection, and manufacturing surveillance procedures. New Castor IV motors incorporating the corrective actions had been manufactured and requalified. A second orbital test satellite, OTS-B, to replace OTS-A had been scheduled for launch May 4 from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-61)
Although the U.S. and USSR had signed separate treaties in 1963 and 1967 prohibiting test and deployment of nuclear weapons in space, western observers had interpreted the USSR’s Cosmos series as an antisatellite development program, Farooq Hussain reported in a Nature article. Killer satellites had exploited the poor resistance of satellite components (particularly solar cells) to intense heating and radiation damage; they could aim at satellites’ high energy-lasers or ion beams to cause arcing and discharge through instrumentation. Precision-guided missiles could destroy satellites either by colliding with them or by detonating conventional explosives close to a target. One explanation of recent Soviet tests had been China’s development of reconnaissance satellites. The only U.S. test of an antisatellite had occurred in 1963 when a modified McDonnell Douglas Thor missile had been fired against a missile booster in low earth orbit. Recent advances had indicated that killer satellites might carry high-energy continuous-wave or pulsed lasers to destroy target satellites; both sides had used ground-based lasers for several years to interrogate reconnaissance satellites. In Sept. 1977 the Air Force had awarded to Vought Corp., Dallas, Tex., a $58.7 million contract for development of a killer satellite. To avoid the cost of this arms race, the article said, both the U.S. and USSR had been willing to agree on limiting development of killer satellites. (Nature, Jan 26/78, 293)
NASA announced it had launched the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) from KSC at 12:36pm EST on Jan. 26, 1978, aboard a Delta rocket. KSC had delayed the launch for 4hr to secure an access door on the Delta heatshield. The Delta had injected IUE into a transfer orbit with 46 342km (28 784mi) apogee, 167km (104mi) perigee, and 28.7° inclination. IUE was part of a joint program by NASA, ESA, and the United Kingdom’s Science Research Council (SRC); more astronomers (200 from 17 countries) would use IUE than had used any previous satellite. The satellite’s telescope, aimed by ground controllers, would examine the ultraviolet spectrum between 1 150 and 3 200A, a region inaccessible to study from the ground. Studies would range from planets in earth’s solar system to some of the most distant objects in the universe, including quasars, pulsars, and black holes in space. Astronomers would study a wide range of stars to learn how they were born, live, and die; the material between these stars from which they are formed and are still forming; strange objects emitting radio waves or x-rays, or both; the sedate nearby galaxies and the violent distant quasars; and earth’s planetary neighbors and their satellites. IUE would complement and extend current NASA observations from the two orbiting astronomical observatories, OAO 2 and Copernicus, and ESA’s TD 1 satellite. IUE’s follow-on would be the 10-ton Space Telescope (ST) to be launched by the Shuttle in 1983. The IUE spacecraft was an octagonal cylinder approximately 1.5m tall and 1.3m between opposing faces. Overall length of 4.2m included a telescope tube at the forward end and an apogee motor extending from the rear. Solar arrays on opposite sides of the spacecraft when unfolded in space would measure 4.3m (14ft) wide. Spacecraft weight was 14791b, of which 2721b was scientific instrumentation. After stabilization, the spacecraft would continuously point one of its two solar arrays at the sun. Goddard Space Flight Center would have a constant view of IUE; ESA’s Villafranca station near Madrid, Spain, a view at least lOhr per day. GSFC had designed, integrated, and tested IUE and provided U.S. ground-support facilities; ESA had built the solar array and the Madrid ground facilities. SRC, in collaboration with Univ. College, London, had provided four television camera detectors to transform spectral displays into video signals for transmission to the ground. The joint agreement had allocated 16hr of viewing time a day to NASA, 8hr to be shared jointly by ESA and the United Kingdom. The U.S. had spent $57 million on the spacecraft, Delta rocket, and other items; ESA had spent $21 million; SRC and Univ. College had spent $9 million. (NASA Release 78-8; MOR S-868-78-01 [prelaunch] Jan 19/78, [postlaunch] Feb 2/78; NYT, Jan 27/78, A-8; ESA Release Jan 20/78; Goddard News, Jan-Feb 78, 1)
NASA reported completion of a 3yr Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) using space-age technology to monitor global wheat production. A symposium at Johnson Space Center attended by more than 700 conferees from 22 nations representing federal agencies, private companies, universities, and foreign governments, presented results of the experiment. The experiment had begun in 1974 to determine if data from a Landsat orbiting some 805km (500mi) above earth could be used with surface observations and weather information derived from U.S. operational environmental satellites to predict the size of the world’s wheat crop. Major foreign study areas were Canada and the Soviet Union, with preliminary examination of wheat-growing areas of Australia, People’s Republic of China, Brazil, India, and Argentina. The U.S. Great Plains area served for extensive test and evaluation of techniques, since it was the best source of statistical data with known reliability. LACIE had been designed to improve global wheat-production forecasts by making foreign-production predictions as early as possible in the crop season. The goal of the project was to develop estimates accurate within 10% of the true production at harvest time in 9yr out of 10; tests over the winter-wheat area of the Great Plains showed the goal could be met. Using LACIE techniques to monitor Soviet wheat crops harvested in 1977, the system estimated a production of 91.4 million metric tons, less than 1% below the Soviets’ official announcement of 92 million tons. However, the system’s ability to achieve such accuracy from yr to yr had yet to be determined. Findings were presented at the four-day symposium by the LACIE participants: NASA, USDA, NOAA, and cooperating universities and industry. A peer-evaluation team composed of prominent scientists, chaired by Dr. Don Paarlberg, former director of economics for USDA, reviewed the LACIE techniques and reported on them to the symposium. Dr. Paarlberg stated that “LACIE results to date clearly demonstrate that present remote-sensing capabilities can be combined with or substituted for conventional methods of information collection in order to improve foreign crop production estimates.” He concluded that "... for global wheat regions such as the USSR the LACIE technology can be made operational ... for regions where technology requires improvement, funding for further research and development should be continued.” (NASA Release 78-179)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch and Dr. John Keys, assistant deputy minister of Canada’s Dept, of Energy, Mines, and Resources (EMR), had signed an agreement Sept. 19 in Ottawa to establish a Canadian ground station at Shoe Cave, Newfoundland, to receive SeaSat data and to study data use, NASA announced. Under the agreement, Canada would build and operate a ground station to collect from SeaSat’s five sensors the data needed to support their own surveillance satellite project (SURSAT) and to furnish SeaSat data and related surface-truth information to NASA at no cost. NASA would be responsible for SeaSat data transmission to the station and for necessary technical information. Data from SeaSat would support a number of Canadian experiments to assess the usefulness of its synthetic aperture radar and other sensors for oceanographic research and coastal management. (NASA Release 78-143)
General Electric Co. and Comsat General had presented to the convention of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association divergent views on whether DOD should have its own satellite communications systems or should lease service from other organizations, AvWk reported. Lee Farnham, vice president of General Electric, said his company, as a hardware manufacturer, would evaluate a number of considerations before entering into any lease arrangement. Joseph O’Conner, vice president for finance and administration of Comsat General, said his firm, as a telecommunications common carrier, had been structured to establish system and lease communications services. At the insistence of Congress, the Navy had issued an RFP for a Leasat system based on a leasing arrangement. Comsat General might submit two bids, one for a dedicated Navy system and one for a system to serve merchant shipping as well as the Navy. GE’s Farnham said a manufacturer would have to consider (in addition to matters such as user requirements and hardware complexity) three factors in making a bid decision: financing, corporate impingement (corporate credit rating), and length of the lease. (AvWk, June 26/78, 23)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced it had installed a new RCA domestic satellite (domsat) earth station with 10m antenna, now fully operational as part of the NASA Communications Network (NASCOM). RCA had received a contract to provide three 56-kilobit-per-sec (kbps) wideband data channels between JPL and GSFC, primarily to serve the Voyager project. The three channels, used with new NASCOM-installed “tri-channel” end terminals, would provide a 168kbps end-to-end data transfer capability. The antenna was the completion of a high-data-rate link to JPL from the Deep Space Network’s 64m tracking station at Madrid; Voyager high-rate telemetry received at Madrid would be beamed up to the Intelsat satellite, down to an East Coast receiving station, then to GSFC for transmission to JPL over the new domsat link. Although the 56kbps rate had formerly sufficed for telemetry received from overseas stations, the Voyager encounters with Jupiter scheduled to begin in the spring would need a higher (115.2 kbps) rate. (JPL Universe, Sept 15/78, 1)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that the USAF had awarded Harris Corp.’s Electrical Systems Division, Melbourne, Fla., a $4.7 million contract to design and produce transportable weather-satellite receiving terminals. The company would build and deliver one operational prototype and three production units to support SAMSO’s Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP). The terminals (called Mark IV, a follow-on to the Mark III weather terminals currently in operation) would give military commanders precise weather information accumulated from DMSP spacecraft orbiting the earth every lOlmin. The terminals, half the size of present terminals, could fit on C-130 aircraft or M-55 trucks and be operational within 6hr, as opposed to the present 48hr, automatically tracking a satellite appearing over the horizon and receiving visual and infrared imagery in real time. An operator using magnification and other techniques could choose and enhance a specific area of coverage, or could process the entire 4500-nautical-mi-long 1600-nm-wide satellite image. The Mark IV project officer, Capt. James Fowler, said that the operator, after choosing the area most suitable for the mission, could produce a hard-copy print in 2min and transmit the photo to four remote laser-image processors lOmi from the terminal. “This capability, unique to the Mark IV system, will provide battlefield unit commanders with weather data within 20 minutes after the satellite’s pass,” he said. The prototype Mark IV terminal had been scheduled for delivery in Feb. 1979; production units were to be in the field by Oct. 1980. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 1)
NASA had cancelled the Lockheed/JPL SeaSat ocean-research spacecraft launch planned for May 17, AvWk reported, because of a failure in its synthetic-aperture radar downlink transmitter. Lockheed had detected the failure during thermal-vacuum testing of the spacecraft. Launch would be postponed until early June; the postponement would delay launch of the RCA/Goddard Tiros-N weather satellite to early Aug., because both missions would go on General Dynamics’s Altas boosters that must use the same pad at Vandenberg AFB. Analysis of the SeaSat failure had revealed damage to a ceramic circuit board during manufacture; all other SeaSat systems functioned normally in the test. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 27)
NASA was proceeding cautiously toward its prospective 30/20GHz satellite communications demonstration program, with development starting in FY82 instead of the faster pace envisioned earlier, Aerospace Daily reported. Several questions of policy and organization remained unresolved, one of them being administration guidelines that appeared to contradict President Carter’s recently announced civilian space policy [see Oct. 11]. Major issues in the 30/20GHz program included whether a (dedicated satellite was to be flown and, if so, whether and how it should be used, apart from demonstrating NASA technology objectives. Another issue concerned the relationship between NASA and the Commerce Dept.’s National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), set up to take over support formerly provided by NASA to public service satellite-communications users. The 30/20 GHz program had been presented in May to the NASA Advisory Council as a prospective FY80 development program, leading to 1984 launch of a satellite using a Space Shuttle-compatible antenna less than 15ft in diameter, about 20 spot beams, and fast onboard switching. However, in November, an ad hoc satellite-communications subcommittee of the NAC learned that the current prospect was for multiple-contractor Phase B definition studies in FY80, with technology work to precede FY82 development and a 1985 launch. {A/D, Nov 17/78, 78)
The Marshall Star reported delivery to Cape Canaveral of a light ion-mass spectrometer (LIMS) developed by MSFC scientists, for integration with other instruments on the USAF’s SCATHA (satellite charging at high altitudes) scheduled for launch on a Delta Jan. 25, 1979. SCATHA instruments would collect data on electrically charged particles in the upper ionosphere and magnetosphere to help solve the problem of static-electricity buildup on satellite surfaces at geosynchronous altitude. The LIMS would measure density, temperature, and speed of low-energy ions from all directions, as sensors separated hydrogen, helium, and oxygen ions and recorded their speed and numbers. Martin Marietta Co., integration contractor, had delivered the instrument to MSFC 3wk previously, and MSFC personnel had installed flight sensors and completed final calibration before delivering it to the Air Force at the Cape. Designed for a nominal lyr lifetime, SCATHA might return data for possibly 3yr or more. (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 2)
MSFC had designed a geostationary-orbit platform that could perform the functions of more than a dozen domestic communications and weather satellites serving North America, AvWk reported. As early as 1986, NASA could use the Space Shuttle to assemble the platform, first U.S. large space structure in synchronous orbit. NASA would assemble the platform over the course of three Space Shuttle missions, using technology under design at MSFC and JSC. Analysis had predicted that over a platform’s 15-yr lifetime it could save 50% of the cost of operating communications and weather systems now scheduled to be placed in synchronous orbit during that period. Institutional rather than technical barriers had delayed completion of the platform project, but MSFC had reached agreement among common carriers and hardware manufacturers on the savings possible by using the platform. One concern of NASA planners was that grouping communications systems on a single platform would make them more vulnerable to Soviet attack; however, MSFC planned to issue an RFP of about $500 000 for major systems studies in FY79 and FY80 that would constitute Phase A evaluation of typical platform requirements; phase B would require about $1 million for FY80 and FY81 for system design concepts. (AvWk, June 19/78, 67)
KSC’s Spaceport News noted the 20th anniversary of the launch of Vanguard 1, a satellite which, together with Explorer 1, launched 6wk earlier, “invoked a national sigh of relief.” Project Vanguard had begun in July 1955 with a White House announcement that the U.S. would launch a satellite as the U.S. contribution to the International Geophysical Year. The first attempt to launch a Vanguard, TV-3, ended when the spacecraft was destroyed Dec. 6, 1957, in an explosion on the pad. As one observer stated, “Following the explosion of TV-3, the Vanguard became a whipping boy for the hurt pride of the American people.” Then came the success of Explorer 1. But the failures of the next Vanguard and next Explorer meant tremendous pressures on the Vanguard launch team. Vanguard 1 had been launched from Cape Canaveral at 7:15am, March 17, 1958. The Vanguard team had in record time (2yr, 6mo, and 8da) developed from scratch a complete high-performance 3-stage launch vehicle, a highly accurate worldwide satellite-tracking system, and an adequate launch facility and range instrumentation. And, they had suceeded in getting the Vanguard into orbit during the International Geophysical Year. (Spaceport News, Mar 17/78, 4)
ESA announced plans to launch its scientific satellite Geos-2 in mid-July from ETR/Cape Canaveral on a Delta. This satellite would carry out the mission originally planned for Geos 1, which a malfunctioning Delta injected into a transfer orbit too low to permit attaining its scheduled geostationary orbit. The European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) at Darmstadt, W. Germany, had fired Geos 7’s apogee boost motor to inject it into a 12-hr elliptic orbit; after a yr in this orbit, results showed Geos 1 had made a significant contribution to the International Magnetospheric Study (IMS). Main mission objective of Geos-2 would be to learn more about responses of the near-earth environment to processes occurring in outer space. The satellite’s geostationary orbit would be in a region of earth’s magnetosphere where many dynamic processes causing magnetic and ionospheric disturbances were believed to develop. Geos-2’s exceptionally high real-time transmission rate (over lOOkilobits per sec), combined with a continuous link with ESA’s Odenwald ground station in Germany, would allow it to transmit about 100 times as much data as any previous European scientific satellite. Built as a qualification model at the same time as Geos 1, the spacecraft had been converted into a high-quality flight model. Based on Geos 1 experience, only minor modifications were made in some Geos-2 subsystems. Geos-2’s very sensitive experiment payload had put severe constraints on spacecraft design in the areas of electromagnetic and chemical cleanliness: for example, a complex system of 8 booms deploying in orbit had to be designed to put the sensitive experiment detectors measuring minute variations in the magnetosphere as far as possible from any electrical interference generated by the satellite. Prime contractor for Geos-2 was British Aerospace Dynamics Group, under the direction of industries in 10 European countries. (ESA Release, June 22/78; ESA Newsletter, June 78, 4)
Researcher William Bainbridge, who had polled registered voters in the Seattle area about attitudes on the space program, reported widespread enthusiasm for the knowledge and practical benefits derived from the space program, Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine said. Bainbridge had offered his poll sample a set of 49 statements as “not good,” “moderately good,” or “extremely good” reasons for continuing the space program: communications satellite benefits had received most positive responses; scientific knowledge attained through space exploration ranked second. The unconventional idea that ranked highest—communication with extraterrestrial intelligence—was approved by 53% of those polled. Bainbridge felt his results showed public appreciation of the practical and scientific results of the space program, and an anticipation of more benefits from new projects. (A&A, June 78, 60)
NASA announced that the United Nations would use the world’s most powerful comsat, the Cts communications technology satellite operated jointly by NASA and the Canadian Dept, of Communications, in a demonstration of remote simultaneous interpretation of a conference and of transmission by facsimile of conference documents for remote translation. Cooperating in the demonstration would be ComSatCorp and ENTEL, an Argentine state-owned telephone company. The UN Conference on Technical Cooperation Among Developing Countries currently meeting in Buenos Aires, Argentina, through Sept. 12 would be the demonstration subject. Pictures and voices of the conferees sent to a portable NASA terminal at UN Headquarters in New York would be interpreted, translated into five official UN languages, and returned through Cts to a portable ComSatCorp terminal in Buenos Aires, where conference attendees could select the language of their choice. The New York terminal, a NASA-developed portable earth terminal bus, was a mobile broadcast-receive studio with a 2.4m (8ft) dish antenna designed for use with Cts. Another phase of the experiment would be high-speed simultaneous transmission on other Cts channels of texts of speeches and other documents from Buenos Aires to UN. Hq for translation and return the next day. Cts earth terminals could transmit at a frequency of 14GHz and receive at 12GHz. (NASA Release 78-134)
KSC announced that for the third consecutive yr it would host about 80 of the nation’s leading atmospheric physicists and lightning researchers, representing 10 universities, 2 research laboratories, NOAA, and 3 other NASA centers, for a summer of combined study of the electrical properties of thunderstorms. The thunderstorm research international program (TRIP) would use the unique meteorological facilities built at KSC during the Apollo and Skylab programs, to assess thunderstorm hazards during launch operations and to monitor the high incidence of lightning-charged storms in the area during the summer. Participating investigators would bring their own instruments for many of the experiments; others would use KSC’s instruments, like the field-mill system built for the Apollo program to detect buildup of electrical charges in overhead thunderclouds; KSC’s instrumented aircraft, NASA-6, used in previous lightning studies; and the lightning detection and ranging (LDAR) system that detected electrification in distant clouds. NOAA’s geosynchronous operational environmental satellite Goes would provide satellite photographs for the scientists. Experiments would include an evaluation of prototype lightning sensors as part of the scientific package to be flown in 1982 on the Jupiter orbiter probe designated Project Galileo, first planetary spacecraft to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle; a study of evolution of lightning activity; examination of the structure of waveforms radiated from lightning, for characteristics indicating storm type; obtaining from ground-based systems range and azimuth data on lightning strokes; monitoring of electric-field and corona (surface discharge of electricity) current over water; and study of the relationship of precipitation-formation development in thunderclouds to lightning occurrences. (KSC Release 66-78; Spaceport News, July 21/78, 1)
ESA announced it had awarded to the European consortium Cosmos headed by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm, W. Germany, a contract for phases C and D of the scientific satellite Exosat to include fabrication, integration, and testing of the observatory intended to measure position, structural aspects, and spectral and temporal characteristics of x-ray sources. It would carry four experiments: two imaging telescopes for low-energy x-rays, a large-area proportional-counter array, and a gas-scintillation spectrometer for medium-energy x-rays. The observatory, mounted on a 3-axis-stabilized platform, would travel in a highly eccentric orbit whose apogee (roughly above the North Pole) would be at 200 000km altitude. ESA planned to launch Exosat in the second quarter of 1981 on an Ariane equipped with a fourth stage to put the spacecraft into the required orbit. (ESA Release Sept 11/78)
NASA announced that its scientists had been studying radar images of the North American coast from SeaSat 1, first ocean-monitoring satellite, launched in June 1978 and now in a 805km (500mi) high polar orbit. One of the satellite’s five microwave sensors, a powerful radar system called a synthetic aperture radar (SAR), could take pictures of earth’s surface day or night under any weather conditions, A typical SAR operation had produced a continuous swath of radar images 97km (60mi) wide by 4023km (2500mi) long, extending from the Mexican west coast to Alaska. JPL, manager of the SeaSat project, had processed the images. Scientists from NASA, NOAA, the Natl. Environmental Satellite Service, the U.S. Navy, and USGS had received images of the Arctic pack, the Gulf Stream off the east coast of Fla., the Caribbean off the northern coast of South America, and a hurricane zone near the Baja Calif, peninsula. (NASA Release 78-116)
NASA announced appointment of Robert Aller as director of tracking and data relay satellite system (TDRSS) program office at the NASA Hq Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. Effective Jan. 2,1979, Aller would be responsible for planning, direction, and evaluation of the TDRSS program. Working with NASA program and project managers, he would determine requirements and develop and implement plans for TDRSS support of NASA earth-orbital spaceflight missions. Western Union Space Communications, Inc., would provide NASA with TDRSS tracking, command, and data-relay services under a lOyr telecommunications agreement. Aller had been deputy director of the expendable launch vehicles program in the NASA Office of Space Transportation Systems, and had served in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Skylab, Apollo, and Gemini programs. He had received the NASA medal for outstanding leadership and two NASA exceptional service medals. (NASA Release 78-195)
The JSC Roundup printed a report by Dr. Thornton Page on his experiences during a friendship tour to China. Page, who had used the extreme-ultraviolet camera during Apollo missions, had asked for and received tours of Chinese astronomical facilities; in discussions with Chinese, Page learned most of their data were of western origin because of the limited quality and size of Chinese astronomical instruments. “They were delighted to have the books, reports, pamphlets, and photos I presented to them, particularly the NASA photos of Shuttle, Skylab in orbit, and ALSEP instruments deployed on the moon,” Page reported. “They spoke about the large telescope under construction in Nanking, and their own telescope planned for a mountain site some 30mi northeast of Peking. Drs. Pan How-Ren and Wu Jian-Cheng are calibrating x-ray and far-UV detectors for use on a satellite, but they could not tell me when it will fly.” The Chinese told Page that a major change in national policy on science had taken place during the past yr, since the “Gang of Four” had been removed from power. Chairman Hua had given high priority to science and technology and had set a goal of doubling by 1982 the number of scientists and technicians in China. “None of the scientists I met,” Page added, “was involved in teaching, and none of our other visits to universities and high schools in Manchuria or Shanghai revealed classroom instruction in these subjects.” (JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 1)
GSFC reported that several Goddard-controlled satellites had observed the largest solar flare in recorded history July 11. The observations had furnished a new data base for scientists investigating the causes of solar flares and how they affected the earth. Explosions of solar flares on the sun’s surface had generated huge shock waves in the solar wind (ionized particles flowing at supersonic speeds over the earth and other planets) and had blasted into it new free-flying highly energetic particles that disorganized interplanetary magnetic fields. The flare had disrupted earth’s ionosphere and had blacked out shortwave radio communications for 2hr throughout the entire sunlit hemisphere. Two interplanetary monitoring platforms (IMPs) orbiting the earth had recorded the interplanetary magnetic field disturbances and the intensification of particle flow from the sun. Helios I, a sun-orbiting satellite observing the sun from the opposite side of the earth July 11, had recorded changes in and composition of the radio noise, plasma, magnetic fields, and energetic particles streaming from the sun. The flare had saturated the high-sensitivity detectors on orbiting solar observatory OSO 8, which had previously obtained data on smaller flares associated with the large-flare region. Atmosphere Explorer C had noted atmospheric heating from solar-wind particles deposited on the earth at high latitudes. The international sun-earth explorers A and B (Isee 1 and 2) had obtained data on the accompanying magnetic fields and energetic particles, and Applications Technology Satellite 6 had recorded data on high- and medium-energy plasma particles. (Goddard News, Aug 16/78,
Preliminary analyses of Viking Orb iter 1 (VO-1) data on the Mars satellite Phobos revealed low density and a spectral reflectance and low albedo that suggested a composition similar to type I carbonaceous chondrites, reported Science magazine. VO-1 had obtained a spectacular picture sequence at 100km, an encounter by far the most demanding navigation performance of any interplanetary-spacecraft exploration to date. Since Phobos had a mean radius of only 11km and was only partially illuminated when viewed during the flyby, the VO-1 position relative to Phobos had required accuracy of within a few kilometers. Imaging data had revealed small positive features (hummocks), small craters with bright ejecta blankets, dark material on the floors of some craters, large variations in topography, and an abundance of linear features resembling crater chains. Further analysis would refine density estimates to determine Phobos’s origin. (Sci, Jan 6/78, 61) Corp had fired the apogee kick motor Jan. 7, putting the satellite into near-geosynchronous orbit. After initial positioning at 74°E the satellite would be moved to 60°E as backup to Intelsat IVA F-6, and was scheduled to be on station at 63 °E by mid-June. Intelsat IVA F-3 had an overall height of 6.99m and a diameter of 2.38m. Height of the solar panel was 2.82m. Liftoff weight was approximately 1515kg (33401b); in-orbit weight after apogee motor firing, 825.5kg (18201b). Design life was 7yr. Ten Intelsat IV and IVA satellites were currently in synchronous equatorial orbit over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans, providing full-time telephone, teletypewriter, data, and television services to 107 countries, territories, and possessions. The Intelsat IVA had almost two-thirds greater communications capability than the Intelsat IV series, with about 6250 two-way voice circuits and 2 television channels in its system configuration. The number of operating transponders had increased from 12 to 20. Improvement of the antenna system had produced greater effective bandwidth through frequency reuse by beam separation: for Indian Ocean service, the east-pointed beam of Intelsat IVA F-3 would illuminate Japan and Southeast Asia using a 320MHz bandwidth, and would reuse the same 320MHz bandwidth in the west beam illuminating Europe and Africa. In addition to eight east-beam transponders and eight west-beam transponders, four transponders connected to an earth-coverage antenna would illuminate all stations in the Indian Ocean region. The Communications Satellite Corp. (ComSatCorp), U.S. member of INTELSAT, would be management services contractor for the satellite system; ComSatCorp on behalf of INTELSAT would reimburse NASA under a launch-services agreement for costs of the Atlas-Centaur and the launch. The Intelsat IVA program represented an investment by 101 nations of approximately $295 million (US); this launch had cost approximately $47 million ($18 million for the satellite and $29 million for the launch vehicle and related services). (NASA Release 77-250; MOR E-491-633-78-5 [prelaunch] Jan 5/78, [postlaunch] June 23/78; W Star, Jan 7/78, A-5)
NASA announced it had turned over Goes 3, third in a series of geostationary operational environmental satellites, to NOAA for operation on July 5, 1978, at 1600Z. Since its launch on June 16, NASA engineers, wishing to ensure proper operation, had completed an orbital checkout in 14da, rather than the 30da required for previous GOES missions. Goddard Space Flight Center’s newly installed GOES test laboratory had accelerated the schedule by allowing full-time communications with Goes 3; NOAA’s Wallops Island facilities had been available to previous missions only part-time. Engineers had checked out Goes 3 during its westward drift at 2 deg/day toward its operational station at 135°W, and had corrected the orbit inclination from 1.7° to the specified 1°. First pictures from the satellite’s visible and infrared spin scan radiometer (VISSR), received June 29, were of excellent quality. More than 521b of the initial 801b load of hydrazine was available, enough for more than 5yr of normal operations. A minor problem with the spacecraft data-handling equipment that relayed signals from earth-based data-collection platforms had resulted from interference by VHF equipment that could be turned off during most of the mission. The GOES laboratory would monitor operating data to detect any variables in performance with time and temperatures. NASA had advised NOAA that, based on preliminary analyses, the spacecraft was operating under no constraints. According to NOAA’s plan for final positioning, Goes 3 would replace Goes 1 at 135°W longitude; Ctatsjl, relocated over the Indian Ocean, would support the first GARP global experiment. (NASA MOR E-612-78-01 [postlaunch] Aug 2/78)
Av Wk reported that Europe’s aerospace industry would probably get a sizable slice of procurements for the emerging global maritime satellite-communications system (variously designated as the second-generation system, the Marisat 2 system, or the pre-Inmarsat system). Great Britain’s ambassador Peter Jay and France’s ambassador Francois de Laboulaye had made strong representations on Europe’s behalf to U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The fact that all prime contracts (and most of the dollar volume of procurement) for the first global satellite communications system, owned and operated by INTELSAT, had gone to U.S. firms had been a sore point in U.S.-Europe relations for more than a decade. ESA’s Marecs satellite scheduled for launch on an Ariane booster would figure in both plans for the new global system that had received most-favored consideration, as U.S. government agencies (led by the State Dept.) and ComSatCorp struggled to formulate a U.S. position. One plan favored by the U.S. for the interim system was to combine maritime communications packages on three Ford Aerospace-built Intelsat 5 satellites with two or three Marecs satellites. The other favored plan was to combine commercial communications packages on the Leasat system being established by Hughes Communications Services, Inc. for the U.S. Navy with two or three Marecs satellites. (AvWk, Nov 27/78, 13)
NASA announced it had planned, weather permitting, to have its Project Cameo release large bluish-white luminescent clouds of barium in the skies over Alaska beginning Saturday, October 28, and lithium over northern Scandinavia at a later date [see Sept. 19]. The agency said Project Cameo clouds should be visible to residents of Alaska, eastern Russia, western Canada, and the northwestern U.S. The chemicals would have been released from the orbiting second stage of a Delta rocket that would have launched the Nimbus 6 satellite into polar orbit Oct. 24. Of the many high-altitude sounding-rocket chemical-cloud launches conducted by NASA throughout the world, this would be the first from an orbiting vehicle; the Delta second stage was in a circular near-polar orbit at about 950km (590mi) altitude. (NASA Release 78-169)
INTELSAT reported that telecasts of the 1978 World Cup soccer championship won by Argentina had been the world’s biggest satellite television event. Although final figures had not been tallied, officials estimated the World Cup had surpassed the popularity of the 1976 Montreal Olympics, measured by riumbers and hours of international satellite telecasts. INTELSAT said the number of transmissions and receptions of the games had totaled 1364; with an average 2-hr transmission, total time given to transmissions and receptions worldwide was 2728hr. INTELSAT’S operations center in Washington, D.C. had estimated an additional 400 transmissions of World Cup material, other than the actual games, accounting for another 700hr. The World Cup thus ran to more than 3400hr compared to the 1976 Olympics, which had held the previous record for satellite television time, more than 2600 transmis-sion/reception hr. (INTELSAT Release 78-18-1)
NASA had mounted a “new effort” to make space applications the “administration’s centerpiece,” starting with a reorganization of applications management that could double that office’s $283 million budget, AvWk reported. The new effort would include a major push for a “global information system” supported by all civilian earth-sensing spacecraft, to encompass all Landsat, Seasat, and environmental and meteorological satellite data, coordinated so that for any need an individual user could access all pertinent information available from space platforms. Theoretically, all space-derived information could some day come from a single distribution point. NASA’s effort would emphasize agency cooperation (NASA officials had met with representatives of the Depts. of Agriculture and Interior, EPA, and AID); management changes (a plan awaiting approval would remove flight projects from the traditional applications branches; the project offices would instead develop user-oriented sensor systems to be passed along to an applications-systems division, which would then reconfigure the sensors into the proper spacecraft format); center changes (instead of the previous lead-center approach to managing flight projects, NASA Hq would formulate programs as the main user liaison); applied sciences (greater emphasis by space applications on the phenomena its spacecraft would measure); ground systems (speedup of work on the end-to-end data system); an operational comsat system (solution of years-old Landsat operating problems); and communications research (industry would foster the research, while government agencies would concentrate on creating and sustaining a real market for public service communications). (Av Wk, Mar 13/78, 67)
ComSatCorp announced it had derived 57% of its 1978 operating revenues from services provided through Intelsat satellites; 37% from maritime and U.S. domestic services provided by Comsat General through the Marisat and Comstar satellite systems; and 6% from its investment share in INTELSAT and operational and technical services. ComSatCorp had been considering expansion into the growing environmental information services field in which satellite technology could play a significant, possibly essential, role. Comsat General, in cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey and Telesat Canada, had already demonstrated the ability of satellites and small unattended earth stations to collect water-resources data from remote areas of the U.S. and Canada. ComSatCorp would enter the field by acquiring at a price not to exceed $20 million Environmental Research & Technology, Inc. (ERT), currently engaged in a broad spectrum of environmental services. Adding ERT’s expertise in environmental data collection, monitoring, analysis, and prediction to ComSatCorp’s expertise in satellite communications and related technologies should make the organization better able to extend satellite-communications technology to the growing environmental-information services market. ComSatCorp had also been working to apply advanced technology in developing and manufacturing specialized products, including earth-station components, signal-processing systems equipment, and fiber-optics communications equipment. (COMSAT annl rept 78, 1-7)
ESA announced that since the end of March its Meteosat 1 had been transmitting daily meteorological data collected by special equipment aboard a French naval vessel in the North Atlantic. ESA had relayed the data to the European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) in West Germany. The satellite had transmitted messages every 3hr that included the ship’s position, and parameters such as wind characteristics, sea states, and air and sea temperatures. The experiment, carried out jointly by the French meteorological service and ESA, had been planned to demonstrate the reliability of automatic communications between ships and the Meteosat 1 satellite for regular production of meteorological reports. The experiment would last until July and would resume later with other European meteorological services. When operational, the system should include several hundred ships all over the world fitted with Meteosat equipment. (ESA Release, Apr 12/78)
The People’s Republic of China had announced an 8yr crash plan to catch up with the rest of the world in scientific research, Nature reported. Vice-Premier Fang Yi told 6000 delegates to the All-Nations Science Conference in Peking that China had lagged 15 to 20yr behind the West in many branches of science and still more in others; the program would narrow the gap in some areas to lOyr by 1985, and would help in overtaking the rest of the world in all branches of science by the end of the century. The article said that China had planned to begin production of fast-mainframe computers and to establish a strong computer network and data base by 1985, with extra attention to peripherals, software, and associated areas of applied mathematics. PRC would devote its efforts to basic space physics, cosmic rays, and technical problems of remote sensing, and planned to launch a series of Skylabs and deep-space and communications satellites within 8yr. (Nature, April 6/78, 482)
MSFC announced plans to begin thermal-vacuum testing of NASA’s second high-energy astronomy observatory, HEAO-B, as part of a series of environmental tests on the satellite before scheduled launch in Nov. TRW Systems, Inc., HEAO prime contractor, would conduct the 2wk-long test to simulate thermal-vacuum conditions in space. HEAO-B had already undergone a number of environmental tests, including acoustic and mechanical vibration tests. {Marshall Star, June 7/78, 1)
Av Wk reported that U.S. Air Force ground controllers had begun to bring the second NavStar global-positioning system satellite up to full operational status, after its successful launch on an Atlas F May 13 from Vandenberg AFB. The 9551b spacecraft had gone into an 85 x 10 900nm elliptical orbit, and its solid-fuel rocket motor had fired 2days later, putting it in a circular orbit; thrusters would shift it to its final station. Modifications of the rubidium-vapor atomic clocks had delayed launch of NavStar 2 for a day; when ground tests indicated a malfunction of the NavStar frequency-divider circuit, the USAF had ordered modifications of all three clocks on NavStar 2 to prevent a similar occurrence in orbit. The USAF planned to launch a third NavStar from Vandenberg in Aug. (A v Wk, May 22/78, 24)
NASA announced it had rescheduled launches of the TIROS-N third-generation operational meteorological satellite and the Nimbus-G pollution-monitoring satellite, originally set for mid-Sept. to Oct. 14 and 23, respectively. NASA had postponed the WTR launches because of malfunction of an onboard computer in TIROS-N, and subsequent discovery of reworking required for tape recorders on both TIROS-N and Nimbus-G [see Sept. 18]. NASA had returned the tape recorders to the manufacturer for correction of the suspected problem (loose solder particles) and would reinstall the instruments in the spacecraft over the next 2wk. (NASA Release 78-149)
The House subcommittee on space science and applications had added funding of $4 million to the NASA FY79 budget for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter and a new stereosat earth resources spacecraft, AvWk reported. The subcommittee had also added $7 million to NASA’s Office of Space Transportation funds for advanced planning, plus $3 million each for. large space-structures work and solar power satellite studies. (NASA’s initial budget request had not included solar power satellite funding, because of Dept, of Energy priority in this area.) The subcommittee had added $40.5 million to the NASA request and cut $25 million, resulting in a net $15.5 million increase. Funds for a stereosat came with a subcommittee call for development of the $40- to $45-million spacecraft based on significant funding from the user community; primary users would be geologists exploring for petroleum and minerals. Other subcommittee additions were $10 million for distribution of Landsat data and training programs to states for crop-prediction research, encouragement of microwave development, and work on an operational Landsat system; $4 million to stimulate, bioengineering work; $1.5 million to support industrial application of NASA technology; and $4 million for modifying NASA’s tracking system to facilitate full and timely handling of Spacelab data early in Spacelab’s flight program. (AvWk, Mar 6/78, 13)
GSFC announced that the third international sun-earth explorer Isee 3 had been injected into a halo orbit, most unusual ever proposed for a NASA space mission, to increase understanding of solar-terrestrial relationships. Isee 3 was orbiting around the L-l libration point, a point between the earth and the sun about 1.5 million km (1 million mi) from earth at which the centrifugal and gravitational forces acting on a satellite were exactly counterbalanced. In this orbit, Isee 3 would be able to monitor characteristics of the solar wind and other solar-induced phenomena such as solar flares about an hr before they disturbed earth space. GSFC’s Dr. Robert Farquhar, who devised the halo orbit, said it had been designed “to pass slightly above and below the ecliptic plane so that it will avoid excessive solar interference with spacecraft communications back to earth stations. To a person observing Isee 3 from our planet, it will appear to be orbiting the sun, but it actually traces a halo above earth.” On entering the halo orbit, Isee 3 would accomplish three spaceflight firsts: a libration-point satellite; a spacecraft stationed in a halo orbit; and a spacecraft orbiting a point in space rather than a body such as the sun, earth, or moon. Libration-point orbits had aroused interest as possible ideal locations for future space colonies; they would also offer advantages in lunar-farside communications and as staging locations for lunar and interplanetary transportation systems. At least five of the libration points had been mentioned as possible sites for space colonies; one of them (the earth-moon L-5 point) was even the namesake for the leading group of space-colony enthusiasts, the L-5 Society. However, research concerned with space colonization had been mainly theoretical. Isee 3 should provide the first real flight experience for orbital operations of future space colonies. (GSFC Release G-78-85)
U.S. and Chinese technical officials had begun discussion Nov. 28 of a plan for the People’s Republic of China to buy an American communications satellite, the Washington Post reported. The deal would constitute the most sophisticated transfer of technology yet between the two countries. A 15-member Chinese delegation led by Jen Hsinmin, director of the PRC’s Space Technology Research Institute, had met with officials from the State and Commerce Depts. and NASA at the start of a 23-day visit to the U.S. The Baltimore Sun quoted a State Dept, official as saying the U.S. would require, as a condition of purchase, that the PRC not use the satellite for military purposes, meaning that the satellite’s signals could be transmitted only within China’s borders. A White House official said it was understood the Chinese planned to use the satellite to transmit educational television. The communications system could cost as much as $50 million, including the price of sending the satellite into orbit. (WPost, Nov 29/78, A-19; B Sun, Nov 27/78, 13)
Walter Morgan, ComSatCorp seniqr staff scientist, said at a conference sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics that a network of high-capacity comsats could be in orbit by the early 1990s, increasing transmission capacity and reducing the need for large ground antennas, A v Wk reported. Called orbital antenna “farms,” the 14 0001b clusters of communications satellite antennas and sensors could replace many smaller individual satellites in geostationary orbit. Five antenna farms linked together in circular fashion would form a major cluster, which in turn could make up 1 part of a network of 5 separate clusters serving the Americas, Europe, the Pacific, Africa and the Middle East, and Asia. Such antenna farms would reduce the number of individual satellites and emit higher powered radio frequencies, permitting numerous earth stations to have smaller antennas with attendant lower costs and greater mobility. Basis of an antenna farm cluster would be a structure about 40ft long and 14ft in diameter, housing electronic modules to control mission-payload equipment. Although current technology was capable of handling orbital antenna farms, two possible technological problems would be in-orbit construction of the platforms and in-orbit servicing of the equipment. Disadvantages would include compromises on optimum orbital locations for various missions, radio-frequency interference between payloads grouped on a common platform, and the effect of a single system’s failure on other antenna farm systems. Although ComSatCorp had not taken an official position on the concept, Morgan predicted that an antenna farm could be operational in the early 1990s, and that a smaller experimental farm might be operating earlier. (AvWk, May 8/78, 56)
NOAA announced that the American Water Resources Assn, would sponsor the fifth annual William T. Pecora memorial symposium June 11-15, 1979, in Sioux Falls, S. Dak. The Dept, of Interior’s U.S. Geological Survey EROS data center would host the program, to focus attention on satellite remote sensing for observing the hydrosphere as a means of averting water shortages and of water management. Participants — scientists from NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service, the U.S.G.S., NASA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, universities, and private industry—would present papers on applications of space technology to all phases of hydrology and water resources. New satellites such as Landsat 3, Nimbus 7, the heat capacity mapping mission satellite, and SeaSat 1; new or improved sensors, including the scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer and synthetic-aperture radar; improved resolution on Landsat and HCMM thermal scanners; and new thermal bands on the advanced very high-resolution radiometer had affected hydrological technology and would be the subject of papers describing these improvements and capabilities. (NOAA Release 78-119)
ComSatCorp had agreed to a 48% reduction in its rates for international satellite communications, following FAA approval of a proposed settlement of its 13-yr-old rate case, Av Wk reported. ComSatCorp management and FCC staff had agreed on settlement last Feb. As U.S. representative to the 102-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), ComSatCorp had leased capacity on INTELSAT circuits to other U.S. carriers such as American Telephone & Telegraph, ITT World Communications, RCA Global Communications, and Western Union International. The FCC now had to decide how these carriers would pass rate reductions along to their customers. As part of the settlement, ComSatCorp would relinquish all claim to an escrow account totaling more than $100 million that it had set up in mid-1976 pending judicial review of an FCC Dec. 1975 decision in the' rate case. The amount in escrow had been set aside for possible refund of overcharges since mid-1976, and the FCC also had to decide how refunds would be made. Under the settlement, ComSatCorp’s overall allowed rate of return would be 11.48%, compared to 10.8% under the FCC’s 1975 decision. {AvWk, May 15/78, 22)
ESA reported that its council and communications satellites program board had unanimously approved at March and April meetings a first series of five operational Ariane launchers [see Apr. 24]; two operational satellites for intra-European telephone, telegraph, arid telex communications and television relay (ECS-1 and -2); and a second maritime-communications satellite (Marots-B). Three of the five Ariane launchers would be financed from ESA programs for the scientific satellite Exosat (to be launched in early 1981), Marots-B (mid-1981), and ESC-1 (end of 1981). One launcher had been earmarked for the French earth. observation satellite SPOT; the fifth launcher was a reserve. The council also had agreed that a preliminary phase of the H-sat program should revise the proposed satellite design to require only minor modifications (reducing the time scale) to go from an experimental “heavy” platform and payload to an operating direct-broadcast satellite. Other design modifications required to move from, a qualification to an operational Ariane had delayed the scheduled H-sat launch. (ESA newsletter, June 78, 2)
Pioneer Venus, scheduled for launch May 20, would carry a recently completed JPL instrument to obtain new weather information on Venus, JPL Universe reported. VORTEX (Venus orbiter radiometric temperature experiment), a $4.5 million co-effort of JPL and Oxford Univ., England, would collect close-up data on winds, cloud structures, water vapor, and temperatures of Venus. Using technologies developed for satellite monitoring of earth weather, VORTEX would report 3-dimensional measurements of the Venus atmosphere. The complex instrument, an 8-channel radiometer combining 4 different subexperiments (three separate radiometers and a spectrometer) would weigh only 12 lb, partly because of the special hybrid microelectronics used. Orbiting as close as 100km above the cloudtops, it could “see” weather conditions at 7 different levels or layers. For a full Venus year of 243 days, scientists would process VORTEX data into weather maps and infrared images and compare meteorological conditions on Venus with those on earth. (JPL Universe, Mar 17/78, 2)
INTELSAT announced award of an international research contract valued at $75 380 to Cable & Wireless, Ltd., London, to determine the effects of rain on comsat radio signals. C&W would obtain annual statistics for rain-caused depolarization at 4GHz frequencies by measuring the relative amplitude of the 2 orthogonal circular-polarized components of a satellite signal. INTELSAT would use results to develop transmission and reception techniques that could double the capacity of its international telecommunications satellites. (INTELSAT Release 77-8-M)
ESA announced that its Geos2 scientific satellite, launched from Cape Canaveral July 14 on a Delta and placed in geosynchronous orbit, had reached its scheduled position of 6°E on July 26. It would move during ’ its 2-yr mission from its first operational station in geosynchronous orbit 35 900km above the equator through a zone extending from 0° to 37°E longitude. On July 26 the European Space Operations Centre at Darmstadt, West Germany, had switched on the S-band telemetry system and the magnetometer experiment, and would switch on six other experiments progressively until the satellite had become fully operational in early Aug. All data confirmed that Geos 2 was functioning correctly. The satellite, positioned on magnetic field lines linked to the earth’s auroral zones, could correlate those data with similar data acquired from associated auroral stations by ground-based balloon-borne or rocket-borne instruments. NASA had expected that the Geos 2 data, correlated with data acquired by the already launched Isee A and B and by the ISEE-C scheduled for launch in Aug. 1978, would constitute a substantial body of information on the magnetosphere to aid in understanding the effect of interplanetary-space processes on the near-earth environment. (ESA Release July 31/78) During July: The USAF announced it had launched a second prototype satellite in DOD’s NavStar global-positioning system from SAMTEC facilities aboard an Atlas F booster. The 955-lb navigational satellite working with a previously orbited NavStar satellite would be part of the program’s concept-validation phase using six satellites to test navigation capability at the Army’s Yuma, Ariz., proving grounds. When fully operational in the 1980s, the 24-satellite NavStar system would provide precise worldwide navigation coverage 24hr a day. The Air Force’s global-satellite control network, managed by SAMSO’s Air Force Satellite Control Facility at Sunnyvale, AFS, Calif., would track and operate the satellite. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 12) The USAF announced it had launched a third defense meteorological satellite from SAMTEC facilities at Vandenberg AFB on a Thor LV-2F into a near-polar sun-synchronous orbit 450mi above the earth. The 1131-lb satellite carrying visual and infrared instruments had joined two previously orbited spacecraft in providing high-priority weather forecasts to U.S. military commanders worldwide. The sensors could detect and observe developing weather patterns and could track existing weather systems over remote areas, including oceans. After 30 days of on-orbit tests, the satellite was orbiting the earth every lOlmin, scanning a 1841-mi area on each pass and photographing the entire earth over a 12-hr period. It would transmit weather imagery in real time to ground and shipborne terminals around the world for military purposes and, through NOAA, to the civilian community. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 1)	'
NASA reported its scientists and engineers were continuing attempts to revive SeaSat, the ocean-monitoring satellite that had suddenly gone mute before an orbital pass over the Santiago, Chile, tracking station [see Oct. 11]. Gene Giberson, SeaSat project manager at JPL, said that engineers there and at GSFC were assembling and analyzing tracking-station data from the spacecraft to determine possible cause of data interruption. NASA engineers would then work backward to reconstruct a “failure model” matching the data received just before and up to the instant the spacecraft ceased transmitting. If such a match could be made, the next step would be to find an alternate method of reestablishing contact with the spacecraft. The steps could take up to 2wk. SeaSat had not had full benefit of its solar panels because they had received full sun during only half the spacecraft’s orbits. In December, when the spacecraft would be in full sun during 100% of its earth orbits, its batteries might be charged enough to overcome a problem caused by insufficient electrical power. (NASA Release 78-159; JPL Universe, Oct 13/78, 1)
NASA announced it had signed a $77 million contract with General Electric Space Division to build Landsat-D, most advanced earth-resources-monitoring satellite system to date, scheduled for launch in 1981 to view the earth from more than 640km (400mi) altitude. In addition to a multispectral scanner (MSS) like that on the first three Land-sats, Landsat-D would carry a thematic mapper (TM) with spatial resolution three times as detailed as that of MSS. The new sensor could distinguish area features as small as 0.2-acre instantaneous field-of-view (IFOV) compared to the 1.2-acre IFOV resolution of present systems. The cost included a $5 million fee with possible additional earnings up to $4.3 million, depending on system performance once the satellite was in orbit. The contract included a backup spacecraft, data management system, operations control center at GSFC, transportable ground station, and a Landsat assessment system to demonstrate advantages of the TM over the MSS. Landsat data had served primarily for monitoring earth resources and managing food, fiber, and water resources; mineral and petroleum explorations; and landcover and land-use mapping. The U.S. Depts. of Agriculture, Commerce, Interior, and State, and a number of states and foreign governments would participate in the Landsat-D mission. (NASA Release 78-188).
NASA announced that an experimental oceanographic satellite had achieved an unexpected technological breakthrough: for the first time, earth-contour measurements by a satellite microwave sensor had exhibited an accuracy comparable to that of conventional" ground and aerial surveys used for small-scale mapping. An experiment sponsored by WFC had produced terrain contouring from Geos 3 (geodynamics experimental ocean satellite) radar-altimeter measurements at a height of 840km (520mi) above earth. As Geos 3 circled the globe at 7km/sec (4mps), the radar altimeter pointed vertically down and measured the distance between the satellite and the earth’s surface with a precision of 50cm (20in). Nineteen Geos-3 passes over the San Joaquin valley of southern Calif, had recorded terrain elevations for 40 000km2(15 500mi2), and comparison of the satellite-derived contours with U.S. Geological Survey small-scale topographic maps showed agreement within lm (3 ft). Since the altimeter had been designed as an ocean-sensing system, the acquisition of meaningful land data was unexpected. The ocean-optimized design of the altimeter and the nature of radar backscatter was expected to limit measurement of terrain variations to smooth or gently rolling topography such as a coastal plain, interior plain, or valley. The Geos 3 overland results showed that satellite-borne altimeters could measure terrain elevations for more rugged areas with accuracy sufficient to satisfy many small-scale mapping requirements, at a cost competitive with conventional methods. This technique would be particularly useful in remote areas of the world, such as arctic and desert regions where conventional surveying was difficult and expensive. (NASA Release 78-183)
NASA announced that, after nearly a mo of attempts to reestablish contact with SeaSat, its experimental oceanographic satellite, project officials had formally terminated the mission. JPL would process the data collected during the spacecraft’s 106-da lifetime; project officials expected the task to occupy more than 1.5yr. SeaSat’s synthetic-aperture radar had completed some 300 data-gathering passes, during which it collected about 60hr of data including images of sea ice, waves, coastal conditions, and various land forms. The spacecraft’s scat-terometer (measuring sea-surface wind speeds) and scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer (measuring sea-surface temperature and wind speed) had collected data for 99da. SeaSat’s altimeter and visual and infrared radiometer returned data for 70 and 52da, respectively. The instruments also completed a series of sea-surface fact-finding experiments. The SeaSat program had three objectives: to demonstrate techniques to monitor earth’s oceanographic phenomena and features from space on a global scale; to provide timely oceanographic data to scientists studying marine phenomena, and to users of the oceans as a resource (ocean shippers, fishermen, marine geologists, etc.); and to determine the key features of an operational full-time ocean-monitoring system. Analysis of SeaSat-collected data by teams of scientists, engineers, and user representatives indicated the first of the objectives would be largely met, as well as a high probability of accomplishing most of the other objectives. A failure review board [see Oct. 30] was working to determine the causes of the premature end of SeaSat operation. SeaSat had been launched June 26 from Vandenberg AFB; contact was lost Oct. 9 on its 1502nd earth orbit when a so-far-unexplained short circuit drained all power from the batteries. (NASA Release 78-178)
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'
MSFC announced that NASA had instituted a NASA End-to-End Data Systems (NEEDS) project to ease the enormous burden of storing data collected by its satellites and aircraft. NASA’s public archives had been growing by 100 000 000 000 bits of data per day; during the 1980s and beyond, spacecraft like Spacelab, earth-orbiting satellites, and planetary probes would produce a staggering quantity of data, creating a major problem of storage and availability to users. NEEDS would decrease processing time and storage space, reduce maintenance costs, and provide better user access. Four field centers would participate in the project, MSFC being responsible for developing a medium to replace magnetic tape and microfilm. Working with Harris Corp. of Melbourne, Fla., MSFC had developed the optical mass memory system, using a dry-process film that could store as much data as on magnetic tapes or microfilm in 100 times less space, and could make access 100 times faster. The goal of NEEDS would be a tenfold reduction in the present $300-million-per-year storage/maintenance cost, and a thousandfold increase in information return to users. (Marshall Star, Jan 18/78, 4)
Launches of USSR military space missions continued a marked decline, with total flights in 1978 23% fewer than in 1977, a possible Soviet effort to influence the atmosphere for a SALT II agreement, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Notable omissions from the Soviet military-spaceflight schedule were satellites related to antisatellite interceptor development and nuclear-powered ocean surveillance. These systems had come under intense public scrutiny and criticism in the past yr, as President Carter emphasized that they were major instruments of instability and needed to be banned. No antisatellite system launch had occurred for several months, since the Soviets had agreed to discuss a ban of such weapons and just before the convening of the first such meeting in May. The last Soviet ocean-surveillance satellite was Cosmos 954, which had reentered over Canada Jan. 24 trailing fragments of its nuclear reactor [see Jan. 28, Feb. 20]. At that point in 1978, the USSR had sent 50 military missions into space, a significant reduction from the 65 completed in the same time period in 1977. However, the USSR had not reduced photographic recon-naissance/surveillance activity; launch of the high-resolution observer Cosmos 1047 Nov. 15 was the 28th photographic recon/survey mission in 1978, launched at the same rate as in 1977. (D/SBD, Nov 17/78, 79)
RCA Americom Communications, Inc., announced it would launch its Satcom-3 domestic comsat in Dec. 1979, more than a yr earlier than planned, and would study procurement of a fourth comsat either based on current design or the first of a new generation of spacecraft, Aerospace Daily reported. Satcom-3 previously appeared on a Space Shuttle schedule for launch in mid-1981. Latest plans called for a Delta launch like Satcoms 1 and 2; the Shuttle reservation would be assigned to Satcom-4. RCA Americom said it was advancing the Satcom-3 launch because traffic on the first 2 satellites was nearing capacity particularly in cable television, now using 900 earth stations, with 1400 to 1500 expected by the end of 1979. Satcom-3 would have the same 24-transponder capacity as the first two satellites, but would carry spare transponders and additional stationkeeping fuel to exceed its planned 8-yr lifetime. The company had asked the FCC for permission to station Satcom-3 at synchronous altitude over the equator at 132°W to serve the 50 states, mainly for cable-TV relays. RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div., which had built the three Satcoms, estimated the cost of the third spacecraft and its launch at $40 million. (A/D, Nov 5/78, 150)
The Washington Post reported that, as a result of belated discovery that Soviet radar in Europe would interfere with two NASA satellites scheduled for launch in 1980 to communicate with orbiting spacecraft, NASA would have to spend $100 million to redesign the satellites’ electronic systems. NASA had awarded Western Union a $786 million contract to build six 50001b tracking and data-relay satellites (giant orbiting transmitters and receivers, each carrying two umbrellalike antennas weighing 501b apiece and unfurling in orbit to a diameter of 16.5ft) that would have replaced 60% of NASA ground-station antennas at an estimated saving of more than $100 million a yr. The 3-mo delay necessary for redesign was important because it would affect communications with the Space Shuttle; failure by the Pentagon and the CIA to warn NASA of the size and scope of Soviet communications interference in high-orbit regions had delayed discovery of the problem. NASA testimony before two Senate committees revealed that Soviet radars from the Baltic tp the Black Sea were emitting beams that converged high over the Atlantic and Pacific in the exact places NASA wanted to put the TDRS. Built to replace obsolete and expensive ground antennas at Ascension Island; Quito, Ecuador; Santiago, Chile; Guam; and Hawaii, the TDRS would improve communications by allowing ground controllers to talk to other satellites and Space Shuttle astronauts during more than 90% of each earth orbit. The electronic interference was said to have been unintentional. NASA “did not fully understand the environment and the effects it would have on the system,” said C. Curtis Johnson, satellite project manager at Goddard Space Flight Center. “Otherwise, we would have been more careful in the specifications of the system.” NASA had considered reducing the number of satellites on order from six to four to save $100 million, estimated cost of the redesign. (WPost, July 2/78, Al)
The Air Force had launched at 7:45pm the previous Thursday a secret payload aboard an Atlas-Agena rocket from Cape Canaveral, Today reported. The launch, not previously announced, resembled previous unannounced launches that had carried various spy satellites. The launch followed 3 consecutive unsuccessful military missions. In Feb., an experimental Trident fleet ballistic missile had failed after launch from a land pad at the Air Force station; in Mar., DOD officials had destroyed both a Titan III-C rocket carrying 2 Triple 7 defense communications satellites and a Poseidon fleet ballistic missile. {Today, April 7/78, 1A)
AvWk reported that the Navy’s Electronic Systems Command planned to issue a request for proposals (RFP) to establish and operate a follow-on system to the Navy/TRW fleet satellite communications (FltSatCom) system. The Navy would lease from the contractor capacity on the new system, designated Leasat, which could be either a hybrid (providing service to merchant shipping as well as to the Navy) or dedicated (serving only the Navy). The RFP would require 3 satellites positioned over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. The first satellite should be available Oct. 1, 1981; the second, Apr. 1, 1982; the third, Oct. 1, 1987. A satellite that failed would have to be replaced within 30 days. The contractor would also build and operate a telemetry, tracking, and control system with central headquarters for coordination at 4 Navy communications stations in Va., Hawaii, Calif., and Guam. (AvWk, Mar 6/78, 14)
NASA announced plans to launch NATO-IIIC, third and final comsat in a new series to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), on Nov. 15 from Kennedy Space Center. A U.S.—NATO agreement had specified launch on a Delta rocket, and NATO would reimburse NASA $8.9 million for the launch vehicle and services. A Delta had previously successfully launched Nato IIA and IIB in March 1970 and February 1971, respectively; Nato IIIA in April 1976; and Nato IIIB in January 1977. NATO-IIIC would provide in-orbit backup to Nato IIIA and IIIB in the NATO Integrated Communications System (NICS). At a geosynchronous orbital altitude of 35 900km (22 300mi), NATO-IIIC would orbit earth once every 24hr synchronized with earth’s 24-hr rotation period, keeping the satellite on station over the same spot above the equator. Once in its transfer orbit, the satellite would be controlled by U.S. Air Force Satellite Control Facility network on behalf of NATO., The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) served as satellite contracting agency for NICS. Ford Aeronautic and Communications Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., built NATO III. (NASA Release 78-171; MOR M-492-207-78-03 [prelaunch], Nov 15/78; Spaceport News, Nov 10/78, 1)	,
Congress had strongly supported legislation establishing a power satellite research and development and demonstration program scheduled to become a major issue among changes to President Carter’s FY79 solar energy proposals, Av Wk reported. Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.) had introduced a bill directing the Dept, of Energy and NASA to begin research and development on technical problems in implementing a solar power satellite. However, Dale Myers, undersecretary at DOE, who had described the joint solar energy projects contemplated by NASA and DOE at a House Science and Technology space science and application subcommittee hearing, said he questioned the need for such a bill. {Av Wk, Feb 27/78, 47)
NASA announced plans to launch the Canadian comsat Telesat-D (to be called Anik-B in orbit) from ETR on a Delta no earlier than Dec. 15, 1978. Telesat/Canada would reimburse NASA $19.2 million for launch support under a March 11, 1978, contract. Telesat-D would be the fourth domestic comsat launched by NASA for Telesat/Canada, which owned and operated the satellites. Telesat-D would replace Anik AI, launched in Nov. 1972 and positioned at 109°W over the equator south of California. With a 7-yr design life, Telesat-D would provide point-to-point voice, TV, and data communications traffic to Canada’s 10 provinces. In addition to 12 commercial channels in the 6 and 4GHz frequency bands, Telesat-D would offer 4 channels in the 12 and 14GHz frequencies; the en	be leased to Canada’s liepartment of Communications for 2yr with an option for a 2yr extension. CDC would devote these channels to social experiments such as telemedicine, tele-education, teleconferencing, and Eskimo broadcasting to demonstrate how satellites can reach remote locations with small ground stations (a use begun by the communications technology satellite Cts, a joint U.S.-Canadian experiment). These channels would also carry out purely technical assignments to gather data on signal propagation and on power generation and usage. NASA planned to launch Anik-Cl and -C2 spacecraft (Telesat-E and -F) on the Space Shuttle in 1981, to replace Anik A2 and A3 (Telesat B and Q launched in April 1973 and May 1975, respectively. (NASA Release 78-184; MOR M-492-201-78-04 [prelaunch], Dec. 12/78)
ESA announced its Ots 2 satellite had successfully completed its first transmission tests of television programs beyond continental Europe. During a conference on “The Role of Space Technology for Development” in Cairo Oct. 7-12, ESA had demonstrated TV-signal transmission from the British Post Office’s Goonhilly Downs station via Ots 2 to a transportable receiving station in Cairo. From Oct. 7 to 11, nearly 8hr of BBC-1 TV programs were transmitted directly from Britain to Egypt at a rate of about 1.5hr per day. Ferranti Microwave Division of Ferranti Electronics Ltd., in association with the U.K. Dept, of Industry, had developed the transportable station. After 5mo of preliminary tests, the Ots 2 communications-test program had reached an operational level that would last at least 3yr, to prepare for subsequent exploitation of the operational European Communications Satellites (ECS) that would begin service in 1981. Tests had included telephone as well as TV routing and propagation experiments and new applications using much simpler terminals. Some 50 institutes, universities, and telecommunications entities would participate in the second category of tests, using more than 30 small terminals with 3m-diameter antennas. (ESA Release Oct 16/78)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, and Professor S. Dhawan, secretary of the department of space and chairman of the Space Commission, Government of India, had signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) July 18 for launch in 1981 from the Space Shuttle of India’s first national satellite, INSAT-1. INSAT-1, a multipurpose spacecraft in geostationary orbit, would provide India with domestic public telecommunications and direct TV broadcasting and meteorology services. This was the first MOU NASA had signed with a foreign government setting forth terms and conditions under which NASA would furnish Space Transportation System launch services on a reimbursable basis. (NASA Release 78-109)
The USAF announced that its ESD Spacetrack System Office had awarded Bunker Ramo Corp. of Westlake Village, Calif., a $927 000 contract for equipment to record and store data for military and authorized scientific use on all man-made objects orbiting the earth. The system would record information received at the Space Computational Center in NORAD’s Cheyenne Mountain Complex, Colo., on positions of the thousands of satellites and other man-made objects in space, and would store the data for 3yr in the computer’s active file. It would also microfilm historical data for permanent storage. The new system had become necessary because the automatic data-processing equipment formerly used by the Aerospace Defense Command lacked permanent-storage capability and was very expensive to maintain. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 6) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
FBIS reported the USSR had launched a communications satellite, Horizont, Dec. 19 under a program “for further improvement and development of communications systems and television transmissions.” Satellite apogee was 48 365km; perigee, 2581km; period, 23hr 40min; inclination, 11.3°. Horizont carried improved multiplex-relay apparatus for transmitting telephone and telegraphic radio communications and TV programs, including those from the 22nd summer Olympic games in Moscow. It had a three-axis system for precision orientation, a power-supply system with independent guidance and alignment of the solar batteries with the sun, a thermo-regulation system, a telemetry system for transmitting data on onboard systems, a radio system for precision measurement of the orbit’s parameters and control of the satellite, and an orbit-correcting system. All satellite systems were functioning normally. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 20/78)
Tass announced that the USSR had launched a Molniya 3 comsat carrying relay apparatus to operate in the centimeter waveband, into an orbit with 40 631km apogee in the northern hemisphere and 661km perigee in the southern hemisphere, period of 12hr 16min, and 62.8° inclination. The satellite would ensure operation of a long-distance telephone, telegraph, and radio-communications system, and program relay from USSR central television to points in the Orbita network. (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 24/78)
Spaceport News reported a spacecraft problem had delayed launch of FltSatCom-A, first of a new highly versatile 3-satellite military communications system in which each satellite in geosynchronous orbit would provide 23 operating channels. A FltSatCom (fleet satellite communications) system would provide reliable secure communications between naval units anywhere except in extreme polar regions, and would become part of the Air Force Satellite Communications System (AFSat-Com) linking the national command authority with Strategic Air Command (SAC) and other USAF units. DOD had reserved one wideband 500KHz channel on FltSatCom-A. (Spaceport News, Jan 20/78,1)
GSFC announced it would welcome a first group of guest astronomers Apr. 3 to its international ultraviolet explorer (IUE) satellite observatory, the first designed so that astronomers with little knowledge of spacecraft design and orbital operations could walk in, conduct observations, and receive data within 24hr. Astronomers would use NASA’s IUE, placed in a modified synchronous earth orbit Jan. 26, to examine a wide range of celestial objects in the spectral ultraviolet region between 1150 and 3200A that included emissions of many common elements such as hydrogen, helium, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. Studies would range from the solar system to distant quasars, pulsars, and black holes. NASA had selected nearly 200 astronomers from 17 nations (including the USSR) to conduct observations from GSFC’s IUE installation and ESA’s facility near Madrid, Spain. First guest astronomers would be Dr. Jeffrey Linsky, Univ. of Colo, specialist in cool stars, and Dr. Sara Head of GSFC, a specialist in hot stars. They would be succeeded by groups of 3 or 4 on a 7-day-a-wk basis throughout the yr. After 45 scientists had completed data reduction, the information gathered would indicate which aspects of astronomy should be emphasized during the spacecraft’s remaining lifetime. (NASA Release 78-50)
Onboard equipment problems had delayed launch of Nimbus-G and TIROS-N from Vandenberg AFB, Av Wk reported. Tape recorder problems had caused cancellation of the Nimbus-G launch scheduled for Sept. 18; the new launch would not be before Oct. 2. Replacement of a malfunctioning processing unit had delayed the TIROS-N launch for 2wk. The problem appeared to be isolated and should not affect the unit’s design or the AF meteorological satellites then in orbit. Aerospace Daily reported that NASA had returned the three tape recorders in Nimbus-G to the builder, RCA Corp., for cleaning and removal of loose solder that could cause short circuits; five essentially identical tape recorders on TIROS-N also needed cleaning. Nimbus-G and TIROS-N represented first uses of the NASA tape recorder, developed over several years by RCA as standard equipment for a variety of spacecraft. The problem had apparently arisen in soldering connectors to the mother board (a printed circuit board into which other PCBs were plugged); upon inspecting a tape recorder that had failed during tests, NASA found that loose solder had shorted pins. While drawing up a cleaning requirement for units not yet delivered, NASA had dismantled three tape recorders and had found loose solder capable of causing shorts in all three. (AvWfc, Sept 18/78, 33; A/D, Sept 18/78, 73)
The USAF had sent a destruct signal Mar. 19 to a Titan rocket carrying a pair of military comsats, the W Post reported, aborting an $80-million mission 8min after liftoff from Cape Canaveral. Air Force officials said a range-safety officer had sent the destruct signal when the rocket suddenly began slowing down and falling back to earth. Debris from the 31 0001b space mission, rocket, and satellites had fallen into the ocean, although the exact location was unknown. (WPost, Mar 20/78, B-9)
Many significant technological advances of the past decade should be credited to NASA, said the Lewis News, quoting an article by Dr. Wo-jciech Rostafinski, an engineer in LeRC’s Fluid System Components Division and frequent NASA spokesperson on Voice of America broadcasts, in the Cleveland Plain Dealer. The article continued: “The magnitude and importance of NASA-derived technology benefits have already been reported. Broadly, payoffs from technology transfer are direct and indirect. One direct benefit is satellites that report on weather, pollution, and crops. . . . An example of indirect benefits—the so-called spinoffs—is the electronic circuit miniaturization, so widely adopted today by terrestrial computer and calculator designers. Countless other innovations could be given for both categories. “Now a question arises concerning the monetary return on the investment. In other words, why should we continue to spend large sums of money on ‘obviously’ abstract endeavors in space? . . . Let us check the figures. Since 1958, when NASA was created, in the span of a short (or long, depending on the ‘yardstick’ by which the time is measured) 20 years, NASA spent a total budget of $67.8 billion. This relatively lofty figure does not appear high at all when compared to other expenditures of the federal government. NASA appropriations have represented, on the average over the years, only 1.8% of the federal budget; in the last five years this has been down to 1%. Currently, NASA accounts for only 0.85% of the budget. Making a parallel with the budget of a family whose income is $20 000 a year, last year’s NASA appropriation represents $170 per year set aside as investment. Not a large figure; a small one, actually, when compared to today’s car prices, utility bills, or to the cost of eduction. ... “In 1971, Midwest Research Institute, studying the impact of technological activity, concluded that the $25 billion NASA spent in its first ten years had returned $52 billion through 1970 and by 1987 will have returned $181 billion. Five years later, Chase Econometrics also studied the economic impact of NASA R&D and concluded that an annual increase in NASA spending of $1 billion for the 1975-1984 decade would increase the GNP $23 billion by 1984; $23 billion for $10 billion during ten years .... “Summing up, it becomes obvious and clear that it is much cheaper and wiser to seek technological progress through rational research, federally organized and performed by government and industry. The return on such investment is sound. The relatively modest sums invested in the national aerospace programs entrusted to NASA are well spent.” (Lewis News, Mar 17/78, 1)
INTELSAT announced it would use both the Space Shuttle and ESA’s Ariane launch vehicle to orbit later spacecraft in the Intelsat V series. INTELSAT’s board of governors had ordered two Shuttle launches from NASA and one Ariane launch from ESA. Worth a minimum of $82 million, the orders would cover the orbiting of the 5th, 6th, and 7th satellites in the Intelsat V series during 1981-82. The Shuttle would give INTELSAT its first experience with reusable launch vehicles; Ariane would be INTELSAT’s first use of a non-U.S. launch vehicle. INTELSAT said its decision was difficult because neither vehicle had been proven in operation. The organizations had scheduled its earlier Intelsat V satellites, like the then-current Intelsat IV and IV-A satellites, for launch on NASA’s Atlas Centaur. The agreement had provided for an Atlas Centaur backup for the series, should the first Shuttle not be available. (INTELSAT Release 78-34-1)
NASA announced that data returned by the American-British-European international ultraviolet explorer (IUE) satellite had suggested the existence of a massive black hole at the center of globular clusters in earth’s galaxy. A group of scientists headed by Dr. Herbert Gursky and Dr. Andrea Dupree, both of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge, Mass., had examined six clusters, three of them x-ray sources. NASA, in cooperation with ESA and the British Science Research Council, had launched IUE in Jan. 1978 into a modified near-equatorial synchronous orbit to study a wide range of celestial objects in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Dr. Gursky said the onboard UV instruments had delivered unexpected information when they penetrated the background denseness of the clusters, which were like miniature galaxies 15 000 light-yr away, to observe the cluster core. What they saw, according to Gursky, was probably radiation from a group of 10 to 20 bright-blue stars orbiting the core: “These stars may well be orbiting a massive black hole the size or mass of one thousand solar systems,” he said. However, existence of a black hole was not certain, as rotation of the stars in relation to the center of the million-star cluster had to be studied first. If the stars were indeed orbiting a massive black hole, Gursky believed they were right on the edge or, if not, might be providing their own gravitational equilibrium. What surprised the observation team, Gursky said, was the ability of the short-wavelength instrumentation to cut clearly through the million-star cluster. “For the first time we are seeing in a clean way the center or core of those globular clusters, and we were surprised. You can see the clusters in visible light, there are lots of red giant stars there, which mask what is going on in the center. Now we have a tool, the IUE’s shortwave ultraviolet, capable of going for the first time right to the core through the whole cluster,” said Gursky. Although the team would continue to observe the six globular clusters, Gursky doubted their findings could be definite until NASA put the space telescope in orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1983. That telescope, using much more powerful instrumentation including short-wavelength ultraviolet, could study the blue stars in more detail. (NASA Release 78-122)
GSFC reported it had asked industry to build a computer that could process satellite images 10 to 100 times faster than present machines. The new computer would be based on 6yr of research in “massive parallelism,” consisting of 16 384 processors working together, each processor a simple computer, with a single chip of silicon probably carrying 2 processors. Previous machines had not gone beyond a web of 64 simple computers. The new system would cross-correlate landmark images from earth-watching satellites 100 times faster than present MSFC where it would undergo vibration testing from May to November 1978. (NASA photo 78-H-222) ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY	73 machines, making multispectral classifications (such as distinguishing wheatland from cornfields) and geometric corrections for comparison of pictures taken from different vantage points in one-tenth of the time previously necessary. (Goddard News, Mar 78, 3) ■
INTELSAT announced that it, together with the Federal Republic of Germany and Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB), had funded development of a new high-efficiency solar-power collector. MBB had built the lightweight deployable solar array for use in satellites of the 1980s, with AEG Telefunken as subcontractor for solar cells on the array surface. ComSatCorp laboratories in Clarksburg, Md., had tested the array. Its weight, considerably less than that of current counterparts, would mean lower launch costs, and its higher power output would handle more onboard satellite electronics, enlarging its communications eapacity. At the beginning of a 7yr mission, the new solar array would provide up to 38watts of power per kg of weight, a 300% increase over current models. Incorporating thin solar cells in the design might increase output to 50watts of power per kg of weight. (INTELSAT Release 78-22-1)
Aeritalia and the Italian ministry of research and technology had discussed a new Italian telecommunications-satellite program, Av Wk reported. Most of Italy’s annual space budget had been devoted to ESA programs, but Italian government and industry had continued a limited number of strictly domestic projects, including the Sirio experimental comsat launched from KSC and the Alfa 2-stage booster that had qualified in three successful test firings from Italy’s Saito di Quirra experimental test range. Current discussions of future satellite programs could lead to detailed telecommunications project studies this year, and development work beginning in 1979. A major space undertaking for Aeritalia was the ESA Spacelab; Aeritalia had been responsible for the structure of the pressurized Spacelab module. (AvWk, Feb 13/78, 41)
FBIS reported that the People’s Republic of China had launched on Jan. 26 an earth satellite that had functioned normally in orbit and returned to earth “after fulfilling tasks of scientific experimentation.” The report added that the achievement had resulted from the guidance of the wise leader Chairman Hua Kuo-feng. (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 30/78)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. and USSR had opened a more reliable “hotline” using satellites, instead of telephone wires and undersea cables, to link the White House and the Kremlin. The direct line had been available since 1963 for use in an international emergency. The direct link would use the synchronous-communications satellite Intelsat and the Soviet Molniya system of satellites. The previous hotline had been subject to unexpected interruptions, a potentially grave problem in event of tension between the two governments; it had been cut at least three times, once when a Finnish farmer cut a buried cable while cultivating land. (WPost, Jan 17/78, A-10)
NASA announced that the governors of Washington, Idaho, and Oregon had unanimously agreed to participate in a 3yr program demonstrating the use of NASA-supplied satellite data for natural-resources management in their states. Governors Dixy Lee Ray, John Evans, and Robert Straub, together with federal representative Pat Vaughan, constituted the Pacific Northwest Regional Commission. They voted $480 000 from commission funds to support first-yr activities beginning in Apr. 1979. The 3-yr plan would be a follow-up of the Land Resource Inventory Demonstration Project launched by the commission in 1975 during which more than 45 state and local agencies in the 3 states had used satellite data for surveys and inventories of various landcover types. Continuing the program would provide the state agencies doing planning and natural-resource management with an operational capability of extracting and using information from NASA’s Landsat satellite system, and would aid them in using the more sophisticated data from Landsat-C after its launch. The Pacific Northwest program would join others across the U.S. sponsored by NASA’s Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications demonstrating the use of space technology by state and local governments, businesses, and universities. (ARC Astrogram, Mar 23/78, 2)
Spaceport News reported astronomers studying data obtained by the international ultraviolet explorer IUE satellite might have discovered a third black hole believed to be at the center of a globular cluster (a miniature galaxy shaped like a globe) some 15 000 light-yrs away. The IUE large ultraviolet telescope had penetrated the background light coming from a globular cluster and reached its core, where researchers found radiation from a group of 10 to 20 bright blue stars, apparently orbiting a black hole possibly small in size but with a mass equal to 1000 stars like the sun. Researchers would study movements and interrelationships of the stars to define the rotation about the center of the million-star cluster. (Spaceport News, Oct 13/78, 7)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Bethpage, N.Y., plant of Grumman Aerospace Corp. had almost completed fabrication of an automatic device for forming continuous structural beams in space. MSFC had developed the “beam builder” to demonstrate techniques for fabricating large structures in space; the device would form triangular beams from flat rolls of very light materials, a complete section of the beam being easily supported with one hand. Housed in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle in earth orbit, the machine would form continuous miles-Iong beams for building large structures such as satellite power systems and service platforms. (Marshall Star, Apr 12/78, 1)
NASA announced it would celebrate Jan. 31 the 20th anniversary of the first U.S. artificial earth satellite, Explorer 1, which had ushered the western world into the space age. Principal scientific achievement had been discovery of the Van Allen radiation belts surrounding the earth. Weighing 13.9kg (30.81b), measuring 15.2cm (6in) in diameter and 203.2cm (80in) long, and shaped like a stovepipe, Explorer 1 had been the product of two other organizations now elements of NASA: the development group of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA) at Huntsville, Ala., and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of CalTech at Pasadena, Calif. In 1960 ABMA had become the nucleus of MSFC; JPL had gone under contract to NASA in Dec. 1958. ABMA had provided the modified Redstone booster and the basic satellite design, and JPL had furnished the solid-propellant upper stages of the carrier vehicle and had packaged and tested the payload. Explorer Vs launch from Cape Canaveral, Fla., on a Jupiter C vehicle at 10:48pm EST, Jan. 31, 1958, had come 45 days after DOD had given the Army the go-ahead to prepare a backup to the existing U.S. Navy Vanguard project. Explorer 1 had continued to transmit information on the space environment until May 23, 1958, when its batteries were exhausted; it had reentered March 31, 1970. Dr. James Van Allen had designed the scientific package that discovered the radiation belts named for him. The Explorer 1 launch had been part of U.S. participation in the International Geophysical Year. (NASA Release 78-13; MSFC Release 78-9; JPL Release Jan 27/78; NRC News Report, Feb. 78, 1; Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 2; Jan 20/78, 3; JPL Universe, Jan 20/78, 1; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 2)
ESA reported on the mechanical-qualification tests of the CAT/ Apple/Meteosat-2 composite (a payload scheduled under the APEX program for the third test flight of Ariane in May 1980) taking place Dec. 12-22 in the CNES facilities at Toulouse. The tests were to check behavior of the payload structure and the subsystems under conditions arising during launch; results would be compared with mathematical models. Undergoing tests would be a dynamic mockup subjected by means of an electroacoustic exciter to longitudinal and transverse vibrations like those occurring in flight. The payload being tested had three satellites mounted one above the other: the Ariane technological capsule (CAT), carried on all Ariane test flights; Apple, a technological satellite of the Indian Space Research Organization, which would carry a communications experiment; and ESA’s meteorological satellite Meteosat-2 which would continue the Meteosat mission into 1980. Apple and Meteosat-2 would be the first satellites placed in geostationary orbit by a European launcher. These tests were the first conducted in Europe on such a heavy payload, 6.5m high and weighing 1574kg. (ESA Release Dec 20/78)
Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
NASA’s Skylab workshop launched in May 1973 might descend to 150 nautical miles (173 statute miles, 278km) altitude and begin reentry into earth’s atmosphere as early as late summer of 1979, JSC Roundup reported, citing orbit data from the North American Air Defense Command’s satellite trackers, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and the Swiss federal observatory. NASA would try two ways of postponing Skylab reentry: first, to reactivate the workshop’s thruster attitude-control system in the spring of 1978 and put it into a very slow tumble, decreasing atmospheric drag and perhaps adding several months to its orbital lifetime; second, to use a teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) launched on an early Space Shuttle mission (about Oct. 1979) and flown by remote control to dock with Skylab. Once docked, the TRS propulsion system could either raise Skylab’s orbit or control its reentry. Although Skylab would break up and burn during descent, some debris would probably survive reentry, and probably would land in an ocean, because 80% of the Skylab orbit had been over water (between 50°N and 50°S). Skylab, largest payload in earth orbit at 85 tons, and about 96ft in length, had been manned during 3 missions by 3 different astronaut crews. When the last crew had left Skylab, NASA estimated the workshop would remain in orbit until 1983; however, its altitude had dropped more rapidly than expected because of increased atmospheric drag caused by sunspot activity. (JSC Roundup, Feb 17/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, Feb 10/78, 2; Marshall Star, Feb 8/78, 4; W Post, Feb 2/78, A-2; C Trib, Feb 6/78, Sec. 1; Nature, Feb 9/78, 499)
LeRC reported that the communications technology satellite Cts, world’s most powerful comsat, had made possible quick diagnosis of burn and multiple-injury victims of a simulated catastrophe at the Baltimore/Washington International Airport. The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services had conducted a disaster exercise called Emergency Management of an Airport Catastrophe as part of a 2-day seminar for physicians, interns, residents, nurses, and other health care professionals. The “disaster” (a simulated collision between a commercial airliner and a ground aviation fuel tanker) had tested airport and statewide emergency medical plans to aid the “injured,” including about 180 crash victims. The scenario at the site included a breakdown in local communications, and an overload of local emergency medical facilities. A joint program between the U.S. and Canada, Cts operated on a new frequency at power levels' 10 to 20 times higher than those of other satellites; the higher broadcast power had allowed use of much smaller and far less expensive ground-receiving equipment. (Lewis News, May 26/78, 2)
NASA announced that the Delta vehicle scheduled to launch the Japanese broadcasting satellite for experimental purposes (BSE) from KSC Apr. 7 had been qualified for flight, following an investigation and tests resulting from detection of a leak in the first stage of the Delta used in the successful launch of NASA’s Landsat 3 from Vandenberg AFB Mar. 5. The pogo accumulator that suppressed pogo-stick-like vibration in the fuel system during flight had been the most probable cause of the leak. NASA had installed a new pogo accumulator, previously subjected to screening and test, in the Delta for BSE launch. (NASA Release 78-55)
NOAA announced it had developed a technique that would permit national weather centers around the world to monitor rainfall over agricultural areas, detect potential flash-flood situations, and predict rainfall from hurricanes while they were still at sea. Once the technique had been perfected, automated, and put into operation, scientists could use earth-orbiting satellites to estimate rainfall from convective (vertically-developed) clouds and to monitor the movement and distribution of precipitation over the planet’s entire surface. Dr. William Woodley and Cecilia Griffith of the Commerce Department’s National Hurricane and Experimental Meteorology Laboratory had adapted the experimental method from a similar system of estimating rainfall from convective, weather systems in the tropics, applied successfully during cloud-seeding experiments in southern Fla. The imagery had revealed a difference between young rain-producing clouds and dying rainless systems, both of which had appeared in bright shades on satellite images. NOAA’s National Weather Service had already made quasi-operational use of a similar method, applied by flood forecasters in predicting flood potential of approaching hurricanes and large thunderstorms. Woodley and Griffith had begun to use the technique in a real-time warning mode to detect potential flash flood situations. (NOAA Release 78-94)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that, pending arrival of the age of the Space Shuttle, the USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAM-SO) was modifying a Titan III 34D booster to ensure prime and backup launch capabilities during Space Shuttle transition. The 34D was a modified Titan HID that the USAF had put into operation in 1971; SAMSO had recommended it in 1975 to the Defense Science Board studying how DOD could manage an orderly transition from expendable to reusable launch vehicles. Instead of a variety of boosters, the 34D would use a common Titan III core for east- and west-coast launches, with the option of dedicating a 34D launch vehicle to either coast as late’ as 6mo before launch. The 34D also was compatible with the new inertial upper-stage (IUS) vehicle, another SAMSO project in full-scale development by Boeing Aerospace Co. During the Space Shuttle backup era beginning in 1980, the 34D/IUS combination would be contingency booster for top-priority defense payloads. Plans called for development of seven 34D boosters to be used first for launching two defense satellite communications system (DSCS) spacecraft in July 1980 from Cape Canaveral. Four of the seven vehicles would serve east coast launches using the IUS, and three would serve polar launches from Vandenberg AFB. Differences between the 34D and Titan HID included solid-fuel rocket motors lengthened 5 ft each to align with new common-core attach points and payload fairing modified to extend from 40 to 55ft. The new fairing would make the 34D payload environment nearly identical to that of the Shuttle orbiter cargo bay, a step toward upper-stage commonality. The 34D program was in final design stage under contracts with Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and United Technologies Corp. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 78, 9)
NASA announced it had given David Johnson, director of DOC’s National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS), the 1978 William T. Pecora award for his work in applying satellite remote sensing to monitoring weather and the environment. NASA and DOI had presented the award annually since 1974 for outstanding contributions by individuals and organizations to remote sensing. The 1978 award citation, presented to Johnson Oct. 11 in Sioux Falls, S.D., as part of the fourth annual Pecora memorial symposium on remote sensing, said that Johnson “has devoted a major portion of his scientific and managerial life to the development and implementation of remote sensing systems designed to observe weather patterns, impacts of weather and man on our environment, the climatological trends of the earth, and in the process eliminated or alleviated loss of property and life as a result of natural disasters.” Dr. Pecora, who died in 1972, had been undersecretary of the Interior and a motivating force in NASA’s Landsat earth-resources survey satellite program and in DOI’s EROS (earth resources observation systems) program. (NASA Release 78-155)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch in a briefing announced that NASA’s FY79 budget would propose an 8% increase, providing “buying power” at about the 1978 level. The space science request had gone up about 27%, largely because of the Space Telescope and the Galileo (Jupiter-orbiter) project. Applications and aeronautics were each up about 16%. The proposed FY79 budget was $4,371 billion; the FY78 budget was $4,064 billion. The FY79 budget requested money for only four Space Shuttle orbiters; Frosch explained that the four orbiters would use two launch sites (KSC and Vandenberg AFB) and that NASA and the Air Force would phase out the existing stable of expendable boosters. Omitted was OV-101, the Enterprise, which would be used for approach and landing tests or for spare parts, or could be reconfigured in an emergency to spaceflight status. The major new start NASA had included in the budget was the “Out of Ecliptic” (OOE) or Solar-Polar, a cooperative venture with ESA to fly two satellites to look at the structure of the sun’s surface and at sunspots and poles. Other new starts NASA had requested were the HALO (halogen-occultation) experiments to study upper-atmosphere pollution, and the earth radiation-budget satellite system to study incoming and outgoing radiation. Key application continuations would be Landsat C and D, the Nimbus-G environmental satellite, Tiros-N next-generation weather satellite, and Seasat-A. Space Transportation Systems would receive $1 827 700 000; Space Science $513 200 000; Space and Terrestrial Applications $283 400 000; Aeronautics and Space Technology $375 400 000; Tracking and Data Acquisition $305 400 000. Manpower would remain at the FY78 level, with 45 positions shifted from MSFC to JSC, KSC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA budget briefing, Jan 21/78; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1; W Star, Jan 23/78, A-8; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 13; Jan 30/78, 28)
The Washington Post reported the Carter Administration had decided to allow the Peoples Republic of China to buy an American communications satellite launched by the U.S. The administration was waiting for the Chinese to reconfirm interest in the deal, the most sophisticated technology transfer so far between two countries. Several yr ago the Chinese had reserved a slot for a communications satellite with the U.N. agency monitoring the field. Discussions were still tentative, as the Chinese would have to negotiate with the few U.S. comsat manufacturers and would have to buy an undetermined number of ground stations. A satellite would cost $15 to $17 million; placing it in orbit would cost $13 to $23 million, depending on the rocket used. Regardless of any military implications, the satellite sale would probably annoy the USSR, which had repeatedly warned of danger in Washington’s “playing the China card” (cultivating closer Chinese ties while Peking-Moscow relations were strained). (WPost, Oct 13/78, C-14)
A fundamental reappraisal by Western European governments of the overall European space effort had resulted in a demand by the West German government for more efficiency and better return on its investments in space, Av Wk reported. On hold during the debate were production of an initial batch of Arianes (European heavy launchers) and development of a new heavy telecommunications bus, as well as adoption of a broad new telecommunications package that would include the heavy bus. Meanwhile, determined to get more for its money, West Germany had begun exploring possible national or limited international programs outside the framework of ESA. Industry sources said that West Germany, traditionally one of ESA’s biggest contributors, was unhappy mainly because of repeated new beginnings of experimental communications-satellite programs as technological objectives changed. The Germans had wanted Europe to move directly into an operational comsat project after the successful launch and initial operations of the Franco-German Symphonie satellites. However, instead of building on this initiative, Western Europe (primarily through ESA) had taken up other experimental satellites like OTS (orbital test satellite), Marots (maritime OTS), and the H-Sat (experimental heavy telecommunications/multipurpose bus). West Germany, therefore, had begun thinking of developing independently (or more probably bilaterally), a direct-broadcast satellite that would be operationally feasible at home and commercially attractive abroad. (AvWk, Mar 13/78, 71)
The NYT reported that the Soviet Union had apparently agreed to a U.S. proposal to begin talks on banning hunter-killer satellites, which the USSR had been developing for about a decade. A senior Western diplomat said the Kremlin had formally conveyed its willingness to negotiate but had not said when. Marshal Nikolai V. Ogarkov, chief of staff of USSR armed forces, had outlined the Soviet position when he met with 21 visiting U.S. congressmen in Moscow. The Carter Administration had revealed earlier that it had suggested a treaty after 3 successful USSR tests of a new satellite (known in military jargon as Asat) able to maneuver close to another satellite in orbit and explode. If perfected, such a weapon (which the U.S. did not have) could threaten satellites used to verify compliance with strategic arms agreements, to give early warning of missile attack, or for civilian and military communications links. The Pentagon was unhappy about the administration’s decision to negotiate because it had 2 U.S. hunter-killer satellites under development: one could be launched into an orbit similar to that of the satellite to be destroyed, and another more maneuverable model using infrared sensors could seek out targets over great distances. The administration apparently hoped Pentagon plans would induce the Soviets to begin negotiations in Apr. It was not clear whether a treaty would cover only hunter-killer satellites or would include ground-based antisatellite weapons such as powerful laser beams, which the Pentagon opposed banning. (NYT, April 1/78, 5)
NASA’s role in basic and applied research under its charter—the Space Act of 1958—had created a paradox, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch said in a speech to GSFC employees, the Goddard News reported. NASA had been in the business of producing change, but the really interesting changes had not been predictable from past experience. “The interesting things happen because somebody not only changes the idea of how to solve the problem but questions the basic problem,” Frosch said. “Thus the R&D problem faced by the applications part of our agency is that of trying to do work that not only satisfies the perceived mission questions, but will change the nature of the mission, or change the nature of the problem.” Current NASA assignments included defining its R&D posture, deciding the proper balance of basic and applied research, selecting what problems to solve, and attaining the proper balance between in-house and contractor effort. Frosch discussed the proper role of NASA in future operational systems. He saw no great difficulty in NASA’s taking on certain operational jobs with judicious interpretation of the Space Act. The question remained of NASA’s operating national systems in a given part of the U.S. government. NASA’s R&D effort in applications satellites was leading, Frosch said, “into an evolving global information system. But if . . . it is to become useful, then it will have to be an operating system. I think we are going to play two roles in such a situation: one of these is to do the R&D to improve such a system, and the other is to take the leadership role of making sure that the valuable research gets turned into an operational system which delivers data in a reasonable way.” Frosch concluded that, although NASA does not want to be the ultimate operator of such a system, it might have to do so in the early stages: that is, NASA would be an initial operator with the intent of transferring the system to another operator, either another government agency or a contractor. “Temptations posed by continuing large and everyday operations might lead us into difficulty in remaining a lively R&D organization.” (Goddard News, Apr 78, 1)
The U.S. reconnaissance-satellite program had apparently moved into a new phase emphasizing fewer satellites and longer orbital stay-time, Aerospace Daily reported, despite the fact that the USSR had an operational antisatellite program that might have influenced President Carter’s backing of a U.S. ASAT project. An Aerospace Daily study of worldwide satellite launches since the early 1960s indicated the U.S. had stopped using satellites for a close look at specific ground targets. These satellites, launched by the Titan 3B/Agena booster combination, had previously flown simultaneously with an area-surveillance class launched by Thor/Agena. The U.S. had apparently withdrawn its area-surveillance models from service in 1972 and substituted a type able to do both area and close-look surveillance—Lockheed’s so-called Big Bird—and dropped the original close-look type. It had retained Big Bird, with 14 launches to date, complemented by an even newer type that might have had the same dual mission but performed better. Only two of the latest models had been launched, one in December 1976 and one on June 14, 1978. This model could have been the subject of a controversy over alleged theft by a former CIA employee of an operating manual for a satellite code-named KH-11, which had an orbital life at least three times that of Big Bird, which had grown to an impressive 179da. The new model might have had a nominal lifetime of 540da; the first one launched was approaching 24mo in orbit. This extended orbital life meant that the USSR and other countries were under constant surveillance; however, as the U.S. had only one or two satellites operating at any one time, the vulnerability of its monitoring effort had probably increased. (A/D, Nov 9/78, 44)
GSFC reported that its astronomers believed they were about to confirm for the first time the presence of gold on a star, perhaps as much as 100 billion tons of it. That amount of gold would indicate the star contained one part per 100 000, comparable to earth’s one part per million. William Heacox and David Leckrone of GSFC’s Stellar and Cosmic Astronomy Branch had planned additional observations to confirm the first signs of gold on Kappa Cancrii, a blue-white star visible to the naked eye in the constellation Cancer. The astronomers had found the gold traces on the star while using the IUE satellite to look at chemically peculiar stars rich in exotic elements. (Goddard News, July 19/78, 2)
MSFC reported that a new 0.8km (0.5mi) antenna range had operated satisfactorily in testing Space Shuttle antennas for range safety. The new range had a 27.4m (90ft) transmit tower and a 22.8m (70ft) model test tower. Antenna tests had begun in May on a 1/15-scale model of the Space Shuttle orbiter, external tank, and two solid-fuel rocket boosters installed in the tower. Engineers had measured radiation patterns of the six range-safety antennas (two on the ET and two on each of the 2 SRBs) to ensure that a signal from the range-safety officer would reach the vehicle at any altitude. The range-safety antenna system was interconnected to immediately relay to the ET and both SRBs a destruct signal received on any one of the six antennas. Future Shuttle tests possibly requiring antenna-pattern measurements included the teleoperator retrieval system, 25kw power module, large space structures, and satellite power systems. (Marshall Star, June 28/78, 1)
NASA announced it had selected four American scientists as payload specialists for the second Spacelab mission scheduled for 1981. Those named were Dr. Loren Acton of Palo Alto, Calif., research scientist at Lockheed’s Palo Alto research laboratory; Dr. John-David Bartoe of Reston, Va., and Dr. Dianne Prinz of Alexandria, Va., both research physicists at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory; and Dr. George Simon of Alamagordo, N.M., chief of the solar-research branch at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory. Two of these scientists would be selected to fly on the orbiting space laboratory to operate the scientific experiments; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and assist the two in orbit. The Spacelab investigators’ working group (IWG), composed of Spacelab 2 principal investigators having experiments on the mission, had selected the payload specialists, each of whom was a coinvestigator on one Of the Spacelab 2 experiments. Scientific investigations on Spacelab 2 would be mainly in astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar-physics research, with others in plasma physics, botany, medicine, and space technology. Scientific instruments on the mission would be “pallet only,” exposed to space in the orbiter’s cargo bay. Payload specialists would operate their experiment equipment from the orbiter’s crew cabin, working in shifts to run the experiments 24hr a day. The mission, scheduled for launch from KSC in 1981, would orbit at an altitude of about 450km (250mi) for 9da. MSFC had been responsible for payload specialist training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission. (NASA Release 78-120; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1) August 4\ MSFC announced it had awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., a $2.7 million contract to develop and deliver a flight experiment solar-array wing by May 1980 for a Shuttle orbital-flight test in November 1980. A significant step toward producing large amounts of power in space, the experiment would verify structural and dynamic characteristics of the solar-array wing, its electrical performance, and the readiness of solar-array technology for planetary- and earth-orbit Space Shuttle payload applications. The solar-array wing, 32m (105ft) long and 4m (13.5ft) wide, folded and stored in the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay during launch, would be extended to its full length and retracted several times during the test. When its solar-cell surface was fully extended, the array’s 82 panels would convert solar energy to produce 12.5kw of power. Only three of the panels would be active in the experiment flight. The experimental solar-array wing would demonstrate that use of this technology to augment power for Shuttle and Spacelab could extend mission duration and lead to a solar-electric propulsion stage. Solar-array technology could have Shuttle-payload applications such as space-base construction, satellite power systems, and power modules. NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology had directed the solar-array program as part of a larger effort on solar-electric propulsion for long-term missions in the mid-1980s. (NASA Release 78-123; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1; DSFC X-Press, Aug 11/78, 4; A/D, Aug 4/78, 151; AvWk, Aug 14/78, 15)
NASA reported that the Netherlands astronomical satellite ANS had been a success, based on comparison of mission results and prelaunch objectives. ANS, an Explorer-class x-ray and ultraviolet mission, was a cooperative program of the U.S. and the Netherlands, the U.S. providing a 2-part medium-energy x-ray instrument and the Scout, launch vehicle, and the Netherlands providing the spacecraft, a 2-part soft x-ray instrument, and a small ultraviolet telescope with photometers. During its 20mo lifetime, ANS had measured positions, spectra, and time variations of galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources in the energy range 2 to 15keV; defined upper limits of silicon-line emissions around 2keV; and transmitted more than 18 000 observations of about 4000 objects in the UV range 1500 to 3300A, in addition to other unexpected discoveries. Although an unplanned elliptical orbit had drastically limited the x-ray observations, particularly in the pointed mode, and had substantially increased the spacecraft’s exposure to radiation, the data it had returned were of a consistently high quality, except for partial failure of half the soft x-ray instrument lOmo after launch. ANS had reentered the atmosphere June 14, 1977. (NASA MOR S-875-74-01 [postlaunch] July 18/76)
NASA reported it had launched Isee 3 from ETR on a Delta rocket at 11:12am EDT Aug. 12, 1978. Eleven days into the mission, the spacecraft had traveled approximately 900 000km in a transfer trajectory out from earth to a halo orbit about the sun-earth libration point. All scientific instruments had been activated and were operational; all spacecraft appendages had been deployed except the + / - Z-axis antennas, which had partially deployed. The international sun-earth explorers (ISEE) project, a NASA/ESA joint contribution to the International Magnetospheric Study (IMS), consisted of two missions using three spacecraft to study solar-terrestrial relationships, NASA providing ISEE-A and -C and ESA providing ISEE-B. NASA had launched ISEE-A and -B (Isee 1 and 2) on Oct. 22, 1977, on a single Delta vehicle into the same highly elliptical earth orbit, where they were both operating. Isee 3, just launched toward a heliocentric orbit near the sun-earth libration point, had carried a scientific payload of 16 detector systems and associated electronics provided by 12 principal U.S. and European investigators to measure the solar wind and its fluctuations in detail. Whereas ISEE-A, -B, and -C were capable of contributing individually to scientific knowledge, the greatest return would result from acquiring data from all three spacecraft: ISEE-C in its heliocentric orbit would measure the sun’s input function unperturbed by the earth’s influence, while ISEE-A and -B were measuring the effect of this input on the region surrounding the earth. At the time the ISEE-C entered its halo orbit in November 1978, it would become the world’s first libration-point satellite. (MOR S-862-78-03 [postlaunch] Aug 24/78, [prelaunch] July 31/78; Marshall Star, Aug 30/78, 2; Spaceport News, Aug 18/78, 1; ESA release Aug 10/78; Nature, Aug 17/78, 630; D/SD, Aug 17/78, 630; Aug 14/78, 199)
GSFC reported that scientists using astronomy satellite Sas 3 had pinpointed just beyond earth’s galaxy the nearest of some 600 quasars found in the universe so far. The object, first discovered a yr ago, had never been identified as a quasar; besides being the nearest, the new quasar (named 0241) had been the third in recent mo found to radiate x-rays. The quasar had been 800 million light-yr away, obscured by thick dust in the galaxy and overlooked previously. Scientists hoped the nearby quasar might explain the mysteries of quasars’ origin, either as eruptions in the centers of galaxies or as long-dead objects associated with the beginning of the universe, whose light was only now reaching the earth. (Goddard News, Aug 16/78, 4)
In a report on Soviet space activities, Defense/Space Business Daily said Progress 2 had crashed into the Pacific Aug. 4, 2da after it had undocked from the Salyut station where it had been for 25da. This Progress resupply spacecraft (a modified Soyuz) had not been designed as a recoverable reentry and descent vehicle. The Soviets had orbited Cosmos 1028, believed to be another in a series of long-duration high-resolution reconnaissance/surveillance satellites; orbit was 182/272km, 67.1° inclination, 88.7min period. Another in the series, Cosmos 905, launched Apr. 26, 1977, had remained in orbit 30da and was recovered. Others in the series had been Cosmos 758, in orbit for 20da after launch Sept. 5, 1975; Cosmos 805, in orbit for 20da after launch Feb. 20, 1976; and Cosmos 844, in orbit 39da after launch July 22, 1976. (D/SD, Aug 8/78, 171)
MSFC announced it had awarded to Mass. Inst, of Technology a $65 000 contract to study the economic and environmental advantages of large space-system material delivery and construction from extraterrestrial sources. The 7-mo study, assuming previous mining and preprocessing of the materials on the lunar surface, would consider final space processing to produce commercial-grade materials for manufacturing, and would explore manufacturing processes required to produce large space-system components. Past studies had postulated economic and environmental advantages to the use of lunar materials for large space systems because such structures would require tremendous quantities of materials. One satellite power-system structure, for example, could occupy a 3miJ area in space, and a large number of systems would be required to provide power to U.S. cities and towns. Materials mined and preprocessed on the moon and refined and manufactured in space would reduce the need to ferry large quantities of material from earth into space, avoiding the transportation costs and and potential environmental impact of heavy-lift launch vehicles passing through earth’s atmosphere. (Marshall Star, Aug 16/78, 2)
Air Force Magazine, in an article on Goddard Space Flight Center, called it the jack-of-all-trades among NASA’s space centers. It was NASA’s communications hub, with a system of landlines, undersea cables, and satellites reaching around the world and connecting the 21 sites of the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) that had served all NASA’s spaceflight activities. GSFC also had one of the world’s largest assemblies of scientists, who theorized either scientific or applications satellite missions and made investigations into disciplines such as astronomy, planetary atmosphere, solar activity, and near-earth physics. About a third of scientific experiments on U.S. spacecraft were conceived, designed, and/or built by Goddard scientists. The Goddard-developed earth-resources survey programs used orbiting Landsats capable of scanning the planet (except for the polar regions) every 9da. The photographs they provided had allowed detailed study of the earth faster, cheaper, and more accurately than aerial photography. Its impact on agriculture worldwide could be enormous; Landsat would make possible, for example, an inventory in Calif.’s Imperial Valley of more than 25 separate crops in nearly 9000 fields scattered over 458 000 acres. Landsat data would identify specific crops and indicate their condition, permitting very accurate agricultural production forecasts. NASA planned to launch in the early 1980s a pair of Goddard-developed satellites containing space-tracking equipment to replace all but sue of the present ground-based tracking stations, supplying data 85% of the time with greater efficiency and manpower savings. GSFC scientists were also making experimental and practical applications of laser technology. One program would eventually establish laser-satellite systems on each continent, to measure the most minute movements of the plates forming earth’s crust. (AF Mag, Aug/78, 68)
NASA and the state of Texas had signed a 3-yr agreement that the Texas natural-resources information system (TNRIS) would use Landsat computer-processed data in managing the state’s natural resources, Johnson Space Center reported. Project costs were estimated at $600 000 for NASA and $750 000 for Texas. Day-to-day operations would use a mix of manual and computer-assisted remote-sensing methods to monitor Texas natural resources; photographic and electronic data from aircraft, ground-truth measurements, and weather-station environmental data would supplement satellite data during early phases of the project. JSC and a TNRIS task force would design and implement the data system; NASA would provide technical expertise. (JSC Roundup, Oct 13/78, 1)
GSFC reported that U.S., Canadian, and other scientists had been studying the first data from the applications Explorer mission Aem 1, launched Apr. 26 into a polar orbit. Using information on day-night temperature changes, the scientists had examined black-and-white and false-color images for clues to the locations of mineral resources and to identify rock types, soil-moisture changes and plant stress, and the effects of urban heat islands. The first false-color image had covered a 700km swath of the eastern U.S. from Cape Hatteras to Lake Ontario. The scientists would correlate data from Aem 1, first of a series of satellites for NASA’s heat-capacity mapping mission, with data from other satellites, especially Landsat. (Goddard News, July 19/78, 2)
. . . Passage of this bill would commit the nation’s taxpayers to $25 million ... in fiscal year 1979. Conservation estimates indicate capital investment reaching a . . . price tag of $2.5 trillion! The proponents of this legislation indicate that passage would commit the nation to a program plan to study the feasibility of utilizing solar energy to generate electricity for domestic purposes. This is not the first phase of this study. We respectfully point out that such a program has already been underway for sometime by the Department of Energy and NASA. . . . “Boeing estimates that the cost of a single launch vehicle would be $10 billion alone while the cost per satellite is in the $20.5 billion neighborhood. These are just a sampling of the costs in terms of dollars; they do not reflect the potential dangers to the environment that are inherent in this program. While the use of solar energy is always viewed as benign, this bill would spawn a . . . malignancy on the nation's already fiscally ill taxpayers ...” (NASA Legis Actv Rept. Aug 22/78)
Launch of Cosmos 1000, reported FBIS, had led Soviet scientists to review highlights of the series. The research program using Cosmos satellites had used several types of unified apparatus, and the USSR had always referred to them as a “series” irrespective of their scientific missions. The virtually mass-produced output of satellites had greatly assisted the high turnover speed of the series, which had reached the 1000 mark within 16yr and 2wk, more than 500 launches having come in the past 6yr. The Cosmos series had begun Mar. 16, 1962, with the launch of an unnamed satellite (named Cosmos 1 only 3wk later, when Tass reported launch of Cosmos 2). The USSR had seldom announced the purpose of Cosmos launches, a ploy that permitted concealment of their purposes as well as of their failures. Observers had classified Cosmos 96, for instance, as a Venus probe left or stranded in orbit; Cosmos 146, which had arrived in orbit measuring about 14m long and by next day was only 9m long, after emitting 2 capsules, was probably a Soyuz precursor. Georgy Narimanov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Institute of Space Research said the USSR had used Cosmos satellites to test long-range communications systems, reentry installations, life-support systems, and assemblies for the Lunokhod moon-rover, as well as automatic-docking procedures. Lack of information had encouraged speculation about military applications, including hunter-killer tests. USSR comments had stressed the practical aspects of the Cosmos program, such as experience accumulated during geophysical experiments for use on the “Meteor” spacecraft; basic research by Cosmos 321 that had defined distribution of the magnetic field over 94% of the earth’s surface; and Cosmos investigations of the upper atmosphere, the aurora, and the magnetosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, April 4/78; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, April 1/78 [2 items])
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology reported that Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) had called for hearings on the current status of NASA programs. Convened by the subcommittee on space science and applications and chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), the hearings would review NASA projects, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle and the tracking and data relay satellite system. Fuqua said it had been subcommittee practice to hold hearings in the fall before considering NASA requests for new and continuing work in the next year’s budget. John Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems, and William Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would testify Sept. 25. Dr. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, and Dr. Noel Hin-ners, associate administrator for space science, would testify Sept. 26. Dr. James Kramer, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, and Raymond Kline, associate administrator for management operations, would both testify Sept. 27. (H Comm on Sci & Tech Release 95-114) The USSR had launched Venera 12 Sept. 14 with a design and purpose similar to those of Venera 11, Tass announced. Onboard systems were functioning normally, and trajectories of both stations were close to original calculations. Venera 12 would also reach the vicinity of Venus in Dec. 1978. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 14/78)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science had successfully launched a satellite to study the phenomenon of northern lights, the Washington Post reported. The 200-lb Exos B, one of three artificial moons to be launched in Japan’s international magnetic-sphere observation program, would orbit the earth in an elliptical trajectory every 8hr 45min. The northern lights (aurora borealis) was a luminous phenomenon best viewed in the Arctic region. (WPost, Sept 7/78, A-16)
INTELSAT announced reduced charges for many of its satellite services for the ninth consecutive yr. Meeting in Washington, D.C., INTELSAT’S board of governors had reduced the monthly charge for full-time two-way telephone circuits on an INTELSAT satellite (about 80% of the INTELSAT system) from $1140 to $960 beginning in Jan. 1979. Charges for on-demand telephone circuits (known as SPADE circuits) would drop from 16 to 14 cents/min. Original rate for satellite telephone circuits established by INTELSAT in 1965 was $5334/mo; since then, advancing technology had increased demand and improved efficiency so that INTELSAT could progressively reduce its rates. Marcel Perras of Canada, chairman of the board of governors, said INTELSAT was considering a 5-yr plan to lower the rate for satellite telephone circuits to less than $700/mo by 1983. (INTELSAT 78-35-1)
The Marshall Star reported that an MSFC researcher had been working to complete a weather experiment for the second Shuttle orbital flight test (OFT-2) scheduled for July 1979. His instrument, known as NOSL (nighttime-daylight optical survey of lightning), would obtain data on the many thunderstorms viewed by the Shuttle during a mission. The equipment consisted of a 16mm data-acquisition camera synchronized with a 2-channel cassette recorder, receiving the output of a photocell optical system serving as a sensor to pick up both visible and invisible lightning flashes and to record them as clicks on the tape. Otha Vaughan, Jr., system developer, said he hoped to analyze the magnetic tapes containing cine photos and associated photo-optical data to get new insights into convective structure of cloud systems and lightning, the horizontal dimensions of lightning discharges, and possible electrical discharges that extend into the stratosphere. A successful experiment would permit adaptation of the data-acquisition and analysis technique to future meteorological satellites for identifying severe weather situations. (Marshall Star, Mar 15/78, 4)
MSFC announced it had completed acoustic testing of NASA’s second high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-B, first in a series of environmental tests on the satellite before its launch scheduled for Nov. HEAO’s prime contractor, TRW Systems, Inc., Redondo Beach, Calif., performed the test that simulated sound pressure generated during launch. HEAO-B, second of 3 large unmanned orbital observatories designed to study x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays emitted by stars and star-like objects throughout the universe, had been moved into TRW’s thermal-vacuum chamber for further testing in June. {Marshall Star, Apr 26/78, 2)
AvWk reported that NASA had been struggling with institutional and funding arrangements for launching a Hughes-built corn-sat, Syncom-4, without giving Hughes the unfair advantage of a free Space Shuttle launch. The problem required prompt attention, because NASA had to make decisions within a few weeks if Syncom-4 was to fly on an early Shuttle mission. Hughes had designed and offered Syncom-4 specifically to fit the Space Shuttle payload-bay design, since NASA had wanted to deploy a test spacecraft on a Shuttle orbital mission. Under the Hughes proposal, the spacecraft would have no significant communications capability, and NASA would launch the unit free of charge; however, the satellite-user community (the state of California, Agency for International Development, and the Interior Dept.) had asked that the spacecraft include some communications capability instead of merely verifying a design. NASA had to decide who would pay for the added capability and whether Hughes would have an unfair advantage. Without a decision, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch said the whole exercise could revert to the original concept, with no significant communications channeled through the satellite. NASA might decide to run an open competition for systems to demonstrate Shuttle-launched communications spacecraft in the same manner as Syncom-4. However, Frosch was concerned that in an open competition Hughes could be “competed out of it in a way that is not quite proper,” since the Syncom-4 concept had been a Hughes innovation. “As it has developed,” Frosch explained to a House appropriations subcommittee hearing, “it is not completely clear that there is a proper solution to this dilemma.” (4v-Wk, Feb 20/78, 60)
ESA announced it had organized a tour of several Mediterranean countries to demonstrate use of data from the Meteosat weather satellite. Tom: objectives were to display Meteosat-system capabilities exhibited in the documents or images produced by the spacecraft; and to show potential users (meteorologists and others working on the study and management of earth’s natural resources) how to use the system. The system included a secondary data-user’s station (SDUS) mounted on a trailer towed by a vehicle containing a 2.5m-diameter receiving antenna and all equipment needed to receive analog signals in the WeFax (weather-facsimile) format. Demonstrations had begun in Cairo and would continue in Athens, Tunis, and Algiers. ESA had planned similar demonstrations in other countries covered by Meteosat. (ESA Release June 1/78)
satellite being built would serve as a spare. KSC and its Expendable Vehicles Directorate would be responsible for preparing and launching the Atlas Centaur vehicles; a joint government-industry team would supervise all launch-vehicle and pad operations during countdown. The ETR, launch-vehicle contractor General Dynamics, and NASA would supply all personnel and equipment required to handle assembly, prelaunch checkout, and launch. The Comstar spacecrafts used by American Telephone and Telegraph Co. as part of its nationwide communications network had a capacity of more than 14 000 high-quality 2-way voice circuits. In geostationary orbit at 22 300mi altitude, they could provide reliable communications to the 48 contiguous states, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Each Comstar carried centimeter-wave beacons to test higher frequency propagation at 19 and 28GHz, measuring the adverse effects of rainfall on signals at these frequencies, and leading to possible use of higher frequencies to future commercial comsat systems. Under an agreement with Comsat General, AT&T would lease the entire capacity of the three in-orbit Comstars; AT&T, which was building its own earth-station network, would integrate satellite communications with its terrestrial facilities to enhance its domestic U.S. services. (MOR M-491-201-78-01 [prelaunch summary] June 14/78; Spaceport News, June 23/78, 1)
The JSC Roundup reported on a 2-day conference, “Meeting Our Energy Needs Today and Tomorrow,” with Dr. Peter Glaser, commonly thought of as the initiator of the solar-power satellite concept, as featured speaker. Glaser, designer of three instruments deployed on the lunar surface by the Apollo astronauts, had proposed a solar-power-satellite concept in 1968 before the days of concern with an energy shortage. He said the scientific community had slowly become aware that solar energy “shines brighter than ever as the major energy source.” Glaser summarized the advantages of collecting the solar energy constantly available in space, as opposed to disadvantages of any terrestrial energy source: absence of gravity and weather; avoidance of thermal pollution and waste; and the ability to direct a beam of collected energy to any location on earth, sunny or not, having usable land or not, close to the user or not. Solar-energy development would depend on development of the Space Shuttle, he noted, and was an idea becoming economically attractive and socially acceptable. Microwave and laser beams could transmit this energy to earth; directing a microwave beam accurately had been demonstrated. As for safety, Glaser pointed out that one cannot concentrate microwaves into a weapon system, whereas lasers could be lethal, so that all nations would have to agree that the laser method would never be used as a weapon. Glaser described the phased-array transmitting antenna already constructed on a 5-story-high project in the Aleutian Islands. He estimated 84% solar-power satellite efficiency in producing 30kw of power, as compared to current power plants with an efficiency range of about 40%. (JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 4)
NASA reported a delegation from the People’s Republic of China had been discussing with U.S. officials since Nov. 28 the possibility of U.S.-PRC cooperation in peaceful uses of space technology. The delegation also had visited several NASA centers and U.S. aerospace industrial establishments. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch headed the U.S. delegation; Dr. Jen Hsin-min, director of the PRC Academy of Space Technology, the Chinese delegation. Following up a visit to PRC in July by presidential science adviser Dr. Frank Press, the discussions had produced an informal agreement on developing a civilian communications system for PRC. China would purchase a U.S. satellite communications system, including ground receiving and distribution equipment; the U.S. would put the space portion of the system into geostationary orbit, and China would take over its operation. A similar informal agreement covered PRC purchase of a ground station capable of receiving earth-resources information from U.S. Landsat remote-sensing satellites including the Landsat D currently under development. The PRC delegation would remain in the U.S. until mid-Jan. for further technical discussions. Both sides expressed satisfaction with the discussions, and agreed on further talks to work out details of the informal agreements and to consider other forms of civilian space cooperation. (NASA Release 78-197)
NASA announced that Nimbus 6, a meteorological research satellite, would track the 6000km (3728mi) journey by dogsled of a lone Japanese explorer from northern Canada to the North Pole and back. The Smithsonian Institution, which had a scientific stake in the venture, had asked GSFC to manage the tracking. The 6-mo journey would begin March 4, 1978. The explorer, 37-yr-old Naomi Uemura of Tokyo, had driven a dogsled solo some 12 000km (7457mi) from Greenland to Alaska over an 18mo period in 1975 and 1976. During his upcoming Arctic journey, Uemura would carry a 4.5kg (101b) battery-powered satellite beacon on his dogsled to transmit once per min an automatic radio signal, including local temperature and atmospheric pressure. Nimbus 6 overflying the pole every 108min would monitor the signals and collect the data for relay to GSFC by a NASA tracking station in Fairbanks, Alaska, Uemura would systematically collect snow, ice, and air samples for Japan’s Natl. Inst, of Polar Research and the Water Research Inst, of Nagoya Univ. Researchers needed as accurate a record as possible of Uemura’s daily positions to correlate with the collected data. Satellite-tracking data would also verify Uemura’s deadreckoning and celestial-navigation readings, particularly difficult in polar regions. NASA’s expenditures on the venture would be minimal because both the Nimbus 6 and its ground-control computer would be routinely operating on a 24hr basis. (NASA Release 78-29)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced its engineers had delivered the first hardware—a thermal-model tape recorder —for the earth-orbiting infrared astronomical satellite IRAS to their counterparts in the Netherlands for testing, before delivering the actual flight recorder in 1979	for installation in the IRAS satellite. A joint program by the U.S., the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands, IRAS had been scheduled for launch from Vandenberg AFB in Feb. 1981, carrying a single experiment: a liquid-helium-cooled telescope to map the sky in infrared frequencies from 1 to lOOmicrons. Infrared astronomers would use the data to construct an infrared sky map and a source catalog with roughly 1 million sources. IRAS would make about 14 orbits of earth daily, but only two daily data-transmitting passes over the U.K. ground station. The tape recorder would therefore store all data for transmission every 12hr. Odetics Corp. of Anaheim, Calif., had built the flight version of the tape recorder for shipment to the Netherlands, where the spacecraft was being built. After completing construction and installation of the telescope, IRAS would return to the U.S. for tests at JPL. (JPL Universe, June 23/78, 1)
NASA announced that the first major symposium on crop monitoring based on space-age technology, scheduled for JSC Oct. 23-26, would discuss results of the Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE). The symposium would give participants from government, industry-agriculture, and university communities around the world more information about LACIE’s pioneering effort and how it could best be used to improve the world food situation. LACIE, a 3yr program of NASA and the U.S. Department of Agriculture working with university and industrial research groups, had been designed to estimate wheat production in major growing areas throughout the world by using satellite data and the global weather-observation network. LACIE had begun in the fall of 1974 when DOA had recognized a need for information on wheat-growing areas outside the U.S. Landsat satellites continuously scanning agricultural regions had provided the electronic imagery for area estimates. Combined daily with ground-acquired data and information received from 8000 worldwide weather stations, the imagery had made it possible to predict crop area, yield, and production of domestic and foreign wheat-growing regions and to give an early warning of problems. Earth resources scientists had learned to identify the “signature” (appearance) of wheat in the satellite data; others had been able to estimate the growth stage and potential yield of wheat. Computer programs combining records of weather conditions in past growing seasons with figures on crop yields in the past had enabled experimenters to estimate yields for the current growing season. Results from LACIE had shown the effectiveness of new technology in improving knowledge of global wheat production generally applicable to other crops. USDA was considering use of the data source to give early warning of significant changes in prospects for global commodity production. (NASA Release 78-125)
NASA announced that its Tiros-N third-generation weather satellite launched from WTR Oct. 13 had returned excellent quality data and pictures from a near-perfect circular polar orbit at 870km (543mi) by 860km (537mi) altitude. Its advanced very high-resolution radiometer, the automatic picture transmission system, and the high resolution picture transmission system designed to provide local area coverage to hundreds of weather forecasters around the world were all working. After NASA completed a checkout in 3wk, it would turn over the satellite to NOAA for operation. (NASA Release 78-164)
The Inti. Council of Scientific Unions and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) announced that more than 140 nations would participate in the largest international scientific experiment ever held, beginning in January 1979. The Global Weather Experiment (GWE) would establish the practical limits of weather forecasting and design a global observation system to achieve them. During the 12mo experiment, a massive array of scientific personnel and observing equipment would monitor earth’s oceans and atmosphere to compile the most complete record of global weather data ever assembled. The experiment, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP), would be a joint effort of the 2 organizations and all 147 member nations of WMO; 5 other international organizations were also contributing. U.S. participants would include the Depts. of Commerce, Defense, Energy, Interior, Transportation, and State; NASA; the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research; the Natl. Science Foundation; the Defense Nuclear Agency; the Air Force, Army, Navy, and Coast Guard; and many academic institutions. NOAA would coordinate U.S. participation. The experiment would supplement the existing World Weather Watch (now generating more than 40 000 observations daily) with 10 satellites, about 50 research vessels, 110 aircraft (including 10 research planes), 300 high-altitude constant-level balloons, and 300 instrumented drifting buoys. One focus of attention would be the broad belt around the equator, an enormous heat sink absorbing much of the sun’s energy and generating much of the world’s weather, but so far comparatively unobserved. To obtain more data on this crucial region, GWE would operate observing systems during two special periods (Jan. 5 to March 5, and May 1 to June 30) to gather vital tropical-wind information. The combined systems would generate weather data for 85% of the earth’s area not covered by the World Weather Watch. At the end of the Global Weather Experiment Nov. 30, 1979, centers in a number of nations would process the data and forward the results to World Data Centers in Moscow and Washington, D.C., and to meteorological research laboratories in Bracknell, England, and Princeton, N.J. Scientists would use computers to refine the data and construct for the first time a complete 12-mo world-weather history. They would run computer experiments using this unique record to test their results, and to determine not only the practical limits of weather prediction but also the data needed to reach these limits and the kind of system needed to gather the data. The socioeconomic impact of improved weather forecasts could be dramatic; industries, for example, could benefit from knowing what the weather would be as far as 8 to 10 (or even 14) days in advance. (GWE Release 78-1)
GSFC reported that, after a 2mo search, its Copernicus satellite had located what might be a second invisible “black hole” in the universe. The satellite’s x-ray experiment had found in the constellation Scorpio what was believed to be a super dense collapsed star with such strong gravity that even light could not escape it. Scientists had declared it much more active and convincing than the first black hole found, Cygnus X-l. The new black hole was orbiting Scorpio V-861, a supergiant star visible with the naked eye from earth, and gradually siphoning away the larger star’s atmosphere. Tracing the massive amounts of x-rays released from matter emanating from the giant star had led scientists to what they called the “best black hole yet”; discovery had given astronomers their first opportunity to study a black hole as it passed behind its companion star and to test some of their black-hole theories. Glen Pollard, coinvestigator on the project, said he hoped the new information would define the shape of the cloud of stellar material sucked into the black hole, reveal the dynamics of such systems, and provide a measure of the quantity of material being removed at speeds up to 2 million mph. Studying black holes would extend astronomers’ knowledge of physics into areas not observable on earth—the physics of relativity. (Goddard News, July 19/78, 1)
NASA announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Corp. a $32 million contract to develop a teleoperator retrieval system (TRS), a reusable TV-equipped propulsive device for use by Space Shuttle crews to deliver, stabilize, and recover satellites in orbit. Managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the contract called for delivery of flight hardware by September 1979. The TRS, a low-thrust box-like spacecraft operated from the Space Shuttle by remote control, could be carried in the orbiter cargo bay or left in space after completion of a mission for retrieval by the next Space Shuttle. First mission for the TRS would be a docking with Skylab to boost it into higher orbit or to aid a controlled reentry; a camera on the forward end of the TRS would permit an astronaut to maneuver it for rendezvous and docking, or for other purposes. The TRS would return to the Space Shuttle using its own guidance and control system. (NASA Release 78-96; Marshall Star, July 5/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, July 14/78, 2; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1)
The Jan/Feb issue of Satellite Pathways reviewed COMSAT accomplishments, noting that satellite communications technology had advanced through research and development programs at COMSAT Laboratories, engineering support it had provided to current satellite systems, and its work on satellite systems of the future. COMSAT’s research and engineering programs had aimed primarily at more powerful and long-lived multiple-beam satellites operating with smaller earth stations in higher communications frequencies; these programs would lead to more efficient use of the frequency spectrum allocated to satellite communications by simultaneous multiple use of the same frequency bands and transmitting communications in high-speed digital rather than conventional analog modes. Among achievements in 1977, the article mentioned new nickel-hydrogen batteries developed by COMSAT under INTELSAT sponsorship; data collected from COMSAT-built 13- and 18-gigahertz transponders aboard the Ats 6 satellite and the 19- and 28-gigahertz beacons aboard the COMSTAR satellites; a simulator that could handle communications for the Intelsat V satellites that would form a global system in the 1980s; and new communications processing equipment to convert conventional analog signals into digital signals, and vice versa. (Satellite Pathways, Jan/Feb 78, 12)
The Air Force Systems Command noted that Atlas launches planned at Vandenberg AFB as well as at Cape Canaveral in 1978 would use one of the oldest booster systems still working: first use of Atlas as a launch vehicle was in 1958. Atlas launches planned from Space Launch Complex 3 would support the USAF NavStar global-positioning system and space-test program; 2 NASA-sponsored satellites, Sea Satellite-A (SeaSat) and Tiros-N, would also use Atlas vehicles. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 78, 3)
The remote location of the White Sands Test Facility (WSTF) just east of Las Cruces, N.M., had made it ideal for testing space-propulsion and power systems and for investigating the behavior of propellants and other hazardous chemicals, said the JSC Roundup in a feature article. “We have no environmental limits for testing Shuttle programs,” said WSTF Technical Manager Louis Gomez. “We recently added seven square miles of buffer along the western boundary of the facility as we saw various types of land use creeping our way from Las Cruces.” Valued at $75 million in 1973 dollars, WSTF had been designed to operate with 1000 people; current facility population was 670, of which 74 were NASA employees, most of the others being Lockheed Electronics Co. employees on a facility-maintenance and test-operations contract. Rockwell and McDonnell Douglas also had employees at WSTF for orbital-maneuvering and attitude-thruster testing. Currently on the test stands were a version of the orbital-maneuvering subsystem pod and the orbiter’s forward and aft reaction-control subsystems. OMS engines had been rated at 6000-lb thrust. Steam ejectors that could produce a vacuum of 120 OOOft-equivalent altitude in two of the propulsion test chambers would simulate engine firing in a near-space environment. Liquid oxygen and alcohol fed to three modified X-15-type rocket engines would produce a plume quenched with water, making high-velocity steam to aspirate the altitude chambers. Another lab would burn, stretch, pound, heat, and immerse complex samples of materials and substances that were candidates for use in space, to record how the materials responded to such punishment. Some tests were on flame propagation in pure oxygen at varying pressures; others might be for flashpoints and impact ignition. When the tracking and data relay satellite (TDRS) designed to work with the space transportation system (STS) would arrive on station in geosynchronous orbit, a new ground station at WSTF would collect data and voice transmissions to and from orbiters and other spacecraft. Three 60ft-diameter Ku-band TDRS antennas and a control center/support building were under construction there. WSTF would relay Shuttle data and voice to other geosynchronous satellites; the transmission would bounce back from an adjacent RCA ground station to the two 30ft-diameter RCA dishes at JSC, then to mission-control at Houston. Western Union would employ about 100 people at the ground station after it had become operational in 1980. (JSC Roundup, Aug 18/78, 4)
Hughes Communications Services, Inc., Culver City, Calif., had received a $335 million Navy Systems Command contract to provide 5yr of Leasat (leased satellite) communications services at each of four locations in space starting in 1982, Aerospace Daily reported. Hughes, which had proposed to use its Syncom-4 Shuttle-optimized spacecraft, had won out over Comsat General Corp. and TRW Inc. Leasat would replace the Gapfiller service currently leased from Comsat General’s Marisat system, and would complement the TRW-built Navy-owned FltSatCom system by serving both Navy ships and Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force ground-mobile forces. Choice of the Hughes system, dedicated to Pentagon use, should enhance prospects of a ESA and INTELSAT joint offer of a civilian system to be used by the pre-Inmarsat joint venture. (A/D, Sept 11/78, 38)
The Air Force Systems Command reported it had successfully concluded a 2-yr space-communications test program 4mo ahead of schedule, saving the Air Force more than $500 000. Directed by the Satellite Communications Terminal Program Office, SAMTEC’s 6555th Aerospace Test Group had launched the Lincoln experimental satellites LES 8 and 9 from Cape Canaveral 22 OOOmi into space to demonstrate advanced technology that would provide dependable jam-proof communications between satellites spaced thousands of miles apart and terminals scattered over more than 75% of the earth’s surface. The satellites and terminals had worked essentially flawlessly. In the test, a receiver and transmitter on each satellite had relayed messages for the first time directly between two spacecraft without ground or airborne relay. Acting as earth-orbiting relay stations during the test program, the satellites exchanged voice and data information between airborne, ground, and shipboard terminals. Instead of batteries charged by solar panels (susceptible to radiation damage), each satellite had used two nuclear-powered thermal generators for long-term dependable power services. Some tests had run continuously for 2 or 3 days, requiring 24-hr manning. Nerve center for the program had been the test-management facility at the Mitre Corp., Bedford, Mass. (ASFC Newsreview, Jan 78, 6)
MSFC reported that a patent had been issued for a reel mechanism and associated control system invented by MSFC employees Ralph Kissel and Charles Rupp for the Shuttle tethered satellite system (TSS). NASA had considered the TSS as a means of enhancing Space Shuttle performance of scientific investigations and operational activities in space. The system would use a flexible tether line to deploy and retrieve subsatellites at distances as great as 100km from the orbiter. NASA had judged the mechanism and control-system invention would contribute significantly to overall feasibility of the TSS concept. (Marshall Star, May 24/78, 4)
Heao 2 had radioed back its first picture Nov. 18, an image of x-rays coming from the edge of what may be a black hole, the Washington Star reported. When the picture first appeared on a GSFC television monitor as a collection of bright dots against a black background, scientists and engineers were described as “ecstatic.” Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory said: “The significance of today’s event is that for the first time x-ray astronomy has become of age, and it has achieved the kind of resolution and sensitivity which has been traditional in the fields of radio and optical astronomy.” He said the x-ray telescope on Heao 2 should be able to detect x-rays from objects two-thirds of the way toward the edge of the universe, meaning that the satellite would be seeing radiation created roughly 10 billion yr ago. Giacconi added, “The scientific significance is what it tells us we are going to get in the future,” and noted the telescope was 100 to 1000 times more sensitive than previous x-ray detectors placed above earth’s atmosphere. The picture reconstructed by computer from data radioed back by the satellite was a test to demonstrate the capability of the telescope, which had a 23-in-wide mirror and an 11-ft focal length. Target for the test was a star system in the Milky Way galaxy called Cygnus X-l, selected because of its well known location and its brightness. Cygnus X-l, 6000 light-yrs away, also happened to be the best candidate for a black hole; observations by a smaller x-ray satellite had shown that its x-ray emissions were unlike those seen from other objects. {W Star, Nov 19/78, A-13)
NASA announced plans to launch TIROS-N from WTR Sept. 15 as part of a third generation of new meteorological satellites. First of a series of eight polar-orbiting environmental spacecraft, TIROS-N would carry new environmental monitors representing significant technological advances over those on the current NOAA-series spacecraft. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Services (NESS) would operate TIROS-N, intended to improve weather analysis for more accurate weather forecasts; to locate ocean currents and areas of upwell-ing, important to fishing and shipping interests; and to acquire more precise data on snow cover, snowmelt, and rainfall, essential to water-resource management and flood forecasting. Also possible would be more accurate alerts of high-energy solar-radiation levels above the atmosphere, important to space missions, high-altitude commercial airEAGE At l INTENTION ALLY BLANK craft flights, long-range communications, and electrical power-distribution networks. Its advanced data-collection and platform-location system meant that TIROS-N would have for the first time an operational capability to collect and transmit environmental data from platforms on land, at sea, and in the air; and to determine the geographic locations of those platforms in motion on the surface of the sea, land, or aloft. TIROS-N’s scanning radiometer, most versatile to be carried aboard an environmental satellite, could gather and store for later playback visible and infrared measurements and images in 4 channels for more precise evaluation of land, ice, surface-water, and cloud conditions, and sea-surface temperatures, transmitting them in real time to both automatic picture-transmission (APT) and high-resolution picture-transmission (HRPT) users in more than 100 countries around the world. The vertical-sounder subsystem, containing three instruments, could register temperatures to within 1°C and moisture data from earth’s surface up through the stratosphere. Even under obscuring cloud cover, TIROS-N could obtain some data because one of the three instruments would be able to record microwave radiation regardless of clouds. TIROS-N would be a primary data source for the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s first global experiment, an international cooperative project of 140 countries scheduled to begin Dec. 1, 1978. Its instruments would meet FGE requirements for collecting quantitative data on earth’s atmosphere and sea surface to construct numerical atmospheric models for improved long-range weather forecasts. Sensors were multinational: the stratospheric-sounding units were from Great Britain, the data-collection platform-location system from France, and other sensors from the U.S. Ground-support systems were also multinational: the U.S. would acquire and process most data through NOAA’s command and data-acquisition (CDA) stations near Fairbanks, Alaska; Wallops Island, Va.; and a central processing system at Suitland, Md. France’s Centre National d’fitudes Spatiales (CNES) would process and distribute data associated with collection and the platform-location system. TIROS-N instruments had drawn heavily on technology from NASA’s Nimbus-spacecraft program: TIROS-N’s bus was a modified USAF Block 5D spacecraft bus with a 25% growth allowance in payload-carrying capability. NASA had designed and funded TIROS-N; Goddard Space Flight Center would manage it during checkout (about 2mo) before turning it over to NOAA. Launch vehicle would be a standard reconditioned Atlas E/F. (NASA Release 78-132; NASA press conf. Sept 8/78; Spaceport News, Sept 15/78, 2)
KSC announced it had awarded the Univ. of Florida a $99 013 contract for development of a water-management system using satellite data and other NASA-developed technology. A Florida water-resources management information system could provide managers with a computerized bank of information to help meet increased demand for water; data from earth-resources satellites like NASA’s Landsats and NOAA’s Goes should reduce guesswork in water management. Studies by the Univ. of Florida and the South Florida Water Management District had substantiated Florida’s need for a comprehensive water-management system. The university study showed lack of water as the main problem facing Florida agriculture, and reported that water demand would equal the existing supply by about 1980. These studies, coupled with a 1972 mandate by the Florida legislature for a water-use and supply development plan, prompted state water-management districts to seek help from the university and KSC in solving their problems. (KSC Release 32-78)
22pm EDT on the same date to produce an orbit with 35 469.1km perigee, 36 679.2km apogee, and 1.7° inclination. The drift had been too rapid, and an orbit-adjust maneuver June 20 had reduced it to 2 deg/day West. Goes 3 had been scheduled to arrive on station at 135°W July 16, 1978. All subsystems were on, except the visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR); the main power bus was normal. The S-band and UHF equipment had functioned properly, but NASA was checking specifics of gain, margin, and sensitivity. Although the space-environment monitor (SEM) subsystem had appeared satisfactory, it needed further testing for possible interference from other subsystems. NASA expected to check out Goes 3 and turn it over to NOAA for operation when it arrived at 135°W. Goes 3 would be a key element of the Global Weather Experiment, a worldwide yearlong accumulation of meteorological and oceanographic data that had begun in Dec. 1977. Largest international scientific experiment in history, with 140 nations participating, GWE was collecting information from sources that included nine satellites and scores of ships and aircraft, plus thousands of daily surface arid upper-air observations by several hundred buoys distributed in the southern hemisphere and by conventional observation methods elsewhere. The experiment, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) sponsored by the UN’s World Meteorological Organization and the Inti. Council of Scientific Unions, would last through 1979 and provide scientists with millions of pieces of information from all over the world. Goes 3 would not only provide the major western-hemisphere coverage in the experiment, but would also determine how much important meteorological information could be gathered from a data-sparse area of the world centering on the Indian Ocean. Goes 3 was the last NOAA geostationary satellite NASA would launch on an expendable vehicle; three additional geostationary spacecraft planned for the next 8yr, beginning with GOES-D, would be launched on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 78-72; MOR E-612-78-01 [prelaunch summary] Apr 26/78, [postlaunch] June 26/78; NOAA Release 78-66)
DOD’s top command, control, and communications official, Dr. Gerald Dinneen, had characterized the use of satellite-borne lasers to communicate with submarines as costly and inefficient, Aerospace Daily reported. In testimony before the House Committee on Armed Services, Dinneen had said such a scheme would require “a number of satellites.” Spreading out a laser beam would lose energy, so the beam would have to be relatively narrow to maintain contact with an antenna on the surface of the water. This would require either a large number of satellites, or scanning the beam around the surface of the water to communicate with other submarines. Dinneen had downplayed the idea of piggybacking blue-green laser kits on satellites (suggested as a possibility by 1981 or 1982) because very few satellites, communications or navigation, had excess capacity: “If you are going to put something on,” he added, “you have to take off something else.” (A/D, Aug 31/78, 276) During August: The USAF reported that NavStar 2, within seconds of reaching orbit after its May 13 launch, had been tracked by one of SAM-SO’s stations. “About one hour after launch we made initial contact with the satellite,” said 2nd Lt. Joe Fury, satellite operations controller. “Controllers then tested the satellite’s systems to assure their operation before beginning other on-orbit checks to make the spacecraft function.” In its initial 6-hr orbit, the NavStar had “talked” with ground controllers around the world, each of whom fine-tuned the satellite as it passed overhead. Two days after launch NavStar 2’s internal rocket motor, activated by a command from a satellite controller, had shifted it from an egg-shaped orbit into a circular 12-hr orbit; as it arrived there, the NavStar was spun up to 89rpm to stabilize it. For 1.5da, controllers sent computer-coded signals to gradually slow the spin rate to zero. After stabilization, controllers had deployed the two folded solar-array panels and began to warm up the navigation payload to receive computer data transmitted to the satellite, giving it the intelligence it needed to carry out its military mission. Three wk after launch, controllers had positioned NavStar 2 in a 10 900-nautical-mi drift orbit, slowly moving it toward the final position most suitable for the NavStar program. By the mid-1980s the NavStar system of 24 satellites would give users highly accurate data on position, velocity, and time in all weather, anywhere in the world. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 78, 3)
The ESA Council had given the go-ahead to produce an initial batch of 5 operational Ariane launch vehicles, and had approved interim funding of approximately $23.8 million for preliminary production-related expenses, AvWk reported. Although individual participating countries must approve the expenditures, Council approval had been sufficient to begin production. The first operational launcher should be available by the end of 1980 to launch ESA’s Exosat scientific satellite in early 1981. Cost of the 5-launcher package had been estimated at approximately $182.6 million, with an additional 10% proposed as a contingency reserve. Total budget would amount to about $200 million. At West Germany’s insistence, the individual satellite programs that would use the Arianes would fund the launcher costs. Program managers at ESA had sought approval to produce a first batch of 6 Arianes; however, policy of governments involved was to fund production of launchers only for identified markets. Once production buildup was completed, production rate of the Ariane was expected to reach 2 vehicles per year; program officials predicted this could increase rather quickly to 4, or possibly 5, a year to meet market demand. (AvWk Apr 24/78, 96)
Aerospace Daily reported that the Senate Appropriations Committee had approved a FY79 $4,359 billion funding bill for NASA, restoring $20.5 million cut by the House-passed companion bill for development of the teleoperator retrieval system (TRS) that NASA wanted to use to reboost or deorbit Skylab. Although the full committee had not changed the NASA funding approved earlier by Sen. William Proxmire’s subcommittee, Proxmire indicated that when the omnibus bill reached the Senate floor, he would move to cut all its appropriations, including NASA’s, by 2%. The Appropriations Committee also approved a second FY78 supplemental funding bill that included $58.7 million to acquire the Navy’s fourth and fifth Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) spacecraft, as recommended earlier by the defense subcommittee. (A/D, Aug 2/78, 138)
NASA announced it had judged the UK 5 (Ariel 5) mission successful in prelaunch objectives. This Explorer-class x-ray mission launched in 1974 had contributed significantly to x-ray astronomy and astrophysics. Ariel 5, a cooperative program between the U.S. and the U.K. Science Research Council, had discovered many new transient x-ray sources, although most of its studies were of steady x-ray sources. The second Ariel 5 catalog had listed locations of 107 high-latitude x-ray sources, many of them extragalactic. The satellite had performed well, far beyond its 6mo design life, although gas for the attitude-control system had run out 2.5 yr after launch (18mo beyond prelaunch estimates). An onboard magnetic fine-torquing system had maintained attitude stability and allowed some spin-axis maneuvers. All 6 onboard instruments had performed as they did the first yr after launch and should continue to produce exceptional results. (MOR S-870-74-05 [postlaunch], Mar 15/78)
U.S. share of the 102-nation INTELSAT organization had dropped from its 61% starting point in 1964 (when 19 nations had joined to establish a global communications consortium) to 25.1%, Av Wk reported. Charges that the U.S. had dominated INTELSAT had caused friction in the organization since its inception. The 1964 interim agreements had ensured U.S. majority ownership of not less than 50.6%; expanded membership and traffic patterns had decreased U.S. control as well as the friction. Other ownership shares under the new allocation were those of the United Kingdom, 10.8%; France, 5.98%; Brazil, 4.23%; and Japan, 3.68%. The 1964 interim consortium had been capitalized at $200 million; the 1971 agreements had boosted the figure to $500 million, including members’ net capital contributions and the outstanding contractual capital commitments. The amount had reached $900 million in 1976 to finance Intelsat V satellites. (AvWk, May 22/78, 56)
Av Wk reported award to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. of a $34.5 million USAF contract to design and build a space platform using long wavelength infrared radiation for space surveillance of relatively cool objects. Designated space test program mission P80-2, to be managed by USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organizations (SAMSO), the platform would go into orbit from WTR in Jan. 1981. Principal payload for the P80-2 mission would be a satellite infrared experiment (SIRE) developed for USAF by Hughes Aircraft Co., to operate in the 8- to 12-micrometer region of the spectrum, detecting and tracking objects such as a spacecraft or booster after burnout. The platform would also carry an autonomous navigation system built for USAF by Martin Marietta and a solar-flare isotopic-composition experiment designed by the Univ. of Chicago. The contract provided that Lockheed would integrate the payload (for which it had no responsibility) with the space platform. {AvWk, Feb 27/78, 39)
The USAF had budgeted $664 million for space procurement in FY80, up from $379.6 million in FY79, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Major increases were in the defense support program (early-warning satellite by TRW and Aeroject), up $48 million; the satellite data system (Hughes), up $80 million; the defense satellite-communications systems (DSCS), up $65 million; and the Space Shuttle (Rockwell Inti.), up $73 million. The USAF had planned to buy five satellite systems in FY80: an RCA defense meteorological satellite program (DMSP) spacecraft; a defense support program spacecraft; a satellite data system spacecraft; and two DSCS spacecraft. One spacecraft to be purchased in FY79 would be a DMSP. The Air Force had last purchased boosters (three Martin Marietta Titan Ills) in FY78 and planned none for FY79 or 80, “assuming Shuttle stays on schedule,” a USAF official said. (D/SBD, Aug 10/78, 188)
Wallops Flight Center announced that an attempt to recover in midair an experiment launched on a single-stage meteorological rocket had been successful. The experiment (to obtain vertical profiles of nitric-oxide concentrations in the middle and upper atmosphere between 50 and 30km up) would later provide in situ measurements for use by Nimbus-G satellites from launch sites in the northern hemisphere. The payload launched Aug. 29 on a Super Areas rocket at 3:38pm EDT had reached an altitude of 66km (216 000ft); the 8.7kg payload ejected at apogee deployed the parachute immediately as programmed. Radars at WFC had vectored the fixed-wing Sky Van aircraft to an intercept position to snare the package in midair about 4km (13 000ft) up and about 13km (7 nautical mi) offshore from Wallops Island. (WFC Release 78-13).
NASA declared the launch of ESA geostationary operational environmental satellite Geos 2 on July 14, 1978 successful. Launch-vehicle performance was nominal and had placed the spacecraft and its apogee-boost motor (ABM) into the desired transfer orbit. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit, and the ABM was fired successfully July 16, 1978. The satellite was being maneuvered over the South Atlantic to a position at 6°E above the equator. All subsystem functional checks were complete and satellite status was satisfactory. The mission had replaced Geos 1, whose Delta vehicle had put it into an incorrect orbit in April 1977. (MOR M-492-302-78-02 [postlaunch] Oct 30/78)
The U.S. Navy had orbited two clusters of ocean-surveillance satellites to monitor radio communications and radar emissions from Soviet submarines and ships, and would add more spacecraft to expand coverage, Av Wk reported. The Navy had launched the first of the two clusters (each consisting of three small satellites in close proximity) in 1976, the second cluster in 1977, all from Vandenberg AFB into nearcircular 63“-inclination orbits at 700mi altitudes. At that altitude, the spacecraft could receive signals from surface vessels more than 2000mi away. The Naval Research Laboratory, which in Dec. 1971 had built and launched three spacecraft as a first demonstration of using multiple satellites to direction-find and eavesdrop on Soviet surface vessels and submarines, had designed and built the ocean-surveillance satellites (NOSS). Martin Marietta had begun production of additional satellites with E-Systems, Inc., as major subcontractor to provide the electronic intelligence (elint) receivers and antennas. For the future, the Navy had planned a more advanced spaceborne ocean-surveillance system using active radar to pinpoint the position of surface vessels, to be developed for launch by 1983 under a program called Clipper Bow. (AvWk, July 10/78, 22)
American Indians of the Far West had used the Communications Technology Satellite, world’s most powerful, in an unusual undertaking: tribes in Mont, and N.M. had linked up via the satellite with each other and federal officials in Washington, D.C., to exchange information and views on health, agriculture, education, and other tribal concerns. ARC said the Cts experimental satellite, operating on a new frequency and at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than current commercial comsats, had provided 2-way interactive video and audio communications between ground sites, allowing participants to view and confer with each other as though in the same room. Lewis Research Center had developed the transmitter (its key component) and would manage U.S. portions of the joint U.S.-Canadian satellite program, the Lewis News reported. Indian nations taking part in the broadcasts over 3days were the Crows and other tribes from the northwestern U.S., and the All-Indian Pueblo Council, Inc., and nearby tribes from the southwest. Government representatives included the assistant secretary of the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, senators, and representatives, the governor of Montana, and the assistant secretary for Indian affairs in the U.S. Dept, of Interior. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 7/78, 2; Lewis News, Apr 14/78, 1)
INTELSAT announced it had signed agreements with Saudi Arabia and Zaire to lease capacity on global-coverage Intelsats for domestic telecommunications in those countries. Saudi Arabia had leased a total of 2.25 global-beam transponders, extending domestic service to 8 cities in addition to Jeddah, Riyadh, and 2 mobile antennas served since 1977. The 5-yr agreement with Zaire had earmarked a full global-beam transponder in a spare-capacity satellite to serve 13 locations in that nation. Fifteen countries had begun (or would soon begin) to use the Intelsat system for domestic telecommunications. (INTELSAT Release 78-5-1)
The USSR had launched Soyuz 28 at 4:28pm Moscow time, Tass announced, with cosmonaut Vladimir Remek of Czechoslovakia accompanying Soviet cosmonaut Aleksey Gubarev on the first of a series of international cooperative flights that would include representatives from Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, and Romania. Soyuz launches later in 1978 would carry Polish and GDR cosmonauts. Since 1967 when the Intercosmos program began, scientists and specialists of participating countries had been using Soviet satellites and research rockets to study the physical properties of outer space, space meteorology, communications, biology, medicine, and natural resources. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 3/78)
Scientists and marine biologists trying to preserve the Great Lakes from pollution would receive vast amounts of new and more accurate information from a Nimbus-G satellite scheduled for launch Oct. 23, Lewis Research Center announced. Among its seven sophisticated instruments to measure parameters ranging from stratospheric aerosols and ozone to polar sea ice extent would be a coastal zone color scanner (CZCS) to measure water color and temperature, two characteristics affected by amounts of pollution and algae in water. The scanner would operate exclusively over water, taking pictures of an area encompassing the entire Great Lakes system in 2min, or of any particular area every 4 out of 5da, and would transmit the Great Lakes data to GSFC for recording and processing. Information in the form of photographs and digital-computer tapes would be archived and disseminated to assigned study groups. A Great Lakes experiment team with scientists from LeRC, EPA, NOAA, the Canadian National Water Research Inst, and Center for Remote Sensing, the Environmental Research Inst, of Michigan, the Univ. of Minnesota, Case Western Reserve Univ., Ohio State Univ., and State Univ. of New York would assess the regional value of CZCS water-quality measurements. LeRC would be responsible for interpreting Great Lakes CZCS data and comparing it with coordinated ship measurements. (Lewis News, Oct 13/78, 1)
NASA announced it had adjudged performance of the Heao 1 satellite successful, as it had accomplished its primary and secondary objectives. Heao 1 had demonstrated that, in addition to its operating mode, normal scanning, it could point at specific celestial objects for detailed investigations; it had performed more than 50 pointings. NASA had solved some minor problems with the stored-command programmer early in the mission. The experiment complement had continued to receive high-resolution data over an energy range of 150 to 10 million electron volts. Although the sensitivity of the large-area counter array instruments had degraded, several of the counters remained unimpaired because of their modular construction and were able to achieve overall objectives. Heao 1 data clarified x-ray sources barely visible in older studies; the faintest sources seen were 10 to the 5th times weaker than the first x-ray star (ScoX-1) discovered 15yr ago. Heao 1 had identified many distant active sources, such as quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and BL Lacerta objects. For example, Heao 1 observed the BL Lacerta object Markarian-5011 spectra, which were extremely hard, establishing the lack of surrounding gas. Heao I had discovered that the strongest active sources in the galaxy were emitting radiation into the MeV range as a result of stimulation by strong nonthermal emission mechanisms. A map of diffuse x-rays in the range 0.15 to 60KeV indicated a hot thermal plasma extending beyond earth’s galaxy, and possibly early evolution of the universe. (NASA MOR S-832-77-01 [postlaunch] April 3/78)
NASA announced plans to launch on Feb. 9, 1978, the first spacecraft in a new worldwide military communications system. DOD’s Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) satellites would provide vital communications for the Navy, Air Force, DOD, and the Presidential Command Network [see Jan. 20]. The spacecraft would go into synchronous-transfer orbit on an Atlas Centaur from ETR’s launch complex 36. FltSatCom, a highly versatile military-communications system built by TRW Defense and Space Systems, would offer 23 operating channels: the Navy would use 1 fleet-broadcast and 9 fleet-relay channels for communications between naval aircraft, ships, submarines, and ground stations, ship-to-ship and ship-to-shore. The system could offer reliable secure communications between naval units, even relatively small vessels equipped with inexpensive antennas and simple equipment, anywhere in the world except in extreme polar regions. The Air Force would use 12 narrowband channels as a part of the Air Force Satellite Communications System (AfSatCom) linking the national command authority with Strategic Air Command (SAC) units and other arms of the Air Force; DOD had reserved 1 channel. The Naval Electronic Systems Command would manage the FltSatCom program. The spacecraft would consist of two major hexagonal elements (a payload module and a spacecraft module), with the majority of electronic equipment mounted on 12 panels enclosing the payload and spacecraft modules. The payload module would contain UHF and X-band communications equipment, and antennas—the UHF-transmit antenna, built of ribs and mesh to open like an umbrella; and the receive antenna, a separate deployable helix. The spacecraft module would contain earth sensors, an apogee kick motor, attitude and velocity control, telemetry tracking and command, electrical-power distribution, and a solar array folded around the spacecraft module until reaching final position in orbit, to be deployed by spring-loaded hinges. The 1875kg (41321b) spacecraft weighed about 390kg (8601b), more than any satellite previously launched into synchronous orbit on an Atlas Centaur, NASA’s standard launch vehicle for intermediate-weight payloads. (NASA Release 78-17; MOR M-491-202-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb 3/78)
Aerospace Daily reported that House-Senate appropriations conferees would allow NASA to reprogram FY79 funds from Space Shuttle pro-, duction into development as it had done with $100 million in 1978, if the agency first asked Congress for a budget supplement to restore the production money. Reporting on a Sept. 14 compromise $4.35 billion NASA money bill, the conferees promised that NASA would receive “prompt consideration” of a supplemental request. The reprogramming suggestion seemed to address the major concern: whether or not NASA could increase the rate of development spending ahead of supplement approval. Under a reprogramming, production would be slowed pending restoration of funds, but development could proceed at a rate consistent with the expected extra money. This arrangement had followed up on an earlier House provision dropped by the conferees, allowing NASA to set up a reserve fund for Shuttle development by taking $30 million from three science programs. The conferees had approved NASA’s $20.5 million request for development of a teleoperator retrieval system, with the proviso that NASA get approval from both appropriations committees before obligating more than $10 million of the money, and that the balance of $10.5 million be available “only for Space Shuttle funding requirements in the absence of committee approval.” Both committees had been skeptical of the TRS proposal because its use in a Skylab mission might be impossible in view of Shuttle delays and the deterioration of Skylab’s orbit. Conferees also had agreed to add $500 000 to the money bill to start a Stereosat program; the House had added $4 million, the Senate nothing. The conference had compromised on an add-on of $2 million for a solar-power satellite system, ratifying the House cut of $5 million from expendable launch vehicles. It had also eliminated funds for the SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence) program. (A/D, Sept 15/78, 65)
NASA announced launch of ESA’s orbital test satellite 2 Ots 2 at 6:59pm EDT, May 11, from Cape Canaveral toward a stationary orbit 22 300mi over Gabon in West Africa. A Delta vehicle had put the satellite into synchronous-transfer orbit with apogee of 36 042km, perigee of 185km, and inclination of 27.4°. An apogee boost motor fired 37hr after launch at fifth apogee had circularized the orbit so that Ots 2 could drift to its final location above the equator at 10°E. Ots 2 would remain for 6 or 7yr relaying telecasts among nations of the European Broadcast Union and carrying as many as 7000 telephone calls at a time. This new comsat was one of two experimental models built by ESA to test performance in orbit; their descendants, European operational com-sats, would serve in the 1980s as satellite links for intra-European telephone, telegraph, and telex traffic and would provide western Europe with television relay. The first launch of an Ots from Cape Canaveral Sept. 13, 1977, had failed when the Delta first stage exploded 55sec after liftoff. The probable cause (burn-through of a solid-propellant strap-on Castor IV motor at the bottom of the first-stage Thor booster) had been avoided for further flights by increasing the thickness of insulation between the solid propellant and the exterior motor case. Industries in Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Spain had built the spacecraft under ESA supervision; prime contractor was British Aerospace Dynamics Corp. Under an agreement with the U.S., ESA would reimburse NASA for the cost of the Delta launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs totaling $417 million. GSFC had provided technical direction of the Delta project; Kennedy Space Center’s expendable vehicles directorate was responsible to GSFC for launch operations. (MOR M-492-210-78-02 [prelaunch] Apr 27/78; NASA Release 78-53; W Post, May 12/78, B-6; ESA Release Apr 7, 12/78; May 8, 17/78)
A delegation from NASA Hq meeting in Paris with ESA’s Spacelab program board would attempt to overcome W. Germany’s objections to a proposed barter agreement, under which NASA would provide four, free Space Shuttle launches instead of paying cash for Spacelab hardware it had agreed to buy, Aerospace Daily reported. The barter deal, proposed by ESA in 1977, had met with opposition from ESA-member governments. Main objection, stated most strongly by W. Germany, was that a European commitment to four Shuttle flights would be premature because European plans to use the Space Shuttle and Spacelab ought to be definite before a barter would make sense. NASA had agreed to the barter instead of paying cash for a full set of Spacelab hardware it had agreed to buy years before. ESA felt that, under the barter, the industrial consortium headed by VFW-Fokker Erno could continue to work with European money at a far more satisfactory pace than could be expected if they relied on NASA money. In exchange for the roughly $100 million the Europeans would pay, NASA would provide four free flights for Spacelab, two for ESA and two for Germany. Observers said that W. Germany’s reservations centered on uncertainty about ESA’s Spacelab program, and that its own commitment to two flights was premature. If (as was likely) W. Germany’s Spacelab missions would not use the Shuttle-Spacelab system’s full capability although it had agreed to the dedicated launches, Germany would have to fill up the Space Shuttle or absorb the resulting losses. Other concerns were the rising costs of Space Shuttle flights, as launch costs in deutschmarks increased while the value of the dollar decreased. (A/D, Sept 12/78, 43) Pegasus 1, launched Feb. 16, 1965, had gathered micrometeoroid data for use in designing spacecraft; data collection had ceased Jan. 13, 1968. The Pegasus 1 assembly weighed about 10 430kg (23 0001b) and was 21m (70ft) long. The spacecraft, weighing about 1900kg (32001b), had remained attached to the empty S-IV stage and the instrument unit of the Saturn I launch vehicle. Neither the satellite nor the attached S-IV contained radioactive nuclear power sources or materials. Pegasus 2 was still in orbit; Pegasus 3 had reentered Aug. 4, 1969, over the Pacific Ocean. Aerospace Daily reported that Pegasus 1 and associated hardware had reentered earth’s atmosphere Sept. 17 over Angola. A NASA spokesman said there were no sightings or reports of debris. (NASA Release 78-141; Marshall Star, Sept 13/78, 2, 20/78, 2; DFRC X-Press, Sept 22/78, 2; A/D, Sept 20/78, 91)
NASA announced results of a demonstration of curriculum-sharing planned by LaRC using television through the communications technology satellite Cts at North Carolina A&T State Univ., Greensboro, N.C. This was the first time a predominantly black college had participated in such an experiment. NASA’s portable earth terminal (PET), a ground-based communications system contained in a trailer, had transmitted 2 days of telecasts originating at North Carolina A&T to Cts 22 500 mi up, which relayed the programs to Jackson State Univ. in Miss.; Bell-Northern Research Ltd., Ontario, Canada; and Stanford Univ. and Rockwell Inti, in Calif. Participants in each location could see and communicate with each other. The program, funded under NASA contract to demonstrate the use of satellites in sharing curriculum information, research techniques, and results, included a question-and-answer session with Frederick Gregory, black Shuttle astronaut recently selected by NASA. ARC had made available almost 7 hr of satellite time for the project. (LaRC Release 78-9; NASA photo L-78-1209; Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 1)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that the Air Force Avionics Laboratory (AFAL) was preparing critical electronic equipment for the NavStar global-positioning system (GPS) to undergo initial flight tests with GPS satellites. A generalized development model (GDM) designed by AFAL and built by Rockwell Inti. Corp.’s Collins Avionics and Missile Systems Division, Cedar Rapids, la., would demonstrate operation of GPS navigation equipment in a hostile electromagnetic-jamming environment. One GDM delivered to ASD’s 4950th Test Wing had been installed on a C-141 aircraft for testing. Evaluation of a GDM installed in two satellites had begun in August at the Naval Air Station, El Centro, Calif., and flight testing with three satellites against a ground jammer would begin in late Nov. GDM tests with four satellites in March 1979 would determine the equipment’s full antijam performance, using ground-based jammers and possibly an airborne jammer. A second GDM, to be delivered to AFAL in Feb. 1979, would be integrated with the laboratory’s GPS evaluator, after which AFAL engineers would conduct jamming tests in various simulated environments. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 78, 12)
INTELSAT announced it had awarded Nippon Electric Co., Tokyo, Japan, a $175 000 contract for development of a multimode phase-shift-keying (PSK) modem for a nonlinear satellite channel. INTELSAT had established full-time global communications using 197 antennas at 161 earth stations in 87 countries. (INTELSAT Release 78-3-M)
A Saturn IB rocket, twin of the one that launched Skylab and Apollo/Soyuz test project (ASTP) astronauts into space, would begin a barge journey from KSC to Tokyo Apr. 5, KSC announced. The Saturn IB, part of the largest group of U.S. space hardware ever displayed overseas, would be only one of hundreds of artifacts borrowed from NASA centers across the U.S. for a Japanese space science exposition scheduled to begin July 16, ninth anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11. The U.S. display would include full-scale Mercury-Redstone, Mercury-Atlas, and Gemini-Titan rockets; a lunar rover; Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft that had actually flown in space; a detailed mockup of the Viking lander; and an ATS-6 (applications technology satellite) communications satellite. The Association for the Space Science Exposition, an umbrella organization for the Japan Science Society and the Japanese Maritime Science Promotion Foundation, had organized the exposition at an estimated cost of $21 million and would defray all costs of dismantling, loading, round-trip shipping, reloading, and reinstalling artifacts. The National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution had coordinated the loan of the space artifacts. (KSC Release 38-78; Marshall Star, April 19/78, 2)	•
The USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) was conducting initial ground tests of a prototype laser-communications (LaserCom) system to transfer data from satellite to satellite as well as to and from ground and airborne users, the AFSC Newsreview reported. Over a 2yr period SAMSO would test the system at the White Sands Missile Range, N.M., in three phases: ground-to-ground transmission and reception of the laser beam, by reflecting it off a 24in steerable mirror 1 to 6mi from the laser; interim air-to-ground tests, evaluating aircraft ability to acquire and point the laser transmitter toward a ground-based beacon laser; and full demonstration of the air-to-ground system, using prototype equipment. Although most of the tests had been successful in laboratory Simulations, a few unknowns remained, including laser-beam communications through the atmosphere. LaserCom had some inherent advantages over existing satellite communications systems: for example, its narrow beam width enhanced security by allowing only the intended user to receive the beam, it also offered an unprecedented data-transmission capability because its 1-gigabit-per-sec rate would accommodate a great number of spacecraft, airborne and surface vessels, and ground users that would be relaying information to a synchronous-altitude LaserCom satellite for subsequent real-time or delayed transmission to other users. After completing its tests in 1980, DOD would evaluate the system for technical capability, requirements, and cost; should LaserCom application prove feasible, in-orbit operation of the system could begin as early as 1986. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 78, 1)
NASA announced successful launch Apr. 26 from Vandenberg AFB on a Scout of the first spacecraft built to measure variations in the earth’s temperature, the heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM). The experimental satellite had assumed a circular sun-synchronous 620km (385mi) orbit to measure areas of the earth’s surface for maximum temperatures, then to measure minimum temperatures of those same areas about llhr later. A 2-channel scanning radiometer would acquire images in the visible and near-infrared spectrum during the day, and in the thermal-infrared spectrum both day and night. Data resolution of the 2 channels would be about 0.5 X 0.5km (1800ft) as the spacecraft covered a 700km (435mi)-wide swath. Project officials said the position of the 3001b satellite in orbit was “almost perfect. If all goes well, we could take a picture of the earth in the visible spectrum as early as tomorrow.” HCMM was first in a series of low-cost modular spacecraft built for the Applications Explorer Missions (AEM) — small, experimental spacecraft in special orbits to satisfy mission-unique experimental data-acquisition requirements. Scientists designed the mission to determine the feasibility of using day-night thermal-infrared remote sensor-derived data to detect various rock types and mineral resources; monitor surface soil-moisture changes; measure plant-canopy temperatures at frequent intervals to detect transpiration of water and plant stress; measure urban heat islands; map surface-temperature changes on land and water bodies; and analyze snow fields to predict water runoff. HCMM data, correlated with data from other satellites (especially Landsat) and from ground observations, could aid in detecting time variations of temperatures on the earth’s surface. Goddard Space Flight Center had been responsible for design, integration, and testing of the satellite and for data processing. Boeing Aerospace Co. had built the base module, International Telephone and Telegraph the instrument. (NASA Release 78-60; MOR E-651-78-01 [prelaunch] Apr 19/78; NYT, Apr 27/78)
NASA announced plans to launch the geostationary operational environmental satellite GOES-C, third in a series of operational spacecraft funded by NOAA to meet DOC requirements, no earlier than May 25, 1978, from the ETR on a 3-stage Delta. In May 1974 and Feb. 1975, NASA had launched two operational prototype meteorological spacecraft, Sms 1 and Sms 2, developed with NASA funding and still in orbit; it had launched the first two operational spacecraft funded by NOAA, Goes 1 and Goes 2, in Oct. and June 1977, respectively. NASA had planned to use a 3-stage inertially-guided Delta launch vehicle to inject GOES-C into a transfer orbit where its apogee boost motor would put it in a synchronous orbit. A GOES-C on station at 135°W would augment existing satellite coverage of earth weather and become a part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP). (MOR E-612-78-01 [prelaunch] May 19/78)
MSFC announced that its weather scientists working with colleagues from Texas A&M had encountered practically every kind of severe weather—thunderstorms, tornadoes, torrential rains, hail, and snow—within the study of the zone, roughly the south central states, during the 7th atmospheric variability experiment (AVE-7). As a 3-day weather pattern had moved across the test area, 24 rawinsonde stations operated by NOAA and one each by MSFC and Texas A&M had acquired data. The experimenters had also received for comparison a weather picture from a Goes satellite every 15min and reports from weather radars throughout the area every hour. In the AVE-7 experiment, rawinsonde stations every 3hr released balloons carrying instruments to record temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, and wind velocity and direction from ground level to an altitude of about 25km (15.5mi). The balloons, normally released about every 12hr, on a 3-hr schedule had allowed researchers to spot small-scale events that could dissipate quickly. The balloon data, combined with satellite pictures at 15-min intervals, had permitted computerized weather forecasts by showing scientists how to spot approaching bad weather much earlier; comparison of ground-based with satellite data would help identify the causes of severe weather. With more such experiments using space technology, scientists could eventually accumulate enough information to more accurately predict severe weather. {Marshall Star, May 10/78, 1)
GSFC announced that, in a cooperative program with NOAA, its scientists had demonstrated the benefits of using short-interval full-resolution satellite images to monitor tropical cyclones. The agencies had undertaken the program to determine optimum resolution and image frequency for selecting winds to study, in forecasting tropical-cyclone intensity. Experiments using the Sms 2 to study hurricane Eloise and cyclone Caroline, and Goes 1 for tropical storms Belle and Holly, had taken scan images of the storms at varying resolutions and at a variety of time intervals. GSFC using its atmospheric and oceanographic information processing system (AOIPS) to examine the experimental data, had found that rapid-scan full-resolution visible images could best disclose the wind vectors. Scans taken every half or quarter hr had been inadequate, because many clouds of the type and size best suited for tracking did not persist or maintain their shape for as long as 30min. GSFC scientists also had found that the full-resolution visible images could improve cirrus tracking and could increase the number of trackable elements available from coarser-resolution infrared images. (Goddard News, June 21/78, 4)
The NYT reported a leading Soviet astrophysicist’s forecast that the next 250yr would see construction of a vast “artificial biosphere” in outer space capable of supporting 10 billion people, more than twice the world’s present population. Iosif Shklovsky had visualized a system of space colonies with total surface area hundreds of thousands of times greater than earth’s, that could capture and use huge amounts of solar energy. Looking further into the future, Shklovsky had also predicted that 2540yr from now mankind would have fully colonized the solar system. His article in the journal Social Sciences emphasized U.S. plans to use large satellites to beam solar energy to earth as microwaves. Prof. Gerald O’Neill of Princeton Univ., head of a group of physicists and engineers designing solar satellites, had estimated that a space colony accommodating 100 000 or more people could be built by the year 2025. Skhlovsky had agreed that expansion into space would be inevitable because of mounting pressures of population and environment on earth’s resources. Only the colonizing of space could offer a long-term solution, Shklovsky contended, claiming mathematical proof that adopting a global-balance strategy of limited growth could delay, but not avert, a world crisis. Shklovsky added that construction of large-scale colonies would require raw materials from the moon, asteroids, and other planets. Although other Soviet scientists had stressed the importance of the search for extraterrestrial life, Shklovsky said that chances of finding other intelligent life were extremely remote. The distance to the nearest extraterrestrial civilization (one whose signals could be reaching the earth now) had been calculated at 3300 to 9800 light yr, or 19 800 trillion to 58 800 trillion mi; however, the absence of life, at least intelligent life, in earth’s region of the universe should , not discourage, but rather encourage, the conquest of space, he said. (NYTMay 18/78, B-10)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, and Roy Gibson, ESA director general, had met in Paris Oct. 7 at ESA’s annual Spacelab program meeting, during which NASA and ESA had signed three memoranda of understanding on the use of data transmitted by Landsat 2 and 3, Nimbus G, and SeaSat. The memoranda covered acquisition, preprocessing, and dissemination to national Earthnet stations (the European ESA network) of data transmitted by the spacecraft. They also dealt with acquisition and transmission of oceanographic data from microwave systems onboard SeaSat by the SeaSat Users Research Group Europe, under auspices of the European Association of Remote Sensing Laboratories (Earsel), to study possible inclusion of microwave detectors on future European satellites. (NASA Release 78-158; ESA Release Oct 9/78)
NASA’s Office of Space Science (OSS) had become less optimistic about how much money it could expect from Congress for Spacelab in the 1980s, and was trying to reduce the estimated cost of such missions, Aerospace Daily reported. The cost of Spacelab operations, together with inherent limitations on the work it could support, was working against previous forecasts of heavy use. Two yrs previously, OSS had viewed Spacelab as an opportunity for growth of NASA’s science program and had projected annual Spacelab budgets of $250 million or so, excluding launch costs, by the mid-1980s. Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, said, “Now we don’t have the same optimism,” given the expected budget environment, Spacelab orbit staytime and schedule limits, and competition within OSS for continued development of free-flyers. A more realistic budget prospect now would be $100 to $125 million per yr, essentially permitting three missions per yr (one for physics and astronomy, one for solar terrestrial programs, and one for life sciences), and development of one facility-class instrument per yr once steady-state operations were reached about 1984. That level of funding would be about the same as that for one major flight of planetary spacecraft per yr. (A/D, Nov 30/78, 127) During November: Two Space and Missile Test Center (SAMTEC) test ranges had provided NASA with radar tracking and data-relay support during the reentry of Pegasus 1, AFSC Newsreview reported. The micrometeoroid-detector satellite was NASA’s largest unmanned spacecraft when it was launched in February 1965. The Eastern Test Range at Patrick AFB, Fla., had served as lead range in satellite tracking, furnishing data from eastern sensors to GSFC; the Western Test Range at Vandenberg AFB had tracked the satellite after receiving acquisition data from NORAD. Employees of Federal Electric Corp., SAMTEC’s range technical-services contractor, had worked from early Sept. 12 until late Sept. 16 when reentry occurred off the coast of Angola. The company had used the TPQ-18 radar on south Vandenberg AFB, the FPQ-14 radar at Kaena Point, Hawaii, and the FPQ-6 radar at Pillar Point, Calif. In addition, SAMTEC Operations Control personnel at Vandenberg had supported the tracking and data relay provided to ETR from SAMTEC’s Kwajalein missile range in the Marshall Islands. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 78, 1)
FBIS reported that scientists and staff members of the Prague Institute of Geophysics were working around the clock as they received and processed data coming from the first Czechoslovak artificial satellite, Magion. Beginning Nov. 14, when Magion separated from Intercosmos 18 and went into an independent orbit, it had returned data on the earth’s ionosphere and magnetosphere four times a day to the Czechoslovakian Panska Ves Observatory, where incoming information was computer-processed and transmitted to the Flight Control Centre and to stations in the Soviet Union. P. Triska, in charge of the Magion experiment, said that onboard systems were working efficiently and that he and his staff were cooperating closely with their Soviet colleagues: “We draw up together working programs for Intercosmos 18 and Magion and exchange information.” (FBIS, Tass In English, Nov 21/78)
The U.S. Postal Service would soon begin a lyr test of an electronic message service system that would reduce letters to electronic impulses, relay them to their destination by satellite, reconvert them to letter form using high-speed printers, and deliver them by regular carriers, Defense/Space Daily reported. If the test was successful, the agency could offer electronic mail services in up to 10 cities within 3yr. The initial test would send messages by satellite from one room in a Postal Service facility in Rockville, Md., to another room in the facility. A $2.3 million RCA study of the electronic message service system had concluded that it would cost the Postal Service 10 to 11 cents to deliver this kind of mail, a price equal to or less than present costs. RCA suggested that the system could be used within 6 to 8yr for up to one-fourth of the 100 billion letters sent through the U.S. mails annually and estimated it would cost the Postal Service $2 billion to install the system in 87 cities around the U.S. (D/SD, Nov 27/78, 120)
Worldwide demand for international satellite communications would increase by more than 100% in the next 5yr, INTELSAT announced. The prediction came out of the fourth global telecommunications traffic meeting sponsored by INTELSAT, in which 172 international communications experts representing 93 telecommunications entities around the world participated. Purpose of the annual meeting was to forecast the demand for services provided by the INTELSAT system. INTELSAT would use these forecasts in configuring its system to meet user requirements with maximum efficiency, and in planning for future satellite systems. Preliminary figures from the meeting indicated that global demand for satellite-telecommunications capacity would increase from 14 105 equivalent full-time simultaneous telephone circuits at year end 1978, to 29 282 circuits by the end of 1982, up 108%. The biggest demand was expected to be from countries surrrounding the Atlantic Ocean, where communications traffic by satellite was expected to rise by 114% over the next 5yr. Traffic in the Indian Ocean region was projected to increase by 98%, and in the Pacific Ocean region by 91%. (INTELSAT Releases 78-19-1, 78-20-1)
ESA’s meteorological satellite, Meteosat 1, had been in orbit for a yr carrying out its image-taking, dissemination, and data-collection missions, ESA announced. Ground facilities at the European Space Operations Center (ESOC) in Darmstadt, Germany, for receiving, processing, archiving, and disseminating meteorological data from the satellite were ready to fulfill all requirements for the first GARP experiment, scheduled to begin Dec. 1. Meteosat 1, which transmitted every half hr visible and infrared images of the earth, had been retransmitting to primary and secondary data-user stations some 300 formats per day in various digital and analog forms. It also acted as a relay for image data from the U.S. satellite Goes 1 over the Atlantic, transmitted through the Centre de Meteorologie Spatiale at Lannion at the rate of about 20 formats per day. Meteosat 1 had also participated in Nov. in the first transmission tests of image data from the TJ.S. Goes 3 satellite over the Indian Ocean, so that users had received data from three geostationary satellites covering approximately two-thirds of the globe. Data-collection platform experiments had demonstrated the high quality of the links between Meteosat 1 and the mobile platforms; about 15 DCPs were operational, and about 10 were in the process of being admitted and would come into service in early 1979. Another mission of Meteosat 1 was to supply immediately usable meteorological products (wind speed, cloud height, sea-surface temperature, etc.). Meteosat image quality should maintain the serviceability of these products; results already achieved were at least comparable to those obtained by other geostationary satellites participating in the GARP. Use of the water-vapor channel, an original feature on Meteosat l, was considered by the meteorological community as a major advance in refinement of interpretation techniques. (ESA Release Nov 28/78)
Fourteen satellites, four of them NASA’s and two starting the Intelsat V series of international communications satellites, were on the preliminary schedule of NASA launches for 1979, Aerospace Daily reported. These missions would use expendable launch vehicles, and NASA hoped that its most significant mission of 1979 would be number 15: first flight of the Spaed Shuttle. The tentative 1979 schedule would begin the transition of payloads from expendable launchers to the Space Shuttle. The Delta launch vehicle, workhorse of the 1970s, would carry only 4 of 1979’s 14 missions. Only three of the payloads were commercial, and half the 1979 launches would be from Vandenberg AFB and Wallops Island rather than KSC. The three launches scheduled in the first quarter of 1979 would use all three launch sites and three different launchers. Second-quarter payloads, all sponsored by organizations outside NASA, would also use all three launch sites. NASA planned five launches in the third quarter, which it hoped to close with the Space Shuttle’s first flight. (A/D Nov 21/78, 95)	,
After 2 decades as key booster in NASA’s space program, the Atlas Centaur would remain “old reliable” for a variety of planetary, commercial, and military payloads launched in the 1980s, Lewis News reported. The Centaur project had begun in November 1958 when DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) awarded the first contract to General Dynamics after a study recommending a high-energy upper stage for the Atlas launch vehicle. Before the study, Pratt and Whitney had received a contract for a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Since Centaur would be the first space-launch vehicle to use a liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen combination, a whole new technology was needed for handling materials, behavior, fabrication, and testing of liquid hydrogen in a space environment, not only to make Centaur a success but also because this fuel was to be used for the upcoming Apollo program. In 1958 Centaur received its first mission assignment, definition of geosynchronous orbit, and in 1960 its first deep-space mission. The creation of NASA resulted in transfer of the Centaur program from ARPA to NASA in July 1959. LeRC, which had pioneered research in hydrogen technology and had fired an experimental liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine with 50001b thrust as early as 1953, received technical management of Centaur in 1962. The first successful flight of an Atlas Centaur in Nov. 1963 included the world’s, first inflight ignition of a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Centaur had proved its operational capability in 1965 by successfully injecting a dynamic model of the Surveyor spacecraft into a prescribed transfer trajectory, resulting in a simulated lunar-target impact. After successfully launching Surveyor (for the first soft landing on the moon) and Pioneer 11 (for a flyby of Jupiter), NASA in the mid-1960s had directed its efforts to integrating the Centaur with the USAF Titan booster. General Dynamics had built an improved Centaur adaptable to both the Atlas and the Titan boosters; Martin Marietta had conducted studies for NASA on integrating the Titan booster with an improved Centaur, and on modifications needed to the Titan launch facility at ETR. Atlas Centaur missions had included earth-orbiting spacecraft such as the applications technology satellite, orbiting astronomical observatories, Comstar, high-energy astronomical observatories, and FltSat-Com. Atlas Centaur, used for future missions with HEAO and FltSat-Com spacecraft, would remain one of NASA’s prime launch vehicles until the Space Shuttle became fully operational. (Lewis News, July 21/78, 1)
NASA announced plans to launch Nimbus-G, first satellite designed to monitor manmade and natural pollutants in earth’s atmosphere and the last of seven Nimbus environmental-research spacecraft launched since Aug. 1964, from WTR no earlier than Sept. 18, 1978. A 2-stage Delta launch vehicle would put the 907-kg observatory toward a near-polar orbit. Nimbus-G would for the first time provide scientists throughout the world with continuous environmental data on physical conditions in the global atmosphere, the oceans, the dynamic atmosphere-ocean interface, and the earth’s heat balance—information vital to understanding climate, oceanography, atmospheric pollution, and regional and global weather patterns. NOAA and several U.S. university scientists would work with NASA scientists on the Nimbus-G project, along with scientists from the United Kingdom, Denmark, Switzerland, Canada, South Africa, West Germany, France, and Belgium. For the first time ESA would bring on line a Nimbus-G direct reception and data-processing capability at Lannion in France that would eventually receive, process, and distribute on a regular basis Nimbus-G data to approved European investigators. The 8 highly complex sensors on Nimbus-G (seven from the U.S. and one from the U.K.) were improved versions of instruments carried on six previous Nimbus flights to answer three questions: Was ozone in the earth’s upper atmosphere changing? Was the earth warming or cooling? What was the extent of pollution in the world’s oceans? Nimbus-G sensors would include four to measure atmospheric gases and pollutants and their interrelationships in the earth’s stratosphere and mesophere (the upper atmosphere from 10 to 90km [6.2 to 56mi] up). The coastal zone color scanner, sensing colors of the oceans, would enable oceanographers to map chlorophyll concentrations, sediment distribution, and salinity in large areas of coastal or ocean water, and to detect and track water pollution such as oil spills, sewage and industrial waste dumpings, and river sediment. GSFC would manage the spacecraft, Delta launch vehicle, and global network for tracking and 2-way communications. Kennedy Space Center’s unmanned-launch operations team would supervise the Delta launch. General Electric Co.’s Space Division, Nimbus prime contractor with more than 50 major subsystem contractors, would be responsible for sensors and components in the spacecraft, launch vehicle, and ground-reception equipment. More than 1000 subcontractors and vendors had participated in the program. Cost of Nimbus-G spacecraft and instruments had totaled $79 million, $2.6 million less than budgeted. (NASA Release 78-136 [press kit]; MOR E-604-78-08 [prelaunch] Sept 1/78, [prelaunch summary] Sept 1/78; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 4)
NASA announced plans to launch orbital test satellite OTS-B, forerunner of an operational system, for ESA from Cape Canaveral no earlier than Apr. 27. This new comsat was 1 of 2 experimental models built by ESA to test satellite performance in orbit, with its operational descendants expected to provide satellite links in the 1980s for routing portions of intra-European telephone, telegraph, and telex traffic and providing TV relay services for Western Europe. Under an agreement between the U.S. and ESA, ESA would reimburse NASA for Delta launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs totaling $17 million. NASA had launched Ots 1 Sept. 13, 1977, on a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral; the Delta first stage exploded 55sec. after liftoff. A burn-through of one of the solid-propellant strap-on Castor IV motors, subsequently modified, had caused the explosion. (NASA Release 78-53)
Preliminary results from a 6-yr experiment at the San Andreas fault in Calif, indicated that earth motion along the fault had accumulated at a rate much faster than expected, equivalent to 6 to 7m over the past 70yr, Goddard News reported. Measurements from tracking sites on both sides of the fault in the San Andreas Fault Experiment (SAFE) to determine gross pla.e motion across the fault, and to demonstrate practical application of satellites and ground-based lasers in tracking relative motion of the earth’s upper plates, had produced satellite tracking data accurate within a few centimeters. Gross motion across the fault had provided a measure of strain energy as it accumulated, eventually to be released as an earthquake. Goddard Spaceflight Center’s pulsed laser ranging systems had measured earth motion by determining the range to a satellite, measuring the time required for a short pulse of intense light to travel from the laser to the satellite and back, and repeating the measurements once per second throughout each satellite pass. GSFC had performed the SAFE experiment in cooperation with a broad cross section of the scientific community. (Goddard News, June 21/78, 1)
INTELSAT announced it had awarded a $101 539 contract to General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., for a reconfigurable-beam satellite communications antenna. Under the 15-mo contract GE would develop an antenna capable of beaming dual-polarized transmissions that could be reshaped on command while the satellite was in orbit; GE would also fabricate portions of such an antenna for demonstration. Reconfigurable-antenna developments might be incorporated into INTELSAT satellites launched during the 1980s. (INTELSAT Release 78-36-M)
The People’s Republic of China had launched eight spacecraft, some of them military reconnaissance satellites, Av Wk reported. Mainland Chinese had confirmed earlier speculation that reentry packages returned from three PRC spacecraft were of that type. Av Wk also said that Cosmos 1031 launched Sept. 8 from Plesetsk by the USSR, appeared to be a close-look reconnaissance satellite to report on NATO’s Northern Wedding exercise to repel a simulated invasion of the Shetland Is. north of Britain. The satellite had an unusual perigee location of 60°N over the Shetlands; its inclination was 62.8°. (AvWk, Sept. 25/78, 9)
INTELSAT announced that earth stations handling satellite communications in countries bordering the Indian Ocean would begin switching to a new larger-capacity comsat, Intelsat IV-A, which would carry about 6000 2-way telephone circuits (25% more capacity than its Intelsat IV predecessor) and would eventually provide increased capacity for international satellite television. The Indian Ocean Intelsat had provided communications for and between countries in an area bounded approximately by Britain and Europe in the west and Japan and Australia in the east. The transition of 47 earth stations through 150 steps was scheduled to start Sept. 18 and to be substantially completed by the end of 1978. No interruption or disruption of telecommunications services was anticipated, except that television transmission facilities would be unavailable during the latter half of Nov. The switchover operation would position Intelsat IV and Intelsat IV-A in orbit at the same location and synchronize their harmonic motion (a sway induced by natural forces acting on the spacecraft). The proximity of the satellites would allow earth stations to see both simultaneously, permitting changes in the operational configuration without a break in service. (INTELSAT Release 78-25-1)
The USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) announced award of a contract to Boeing Aerospace Company, Seattle, Wash., for full-scale development and initial production of an inertial upper-stage (IUS) vehicle system, consisting of a 3-axis-stabilized vehicle of multiple solid-propellant stages with an avionics section including a reaction-control system. Although the USAF had primary responsibility for development of the IUS, NASA would participate in development because it also would use the IUS. The basic concept, a 2-stage vehicle for use with the Space Shuttle and on the Titan for some USAF missions, had one 20 0001b solid-propellant motor and one 60001b solid-propellant motor that would deliver a 50001b spacecraft to geosynchronous orbit. NASA also planned two other vehicle configurations, one to carry large spacecraft on planetary missions and another for deep-space missions such as Galileo, a probe of the planet Jupiter. The Space Shuttle would deliver all NASA IUS vehicles to low earth orbit for use in pushing spacecraft to higher orbits or to earth-escape trajectories. The first NASA IUS flight would be a mission planned for summer 1980 to launch a tracking and data-relay satellite (TDRS); first use of a 3-stage IUS would be the Galileo mission planned for launch Jan. 1982. (Marshall Star, Apr 19/78, 1)
NASA’s Office of Legislative Affairs had reported on a letter from the National Taxpayers Union to Sen. James Abourezk regarding S.2860, a bill that would commit the U.S. to the development and demonstration of solar power satellites. The letter read in part:
Aerospace Daily reported that John Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had addressed the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Nov. 28 on the importance of Congress’s role in an aggressive space program, contrasting the cautious approach of the Carter Administration. He cited the 1978 introduction of national space-policy bills by Sen. Adlai Stevenson (D-Ill.) and Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.). On the House side, Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.) had introduced, and the House overwhelmingly passed, a bill authorizing an unrequested $25 million to broaden and accelerate R&D for a solar power satellite system, including a hardware flight-demonstration phase that the administration had opposed as “premature.”	. The staff of the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications, chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), had been working on ways for Congress to facilitate “the space industrial revolution,” Yardley noted. He added that “if Congress does all these things, it will be in their tradition,” including taking the lead in developing the nation’s railroad system and passing the Homestead Act in the 19th century. “The same kind of action will be needed soon for the space industrial revolution,” he said; the industrial activity required will “be brought to bear if the climate is correct. It’s up to the government to provide the environment to stimulate growth.” Whether this occurred, he concluded, “may be the difference in the next 50 years as to whether the United States continues to be world leader not only in space but economically—or becomes a second-class power.” (A/D, Dec 1/78, 137)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that the USAF’s Geophysics Laboratory (AFGL) had successfully completed a rocket test flight of equipment to cope with lightning-like discharges that could affect earthorbiting satellites. These high-voltage discharges could interrupt transmissions of information to earth stations from geosynchronous satellites. A sudden rush of electrical current could confuse control circuits, causing a satellite to behave erratically or fail to function. Scientists were still analyzing information from the 160mi-high rocket flight, but preliminary results showed that the electrical buildup—which could reach thousands of volts—could be controlled by emitting negative or positive charges from the spacecraft. An Astrobee F sounding rocket carried equipment that released either negative charges (electrons) or positive charges (ions) as the electrical charge built up on the rocket body. This either kept the charging to a low voltage or provided an electrically conductive path around the rocket body so the charge could leak off slowly. The rocket payload contained instruments nearly identical to those scheduled for orbit in Jan. on a SCATHA (spacecraft charging at high altitudes) satellite as part of a test program managed by SAMSO, Los Angeles. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 78,9)
A detailed article on manned spaceflight in a recent Chinese technical journal had raised speculation that the People’s Republic of China might attempt to put a man in orbit, reported FBIS. Navigation Knowledge, published by the China Navigation Society, had printed a description of manned-flight problems such as weightlessness and satellite design, the effects of weightlessness on the body, and the growing of food in outer space. The article suggested that the PRC, having retrieved three unmanned satellites from orbit, was now ready to experiment with living in space. Much of the article concerned physical changes resulting from a space-capsule environment, and the food, clothes, and waste facilities appropriate for an astronaut, information apparently based on completed experiments. By using the direct rays of the sun, the article claimed, a space voyager could grow rice and wheat the size of a Chinese date tree and eggplant and peppers the size of watermelon. Observers believed Chinese space technology had developed considerably since the initial space launches and that the next (No. 8) launch might have an animal aboard. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb. 2/78)
INTELSAT announced it would hold open its offer of a new satellite system for world maritime communications, since its board of governors had authorized continued development of a maritime communications package to be carried on a number of its Intelsat V international comsats as well as further discussions on provision of maritime services by a global-satellite system of three modified Intelsat V satellites and three European MARECS satellites, beginning in 1981. Observers expected that the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT), after its formal establishment, would eventually take over maritime communications. The board also had authorized Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp. to continue studies on maritime-communications equipment sets for its fifth, sixth, and seventh Intelsat V satellites. Although the packages could not increase international communications capacity, they would offer the equivalent of 30 voice circuits for maritime shore-to-ship and ship-to-shore communications and would improve the quality of on-demand voice, telex, telegraph, and data communications. Aerospace Daily reported that the choice between NASA’s Space Shuttle and ESA’s Ariane to launch Intelsat V had been put off until Dec. The board had apparently voted on at least two options, one of which was a compromise using both launch vehicles. The board had deadlocked, because of “a lot of abstentions,” said one source. (INTELSAT Release 78-27-1; A/D, Sept 25/78, 110)
NASA announced plans to launch from Cape Canaveral no earlier than Mar. 23 an experimental Japanese direct-broadcast communications satellite capable of sending television programs directly into an individual’s home. The satellite, technically named Medium-Scale Broadcasting Satellite for Experiment Purposes (BSE), had been a project of Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA). As agreed by the U.S. and Japan, NASA would launch BSE on a Delta rocket; NASDA would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs. NASA’s worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) would track BSE until it achieved final orbit, when NASDA would take over tracking. Present Japanese TV, though covering 97% of the main islands, had not been economical for remote islands and mountain regions; also, tall buildings had degraded TV reception in large cities. NASDA had designed BSE to transmit high-quality color television to the Japanese islands and Okinawa at lower cost; user antennas could be as small as 1 to 1.6 meters (3.3 to 5.2ft), with production costs estimated at $200 per unit. The high power of BSE could transmit directly to individual TV sets even in bad weather, making TV available to Japanese living on the offshore islands and in inaccessible mountain areas. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage the Delta vehicle for NASA’s Office of Space Transportation Systems, and KSC would manage launch operations. General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., had built the BSE under contract to Tokyo Shibaura Electric Co. The Japanese Broadcasting Corp., the Japanese Ministry of Post and Telecommunications, and the Radio Research Laboratories of Japan would sponsor or participate in the program. (NASA Release 78-33; MOR M-492-212-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb. 28/78; Spaceport News, Mar 17/78, 1)
On the day Soyuz 30 cosmonauts had docked with Salyut 6, the USSR had launched from Plesetsk another satellite in what was believed to be its early warning satellite system, followed by launch of a new space-mission series, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. On June 8 Tass had announced launch of eight Cosmos satellites (Cosmos 1013-1020) on one booster rocket. The early-warning spacecraft, Cosmos 1024, had gone into a Molniya (communications satellite) type of orbit with parameters of 630/40 000km, 62.8° inclination, and 12hr 6min period. It was the first of this type of mission launched in 1978; three had been launched in 1977. The USSR had initiated a new spacecraft-mission series with the launch of Cosmos 1025, put by observers in the general category of military monitors but following a regime used by special-research missions. This was the 45th Soviet space mission in 1978, three more than at this point in 1977. The 1978 missions had been 77% military (not including the four Soyuz missions that had direct military application in manned reconnaissance/surveillance). (D/SBD, June 30/78, 307; FBIS, Tass in English, June 8/78) During June: NASA reported that the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) had awarded Dr. Jose Chirivella and Wesley Menard of JPL the 1977 Manly Memorial Award for the best annual paper dealing with engines. Dr. Chirivella, principal investigator of hydrogen enrichment in the aircraft piston-engine program, and Menard, supervisor of JPL’s combustion research group, had achieved fuel savings of 10 to 20% in aircraft piston engines. The aeronautical-propulsion division of NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology had supported the research. (NASA Activities, June 78, 11)
NASA declared the launch from Cape Kennedy at 6:36pm Mar. 31 of Intelsat IVA F-6, last of the Intelsat IVA series, to be successful. NASA had launched the satellite on an Atlas Centaur into the desired transfer orbit, thus meeting all objectives. Orbital parameters had been 35 912km apogee, 548.8km perigee, 21.84° inclination. ComSatCorp had fired the apogee kick motor Apr. 1 to place the satellite in a neargeosynchronous orbit that would take it at mid-June to its final location at 63°E over the Indian Ocean. (MOR E-491-633-78-06 [postlaunch], June 23/78)
NASA announced that Landsat 3, an earth-monitoring satellite equipped to measure earth’s emitted and reflected radiance, had suffered a failure in its fifth (or thermal infrared) band. Launched Mar. 5 into a near-circular 917km (570mi) high polar orbit, Landsat 3 had returned excellent imagery from its other four bands. NASA engineers believed the thermal-sensor problem had resulted from moisture buildup on a glass screen through which the instrument viewed earth. Efforts to correct the situation had been unsuccessful, and NASA had convened a special review board to examine the problem. Scientists had hoped to use Landsat 3’s thermal data to detect crop stress and to recognize “heat islands” associated with urban and industrial development. However, NASA’s heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM), launched in Apr. into an orbit more favorable to thermal-infrared data collection, had been returning excellent day-night data that could serve that purpose. (NASA Release 78-124; D/SD, Aug 14/78, 203; A/D, Aug 23/78, 236)
Space platform studies by NASA’s Office of Space Science (OSS) had raised questions about the extent to which OSS would use Spacelab during the 1980s, Aerospace Daily reported. During the next yr or so, users would evaluate cost-effectiveness of the modular Spacelab being developed by ESA to fly in the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay against that of free-flying satellites and larger undefined space platforms. In the meantime, experiments and instruments for Spacelab would be selected partly on the basis of their adaptability to later missions aboard free flyers. Operating-cost estimates and the outlook for funding had tempered earlier OSS optimism about using Spacelab [see Nov. 30]; the platform studies would likewise curb optimism if they substantially described activity that might be carried out better or cheaper on free flyers. A member of the NASA Advisory Council’s space science advisory committee noted at a Spacelab review that NASA could develop two Explorer-class free flyers at about the same cost as a few Spacelab flights. The space platform studies also had some political dangers: NASA had sold Spacelab previously as an integral part of the space transportation system, and would lose credibility if it backed off. However, Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, pointed out to the committee that the platform studies were intended to avoid the Spacelab situation, which had handed science and applications researchers a facility they had little if any role in defining. If NASA proceeded with a platform, Hinners said, it would be because mission requirements had been identified, “not because somebody who likes to build things says, ‘Here it is.’ ” (A/DNov 4/78, 144)
INTELSAT announced award of a contract to improve satellite communications in regions plagued by frequent heavy rainfall that caused satellite signals to fade at higher frequencies. Under the $39 827 contract, the Technische Universitat Graz, Austria, would conduct yr-long experiments for simultaneous comparison of fading caused by rainfall in four different locations. Results would determine whether alternative earth stations for use during rainfall would solve the fading problem. (INTELSAT Release 78-31-M)
ESA announced that the third (upper) stage of the heavy launcher Ariane, designed to use highly advanced liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propulsion techniques, had been successfully tested Jan. 10 at the Societe Europeenne de Propulsion’s Vernon test center. The firing had lasted 250sec, as scheduled. With previous successful tests, this test had demonstrated European mastery of the technology, ESA said. ESA had developed Ariane to launch communications and other applications satellites weighing up to 1000kg into geostationary orbit 36 000km above the equator; ESA had plans to launch about 200 geostationary satellites between 1980 and 1990. (ESA Release Jan 12/78)
Nature magazine reported that NASA planned to draw more academic scientists into its R&D activities. NASA Administrator Robert Frosch had issued a policy statement that, in the future, academic scientists would conduct “a substantial proportion” of basic research in all agency disciplines. Non-NASA scientists would take a greater part in all NASA basic research, from conception and planning through programming and execution to interpretation of data and publication of research results. The statement said NASA would increase peer evaluation of research projects in order to guarantee high quality. NASA critics had charged that agency research, particularly in areas such as space applications, traditionally proceeded in-house with little outside evaluation. The new policy, partly in response to President Carter’s directive on increased government support of basic science, had aimed at counteracting the criticisms. After NASA’s divisions had prepared a list of proposed activities, NASA would publish a 5-yr plan based on these proposals and conforming to the new policy. The Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications, for instance, whose programs at the outset had been essentially technical exercises to test and develop means of data acquisition, had realized its concern with science relatively late, so that scientists had had to do the best they could with the data available. Under the new system, NASA would ensure better working arrangements between scientists and instrument designers in deciding on the most useful data a satellite could collect, from both a scientific and a technical point of view. NASA stressed that greater use of academic scientists would improve quality control at the same time it would help to develop specific fields of scientific knowledge. (Nature, June 22/78, 586)
The Congressional Record reported that former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had introduced S. 3541, the NASA Solar-Power Satellite Program Act of 1978, authorizing research, development, and demonstration of obtaining electrical power from space through solar-power satellite systems or other energy sources. Successful demonstration of the technical and economic feasibility of this concept would supply an inexhaustible future energy both for domestic purposes and for export. “Either way,” said Sen. Schmitt, “such a demonstration could have a significant impact on our nation’s balance of trade.” The bill would instruct NASA to begin a program aimed at resolving economic and technical problems surrounding the concept, including systems definitions; health, safety, environmental and socioeconomic studies; and technology assessments of various space energy sources compared with terrestrial energy sources. Favorable evaluations “would accelerate the design of a program to make this promising concept operational at the earliest possible date,” Harrison concluded. (CR, Sept 30/78, S 16715) During September: NASA announced that scientists had confirmed detection by Pioneer Venus 1, on the first leg of its 7mo voyage to Venus, of a powerful gamma-ray burst from somewhere in the universe. So-called gamma-ray bursts, unknown until 1973, had enormous energies and occurred about once a month from random points in earth’s galaxy or even beyond. Discovery of their origin—black holes, brilliant supernova, neutron stars, or some totally unexpected source—would be a difficult task for astronomers. Pioneer Venus measurements of these bursts during its 482million-km mission should enable scientists for the first time to track the origins accurately. Two other American spacecraft (Vela, a DOE satellite orbiting the earth, and Helios B, a NASA-European scientific satellite orbiting the sun) had detected the gamma-ray burst; scientists would correlate observations of all the satellites to get a rough fix on the burst. Locating the origin of the burst would give scientists an idea of the extraordinary physical events that could produce such high-energy explosions; no current hypotheses could account for them. (NASA Actv, Sept/78, 19)
NASA declared the launch of two satellites had been successful, Japan’s direct broadcast satellite BSE and ESA’s orbital test satellite Ots 2. A Delta had launched BSE into a synchronous transfer orbit from ETR at 5:01pm EST Apr. 7, 1978, with 35 923km apogee, 166.1km perigee, 27.2° inclination. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit. The boost motor had fired at 7:34pm EST Apr. 8 to move the satellite over the South Pacific to a position at approximately 110°E above the equator south of Japan. All subsystem functional checks had indicated satisfactory satellite status. NASA had launched Ots B (Ots 2 in orbit) at 6:59pm EDT May 11 from ETR on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit with 35 946km apogee, 183.6km perigee, and 27.4° inclination. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit. The boost motor had fired at 8am EDT May 13, to move the satellite over the South Atlantic to a position 10°E above the equator. All subsystem functional checks had indicated satisfactory satellite status. This was the first flight of the Delta 3914 (Castor IV) configuration since failure of the OTS-A mission in Sept. 1977. (MOR M-492-212-78-01 [postlaunch] and M-492-210-78-02 [postlaunch], both June 28/78)
On March 30, 1977, Carter announced that the U.S. and the USSR would establish a study group to “develop an agreement whereby we might forgo the development of a capability of destroying satellite observations vehicles, so that we can have an assured way to watch the Soviets [and] they can have an assured way of watching us from satellites” (the principal means of detecting noncompliance with strategic arms-control limitations). Yet, according to Brown’s statement, Oct. 1977 was already too late for both sides to give up killer-satellite development. The Navy had been interested in killer-satellite capability because the USSR had begun to use ocean-surveillance satellites to locate American ships. The USSR had also tried to use satellites to detect submerged submarines, making missile-carrying submarines vulnerable and offering a threat to the undersea leg of the U.S. triad of nuclear deterrence. (W Star, June 6/78, A-4)
NASA announced it had postponed to at least June 24 the scheduled June 10 launch of SeaSat-A because of precautionary changes and tests on the Atlas F launch vehicle. Temperature increases in the aft sections of recently launched Atlas vehicles had necessitated the changes and resulting tests. NASA would use SeaSat-A, first satellite designed to study the world’s oceans, to see if microwave instruments scanning from space could provide scientific data useful to oceanographers, meteorologists, and commercial users of the seas. The spacecraft would send information on sea-surface winds and temperatures, currents, wave heights, ice conditions, ocean topography, and coastal storm activity. NASA would attempt to demonstrate the feasibility of an operational multiple-satellite network to monitor oceans on a continuous near-realtime basis; twice daily, the system could provide ships at sea with detailed charts updated to show latest weather conditions, sea states, and hazards. Long-range use of the system could influence ship design, port development, and selection of sites for offshore facilities such as power plants. Other potential users of SeaSat data would include commercial fishermen, oil exploration firms, the Weather Service, pollution-control agencies, and the Coast Guard and Navy. (NASA Release 78-77; JPL Universe, May 26/78, 1)
