NASA’s Pioneer 11 had encountered Saturn’s bow shock (where the solar wind—a stream of electrified particles from the Sun—bent around Saturn’s magnetic field), project manager Charles Hall reported from ARC, adding that solar storms during the past few days had played havoc with Pioneer’s radio signals. Pioneer was not designed in 1967 to fly to Saturn; that mission arose only after a successful Jupiter flyby in 1974, calling at first for Pioneer to fly through Saturn’s rings on what the Washington Post called a “kamikaze mission.” The most dangerous moment of the 6.5-year 2-million-mile journey would be crossing September 1 through belts of unknown material beyond the ring systems around Saturn that had been visible from Earth, during which Pioneer would risk a potentially fatal collision. Because of intense radiation (solar-particle interference was degrading the quality of Pioneer images), mission controllers at ARC had reduced the data transmission rate by half. Solar storms had occurred late in July and in midAugust, and high-energy particles from the second storm had reached Saturn at the same time as slower particles from the first storm. Reducing the transmission rate would diminish effects of interference and also the quality of the images. Pioneer would enter the dangerous area outside the visible ring system at 10:44 a.m. EDT, but scientists would not know for 86 minutes whether it had survived (the time the signals needed to reach Earth). No one knew the composition of the 2 minute-wide third ring; if it consisted of boulders, Pioneer could probably get past it safely, but a ring of dust particles could riddle the fast-moving craft and end its career. Project scientist Dr. John Wolfe said chances for survival were half and half; pictures already transmitted by Pioneer were better than any yet taken from Earth telescopes. The Washington Post reported September 1 that solar storms had increased the noise level in space to 10 times normal. In early afternoon, Pioneer had flown into a detectable magnetosphere, showing that Saturn was surrounded by a strong and sizable magnetic field estimated at 700 to 1,000 times the size of Earth’s but roughly equivalent in strength. The New York Times reported September 2 that, as of 12:31 p.m. EDT September 1, Pioneer 11 had survived a hail of fine particles to get within 13,000 miles of Saturn for a 4-hour first encounter. During the approach, scientists were keeping watch on the plane of the visible rings through which Pioneer was descending: Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa was first to note Pioneer’s approach to “dangerous ring debris” in its path. However, the 10:30 a.m. crossing at a speed of 48,000 mph had taken only a second, though ARC had to wait until 2:02 p.m. to learn what had happened; when the radio signals continued past that moment without interruption, “a cheer went up.” LaRC’s Donald H. Humes said that Pioneer 11 might have had a close call, as the micrometeoroid detector had registered two impacts during the crossing: this was the limit of the instrument’s counting ability, and more impacts might actually have occurred. The impacts apparently caused no damage. The sharp rise in radiation encountered by Pioneer before it flew under the rings had fallen as abruptly as it rose, and by the time Pioneer was under the rings (closer to the planet) the radiation reading had disappeared completely. Dr. John Simpson of the University of Chicago said the rings were big enough to “scour out” nearly all the radiation trapped by the planet’s magnetic field. (The New York Times quoted Dr. Van Allen as saying that the radiation count while Pioneer flew under the rings was even lower than while the spacecraft was sitting on its launching pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla., 6.5 years ago. Saturn’s radiation, although it would be lethal to an unprotected human, posed no hazard to spacecraft, Van Allen added.) After its close approach, Pioneer swung behind the planet, out of radio contact for 78 minutes, during which its on-board instruments recorded data for later transmission. Upon reemerging, the spacecraft had to cross the ring plane again on its outward journey; the outbound crossing came at 2:32 p.m., and controllers again had to wait for indication that the spacecraft was safe. At 3:55 p.m. the signals affirmed that Pioneer 11 had survived another crossing. This was the last predicted hazard for the spacecraft, which would continue past Saturn to the outer edge of Earth’s solar system and enter interstellar space in 1993, by which time its radio would no longer be audible. The safe passage meant that Pioneer could spend September 2 and 3 photographing Titan and measuring Saturn’s rings from the dark side of the planet; also, that the two Voyager spacecraft following Pioneer could approach without fear of damage. In its two-hour passage, besides recording impacts, Pioneer had photographed a new ring previously undetected by Earth telescopes, called the F ring: scientists already knew of four rings called A through D (in order of discovery, not location), three of them bright enough to be seen from Earth telescopes, and a fifth (or E) ring had been suspected close to the A ring although Pioneer did not report it. Pioneer had also tracked what might be a new Saturn moon orbiting about 70,000 miles out; some thought it might be a known moon, Janus, but it was in a position indicating that it was an entirely new satellite that would bring Saturn’s count to 11, one short of Jupiter’s 12. Pioneer 11 photos of Saturn showed dark blue and green stripes across it just below the north pole; the colors, not so vivid from Earth, probably came from sunlight scattering in upper-atmosphere clouds. Jet streams like those seen on Jupiter appeared to whirl around Saturn at speeds of 300 mph. Pioneer images could give a better idea of the dimensions and composition of the rings when compared with Earth-based photographs. In the six years it had taken to reach Saturn, Pioneer 11 had reported a space-particle strike only once every two months or so, LaRC’s Humes recalled. Once past Saturn, Pioneer was to photograph Titan from about 221,000 miles, record its temperature and atmospheric methane, and try to detect “life chemicals”; as no life was evident on Venus or Mars, this might be the last chance to find extraterrestrial biology in the Earth’s solar system. First images of Titan had shown a fuzzy ball of light indicating a stratospheric layer of orange smog with blue streaks that might denote an atmosphere beneath the smog and clouds. The closest approach at 2:04 p.m. September 2 was 220,000 miles, and Pioneer had taken the first pictures at 260,000 miles. The pictures would be enhanced by computer before scientists could make detailed analysis. On September 3, Pioneer was already more than a million miles from Saturn, relaying no ill effects from the planet’s rings or radiation belts. Early on the morning of September 2, NASA reported loss of about two hours of Titan data from Pioneer transmissions to the Madrid station; ARC controllers did not know whether the loss occurred between spacecraft and station or between Spain and the control center about 40 miles south of San Francisco. A loss between spacecraft and station would be irretrievable: Pioneer had only the one opportunity for Titan observations after its close approach. It was not sending images at the time, but about 15 minutes of a CalTech infrared sensor’s readings on Titan temperature were lost. The cause might have been electrical storms in space or on Earth, or passage of the signals close to the surface of the Sun on their way to the Earth, any of which would make it difficult or impossible for the Madrid station to lock on to the signals. A dramatic difference in day-night Titan temperatures would suggest a thin atmosphere; a thicker, warmer atmosphere might be more hospitable to life forms. Project manager Charles Hall reported September 4 that the Titan data loss previously attributed to radiation disturbances was now thought to result from radiofrequency interference by a Soviet satellite. Both Pioneer 11 and three USSR satellites had been operating on a frequency reserved for scientific use. The Soviet Union had twice agreed to shut down during Saturn encounter, and Hall said NASA had “no doubt the Soviets would have acted” if they had been asked; “we did not request them to turn off their satellite on Monday,” U.S. scientists did not realize at first that signals from a recently launched Soviet satellite might interfere with reception of Pioneer data, being “between 100 and 1,000 times stronger than the signals we were receiving from our spacecraft.” Aerospace Daily said September 6 that the three Soviet satellites that had stopped transmitting September 1-2 for the benefit of Pioneer’s Saturn flyby were early-warning satellites designed to detect U.S. ballistic missile attacks on the Soviet Union. Cosmos 1024, 1109, and 1124 had suspended transmissions September 1 and 2 at NASA’s request; however, no request was made regarding September 3, and Cosmos 1124 had operated as usual. Western analysts questioned, Aerospace Daily noted, “whether the U.S. would suspend communications with any of is early-warning satellites if the Soviets made such a request” during a planetary mission. Pioneer project officials told a September 6 news briefing that the loss of Titan data was not the fault of the Soviet satellite, which was broadcasting before but not during the lost transmission. Poor data had resulted from the combination of solar storm and poor transmission from Madrid. Some data had in fact reached ARC, but was so “noisy” as to be useless. Scientists said the moon discovered by Pioneer was inside the orbit of Janus, previously the innermost known satellite of Saturn; the new ring (labeled G) was between the orbits of Rhea and Titan, beyond the rings visible to Earth telescopes. (NY Times, Sept 2/79, 1; Sept 3/79, A-l; Sept 4/79, C-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; W Post, Sept 1/79, A-3; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 5/79, A-10; W Star Sept 1/79, A-4; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; A/D, Sept 6/79, 17; Today, Sept 1/79, 4A; Sept 2/79, 1A)
Gen. Lew Allen, Jr., U.S. Air Force chief of staff, told the annual meeting of the Military Operations Research Society that the priority of the Space Shuttle program had “shifted to matters of national defense,” the Santa Barbara News Press reported [see October 30]. Whatever else the Shuttle does and whatever other purposes it will have, “the priority, the emphasis, and the driving momentum now has to be those satellite systems which are important to national security,” said Allen, a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Emphasizing the “change from what had been true a year or so ago,” Allen said the change was “apparent and accepted now, and it’s a change which will, if there are additional technical difficulties..., become more and more significant.” The Shuttle, he said, was “quite critical for concerns of national defense and for.. .verification of treaties.. .Confidence in the Shuttle and its reliability must be sufficiently high for us to place what is a substantial amount of the security of the nation on the performance of that system.” (Santa Barbara News Press, Dec 6/79, 14)
NASA announced an MSFC award to General Dynamics Convair of a $250,000 contract to study feasibility of a space platform in geostationary Earth orbit carrying many separate payloads. The platform would contain plug-in equipment to accommodate communications, Earth resources, meteorology, and similar studies now flown on separate satellites. Preliminary MSFC investigations indicated that a platform could be built in space and located in a synchronous orbit at 40,000 kilometers to offer power and other functions to “tenant” missions parked there for a fee-like rent. Platform services such as power, available to all tenants, would eliminate the need for antennas, solar arrays, or batteries on individual payloads, reducing size and launch weight. Locating packages on a single platform would also simplify in-orbit repair and servicing. (NASA Release 79-82; MSFC Release
ComSatCorp announced the official beginning of the new International Maritime Satellite Organization, INMARSAT, to operate a global maritime communications network. ComSatCorp would represent the United States in the new body. INMARSAT’S board, which would eventually represent 22 member nations, had met for the first time this date at Brighton, England. The new group would begin its operations in the 1980s after taking over from Marisat (developed and managed by ComSatCorp’s wholly owned subsidiary Comsat General), which for three years had provided communications services to the U.S. Navy and commercial shipping and offshore industries. (ComSatCorp Release 79-28) compare the difference of the price tag for the energy effort—$142 billion stretched over a 10-year period versus the $20 billion the Apollo program cost us for 10 years.” The Washington Star said July 19 that all three Apollo 11 astronauts would attend an Air and Space Museum ceremony the evening of July 20; on July 20 it reported that the ceremony had been held at 11 a.m. A Star editorial July 20 asked why the United States had stopped abruptly after taking “our first steps into the universe,” concluding that the United States was reluctant to pay for more space missions; assumed that “Americans had become bored by space voyages”; and now leaned “toward introspection and consumption.” Like the Star editorial, a Tom Wolfe commentary in the July 20 New York Times drew a parallel between the Apollo program and Columbus’s voyages, with support and excitement at the beginning and loss of public interest at the end. The July 21 New York Times said that the Air and Space Museum ceremony drew “some 2,000 people”; the “engineers and managers and astronauts who made possible” the giant leap for mankind had gathered for a “family reunion . . .When they spoke of the future, they wished it somehow could recapture the spirit of the past they remembered.” Later, the three astronauts took copies of the NASA history, Chariots of Apollo to the White House; President Carter said “We will win energy security for our nation in the same way we won the race to the moon.” As part of the observance, the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House Committee on Science and Technology held a symposium July 19: “Next Steps for Mankind—The Future in Space.” Moderated by Jules Bergman of ABC News, speakers were Professor Carl Sagan, Cornell University; Dr. Noel Hinners, Air and Space Museum director; and George Jeffs, president of Rockwell International’s aerospace operations. A NASA release had recalled events of the Apollo 11 launch July 16, 1969, and an MSFC release announced a nine-day observance in Alabama, home of the center and its Saturn V that made the mission possible. (NASA Release 79-74, 79-76; MSFC Release 79-72; W Star, July 17/79, D-1, D-2; July 19/79, B-l; July 20/79, A-10, A-ll, B-2; NYTimes, July 20/79, A-12, A-25; July 21/79, A-l, A-21; symp rept, Sen Cte Comm/H Comm Sci, July 19/79)
FBIS reported that U.S. scientists and engineers visiting tracking stations, research institutes, and “cosmic centers” in the People’s Republic of China had seen their achievements in rockets and cosmonautics. At one center, the Chinese showed their U.S. counterparts the latest “spy in the sky” satellite planned for launch in late 1979. (FBIS, Moscow to Asia in English, Oct 6/79)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle flights through early 1984 were almost completely booked up for payloads, with firm commitments for the first 37 operational flights beginning in 1981. The 47 payloads scheduled for those flights belonged to 14 government, commercial, and foreign users and ranged from launches of ESA’s Spacelab to navigation, communications, and weather satellites. NASA payloads would account for 32% of the number; DOD, about 15%; and all other users, about 53%. Payloads normally received assignments on a first-come first-served basis, but missions affecting national security would get priority, as would missions with time-critical launch windows or prime scientific or technical objectives. Flights for which NASA would be fully reimbursed would take precedence over routine scientific or technical launches. Services available to Shuttle users would include a basic launch with support and options (available at extra cost) such as special hardware, tests, and analysis; use of KSC services and facilities; or special operations such as extravehicular activity or longer duration. In addition to the 47 large payloads designed for the cargo bay, more than 200 organizations and persons had reserved (at a cost of $3 thousand to S10 thousand) space for up to 300 small self-contained payloads called getaway specials (GAS), research-and-development packages weighing 200 pounds or less. (NASA Release 79-142)
NASA pronounced the mission of international ultraviolet explorer lue successful: observatory performance had “substantially exceeded design and mission objectives.” Gyros used on lue would serve the Space Telescope (ST); the spectrograph and cameras would influence the design of those on the ST; and operational software and guest-observer operations would provide an experience base for the ST. (NASA MOR S-868-78-03 [postlaunch] Aug 16/79) Wolfe said that all the experimenters who worked on the mission in 1969 were still alive, and only one had been changed (the principal investigator for infrared, who had taken a sabbatical). He called the media coverage of the Pioneer 10 and Pioneer II Jupiter encounters in 1973 and 1974 “outstanding.” A plaque in the National Air and Space Museum described Pioneer as “a spacecraft designed to fly by the planets Jupiter and Saturn’—Wolfe congratulated the museum on its forecast. He enumerated the options for imaging, explaining how the Pioneer would approach Saturn and its moons and how the information returned would assist the upcoming Voyager encounters. A NASA release August 21 said controllers at ARC had ordered a “left turn” for Pioneer 11 to permit one-at-a-time activation of its onboard instruments. Images of Saturn’s rings from 16 million kilometers looked no larger than a penny; by August 26, investigators expected them to be better than any taken from Earth and 20 times better by September 1. (NASA Release 79-108 [press kit], 79-109; ARC Release 79-37; text, press conf, Aug During August: NASA announced selection of a number of investigators and experiments for its missions. —NASA selected 24 scientists to use data from the laser geodynamics satellite Lageos launched May 4, 1976. Having completed an initial phase of settling into orbit and checking out its laser tracking system, the satellite was now ready to provide mobile and fixed receivers around the world with ranging data on crustal-plate motion, density distribution within the Earth, and polar motion/Earth rotation. The investigators would become part of a working group chaired by Dr. David Smith, Lageos project scientist and were to meet August 29 and 30 at GSFC. Seventeen investigators were from U.S. universities (six), private firms (five), or other government agencies (six); others were from France (four), the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and West Germany (one each). (NASA Release 79-102) —NASA selected 32 research proposals that would use global measurements of the near-Earth magnetic field from Magsat, scheduled for launch in October. The 19 U.S. investigators represented universities (12), private firms (6), and government agencies (1). The 13 foreign investigators were from Canada (4), France and Australia (2 each), and Brazil, India, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom (1 each). The 6-rnonth mission managed by GSFC would remedy shortages and discrepancies in data from many geographic areas. (NASA Release 79-103) —NASA selected 40 scientific investigations for Spacelab/Shuttle flights scheduled between 1983 and 1985; 33 of those chosen were from the United States, and 7 from other nations (Canada, France, Japan, and Belgium) each funding its own experiments. The studies, chosen from some 200 responses to a request for proposals, would be on astronomy, solar physics, upper-atmosphere physics, space-plasma physics, and high-energy astrophysics. (NASA Release 79-112)
ESA announced that, pending an INMARSAT decision on the configuration of its worldwide maritime space system, member states in the Maritime European Communications Satellite (Marecs) program had agreed at a July 26 meeting in Paris to prefinance a third maritime communications satellite, Marecs-C, under a new arrangement whereby, instead of ESA’s offering INMARSAT the Marecs-A and Marecs-B satellites through Interim European Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), ESA would offer three Marecs satellites directly to INMARSAT. The agreement authorized ESA to sign with the satellite contractor for about 45 MAU (million accounting unit) and begin arranging for a Pacific-area ground station. (ESA Release July 27/79)
NASA said it would join the Canadian Department of Communications and France’s CNES in a 15-month demonstration in 1982 of a search-and-rescue system to speed detection and location of distress signals by use of satellites. The three countries would set up ground stations and conduct simulated search-and-rescue. A satellite in polar orbit could cover the globe every 12 hours, listening on the emergency frequencies used by ships and aircraft. Minutes after receiving an alert, ground computers could pinpoint its origin within 20 kilometers (13 miles) and flash it to coordination centers. Canada would provide transponders, and France receiver-processors, to fly on NOAA satellites in polar orbit; the United States would modify, fit with antennas, integrate, and launch the satellites and develop emergency beacons for ships and aircraft to use with the systems. The parties to the agreement were also negotiating for cooperation with the Soviet Union. (NASA Release
NASA reported a prediction by NORAD that the Pegasus 2 spacecraft assembly launched by NASA in May 1965 would reenter Earth’s atmosphere about November 5. Pegasus 2, one of three satellites launched in 1965 to gather micrometeoroid data for use in designing future spacecraft, weighed considerably less at 10,430 kilograms than the 70,300-kilogram Skylab that reentered over Australia in July. The predicted descent area would be 31.7° north and south of the equator, an area three-fourths water. After the reentry of Pegasus 1 and 3 (September 1978 and August 1969, respectively), no parts of either spacecraft were found or recovered. (NASA Release 79-126)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, administrator, and Dr. Willy Moenandir Mangoendiprodjo, director of Indonesia’s telecommunications agency, had signed a memorandum of understanding April 9 for launch of two Indonesian domestic communications satellites. NASA would furnish reimbursable launch and associated services for a second generation of Palapa spacecraft. The new satellites would replace existing communications satellites: Palapa A-l, launched July 8, 1976, and Palapa A-2, launched March 10, 1977. The Shuttle would launch the first Palapa B in June 1982; the second during the first half of 1983. (NASA Release 79-43)
MSFC reported that a delegation from the People’s Republic of China (PRC) visiting the United States since November would arrive at MSFC January 5 to investigate peaceful uses of space technology. Following up a visit to the PRC last July by Presidential Science Advisor Dr. Frank Press, the Chinese delegation, accompanied by NASA representatives, had visited several NASA centers and U.S. aerospace industry establishments. Among items of interest to the visitors at MSFC would be the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, currently undergoing tests. The PRC representatives were to be in the United States until mid-January and had concluded an informal agreement on developing a civilian communications system for the PRC and on buying equipment to receive Earth resources data from Landsat remote-sensing satellites. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch headed the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Jen Xin-min, director of the PRC’s Academy of Space Technology, headed the PRC delegation. (MSFC Release 79-2)
NASA announced it would deploy seven laser satellite-tracking systems in the United States and the Pacific Ocean as part of a global network to extend conventional measurements of strain in the Earth’s crust and to seek the causes of earthquakes. The lasers, to be in full operation by October, would work with microwave devices using signals from satellites and radio stars to measure crustal movements and the buildup of strain. Laser systems using corner-cube reflectors put on the Moon by the United States and the Soviet Union were operating in Texas, Australia, and West Germany; satellite-laser systems were operating in France, Spain, Germany, Greece, Egypt, England, and the Netherlands. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had laser systems in Peru, Brazil, and eastern Australia. NASA had joined NOAA, the U.S. Geological Survey, NSF, and the Defense Mapping Agency in a program using space technology to reduce earthquake hazards and possibly to develop a capability of predicting them. (NASA Release
INTELSAT reported that two new regional satellite systems proposed by member groups would be technically compatible with its present system and would not threaten its economic well-being. A proposed European Communications Satellite (ECS) system would provide telecommunications service to countries in Eastern and Western Europe and North Africa beginning in 1982, working with Europe’s terrestrial network. A Palapa B system, a joint venture of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries including Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, would serve remote areas not having access to INTELSAT’S system, also beginning in 1982. (INTELSAT Releases 79-07-1, 79-09-1)
NASA reported that scientists and engineers from five countries (Australia, Canada, India, Japan, and the United States) had met at WFC to compare techniques of gathering data on ozone in the stratosphere. Instruments in use worldwide had used different techniques of measurement and had never compared for system errors or other biases. The joint effort was sponsored by the World Meteorological Organization, FAA, and NASA. Over a 14-day period beginning October 21, the group would perform 20 rocket-borne experiments to establish instrument precision and comparability; the resulting information should define ozone variability during the period. Measuring instruments would fly on four kinds of rockets (Orion, Nike Orion, Super Areas, Super Loki) scheduled to coincide with orbiting-satellite passes, to compare rocket measurements with those from the satellites. Ozone data would also come from meteorological rockets and balloons as well as from ground-based equipment. (NASA Release 79-130; WFC Release 79-17)
DOD launched a Block 5D defense meteorological satellite (DMSP) from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., at 11:22 a.m. local time on a Thor booster into an orbit with 837-kilometer apogee, 818-kilometer perigee, 101.5-minute period, and 98.8° inclination. DOD made no announcement, but Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the 1,131-pound spacecraft would be tested for about 15 days before being put into operation in its nearpolar Sun-synchronous orbit. (NASA wkly SSR, May 31-Junc 6; AvWk, June 18/79, 56) June 7; The Soviet Union launched Bhaskara, an Earth-observation satellite, for the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) from the Kapustin Yar cosmodrome at 2 p.m. local time on an SS-5 Skean vehicle into an orbit with 541-kilometer apogee, 518-kilometer perigee, 50.7° inclination, and 95.2-minute period. Named for an ancient Indian astronomer, the 1,000-pound India-built spacecraft was the second launched for India by the Soviet Union; it carried television cameras and equipment for studying hydrology, meteorology, and forestry. India’s first satellite, launched about four years ago, was still in orbit and functioning well. (NASA wkly SSR, June 7-13/79; Spacewarn SPX-308; WPost, June 8/79, A-15; AvWk, July 23/79, 59; D/SD, June 11/79, 200; July 3/79, 10)
NASA announced that it had selected 33 scientific investigations for 4 satellite missions scheduled for launch in 1982-1985. The investigations, 23 from the United States and 10 from 6 other nations, would be in climate and upper-atmosphere research. The 23 U.S. investigations represented 11 universities, 1 private organization, and 2 government agencies. Foreign countries represented were Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom. Each country would fund its own investigations; the cost of the U.S. studies would be about $5 million over the next five years, including instruments. Spacecraft used would be the earth radiation-budget satellite, two polar-orbiting NOAA metesats, and Spacelab 3. (NASA Release 79-165)
NASA reported that an unmanned Soviet Cosmos satellite to be launched in mid-September would carry 13 experiments from the United States along with some from the Soviet Union and other countries, all designed to study effects of weightlessness on physiological processes. ARC would manage the U.S. portion of the project, in which 40 scientists representing 18 U.S. universities and research groups would participate. Major payload would be 38 white rats and 60 fertile Japanese quail eggs, scheduled to orbit about three weeks. The Soviet Union would make a first attempt to breed rats in space, separating males and females until the second flight day; two control sets of rats on Earth would be housed and fed like those in space, one exposed to stresses such as launch and reentry but not zero gravity. Three U.S. experiments would use material handcarried to Moscow a week before launch and returned to ARC after recovery. (NASA Release 79-114; ARC Release 79-39)
ESA reported a fifth Japan/ESA meeting October 15-17 in Paris, with Roy Gibson, ESA director general, and N. Kozu, of Japan’s science and technology agency, leading the delegations. In several working-group sessions the parties reviewed continuing exchange of information on use of communications satellites; acquiring data from each other’s remote-sensing satellites; flying Japanese scientific instruments on Spacelab launches; mutual use of Japan and ESA tracking stations; and using Spacelab for research in materials and life science. A sixth meeting was set for Tokyo in 1980. (ESA Info Bltn 26) ESA reported a design review of the Marecs project October 9-10 with the prime contractor, British Aerospace, after which the agency approved a start on satellite assembly so that a flight unit would be ready for launch by the Ariane L04 vehicle. (ESA Info Bltn 27)
INTELSAT would mark the 10th anniversary of its global communications satellite system begun July 15, 1969, when an Intelsat 3 satellite went into service over the Indian Ocean; Intelsat 3 satellites were already covering the Atlantic and Pacific. It had been just over 5 years since launch of the first commercial communications satellite (Early Bird, nickname of Intelsat I) April 6, 1965. “Best of all,” INTELSAT said, its charges for leased telephone circuits by satellite had decreased 71.2% over 10 years despite inflation. (INTELSAT Release 79-17-1)
NASA reported that its small astronomy satellite Sas 3 had reentered the atmosphere April 9 over the Pacific Ocean after nearly four years of scanning the skies for X-ray data, although its design lifetime had been only one year. Launched May 7, 1975, from the San Marco platform off the coast of Kenya, the 195-kilogram. Sas J in a 500-kilometer orbit had discovered 2 new quasars and about half the 35 known X-ray bursters (stars emitting huge brief bursts of X-rays once every few hours). Sas 3 indicated that these bursts resulted from thermonuclear reactions on the surfaces of neutron stars. (NASA Release 79-44)
As decided earlier in 1979 [see June 30], NASA took the first steps to take ATS 6 out of geostationary orbit and boost it to a higher altitude to keep it from colliding with other spacecraft. On the evening of July 30, NASA fired the minus-pitch attitude-control thruster; the firing was successful, but ATS lost Earth acquisition because of intermittent telemetry problems. In order to reacquire Earth, the spacecraft was put in a Sun-acquisition mode the morning of July 31; boost procedures resumed about 1:30 p.m. and proceeded as planned, with completion expected in about 30 hours. Since its May 1974 launch, the five-year-old communications satellite had exceeded its planned lifetime by three years, but three of its four stationkeeping thrusters had failed, and the fourth was shaky. GSFC would use the remaining thruster to lift ATS to a level several hundred kilometers higher, where it would remain in orbit indefinitely. (NASA Release 79-81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt Aug 1/79)
NASA launched for the U.S. Air Force a satellite called SCATHA (spacecraft charging at high altitudes) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 4:42 p.m. EST on Delta into a transfer orbit pending its boost into operational orbit February 2. Later orbit elements were 43,297-kilometer apogee, 27,512-kilometer perigee, 1,416.6-minute period, 6.5° inclination. SCATHA carried twelve experiments, three provided by NASA, to collect data on high-energy solar-wind particles causing false signals from satellites by building up electrical charges on their surfaces. Military and commercial satellites in geostationary orbit over the Earth at 35,900 kilometers (22,300 miles) had been the major sufferers; the charges could effectively disable vital communications by causing equipment failure, false recording of unachieved events, or initiation of unplanned events. SCATHA would meet the greatest challenge of its planned 1-year lifetime during a solar eclipse period beginning in March, when electrical charging would reach its height; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had included an electric-field detector, a pair of 50-meter antennas to be extended in opposite directions in March to form a single instrument longer than a football field. Extension of the antennas might effect the spacecraft’s dynamics. The USAF’s Space and Missile System Organization (SAMSO) would reimburse NASA about $9 million for the launch. (NASA Release 79-3; NASA MOR M-492-303-79-01 [prelaunch] Jan 17/79, [postlaunch] Oct 25/789; O Sen Star Jan 31/79, 1; Today, Jan 20/79, 8A; Jan 22/79, 6A; Jan 30/79, 10A; W Star Jan 23/79, A-6) During January: The ESA announced that it planned to launch one of its Intelsat V communications satellites on Europe’s Ariane booster. The first four of this series of seven would be launched from mid-1979 to late 1980 on U.S. Atlas Centaurs; ESA’s board opted for a 1981 Ariane launch of its sixth Intelsat V and for Shuttle launches for the other two. (ESA Release Jan 1979, 1)
The Washington Post reported that India's “problem-plagued space program” had suffered another setback August 10 when a seven-story-tall launcher, product of 11 years of work, crashed 5 minutes 15 seconds after liftoff and dropped its payload into the Bay of Bengal 300 miles from the takeoff point. The failure was a real disappointment, following USSR launches of two India satellites, both of which developed serious problems: the first, orbited in April 1975, lost power after a few days. A much more complex satellite launched in June 1979 from a Soviet site would have mapped India’s surface using television cameras to record mineral deposits, water reservoirs, forests, and Himalayan snowcover; the cameras failed to switch on, and scientists got only the data from lesser experiments on oceans. This launch was India’s first attempt to orbit its own spacecraft on its own launcher from its own site (the small island of Sriharikota north of Madras, whose residents were moved to the mainland as a precaution). Though reporters were not allowed to attend, government cameramen were present. All publicity on India’s space program discussed mineral location and other social uses, but the Washington Post noted the military element: India was trying to join the “club” that included the United States, France, the Soviet Union, China, and Japan; India had lost a border war with China in 1962 and had been at war with Pakistan three times in the past 30 years. A rocket able to orbit a spacecraft could give India intermediate-range ballistic-missile capability; a satellite transmitting television images of mineral resources could also monitor troop movements. The lost booster was a four-stage rocket with solid-propellant motors designed to orbit an 88-pound satellite. The launch had been successful until first-stage burnout; the anomaly had occurred in second-stage flight. (W Post, Aug 11/79, A-13)
The Washington Post said NASA’s inspector general and the DOD were investigating charges that Rockwell International’s Space System Group beginning in 1977 had hidden cost overruns by charging expenses to the wrong projects. Work on the USAF’s Navstar satellite was charged to NASA’s Space Shuttle contract, employees alleged, and current costs of Shuttle development were charged to future operations, in violation of government budget rules. Present and former Rockwell employees had provided company documents to back up their statements. Ray Sena, an employee who had complained to higher management and to NASA officials, was formally suspended by Rockwell. Company officials admitted an investigation was in progress but refused comment. Although NASA learned of the situation in 1977, it only recently admitted that the Shuttle was at least $500 million over budget. (W Post, Nov 5/79, A-2)
The Washington Star reported on RCA’s plans to launch within 18 months a replacement for the $20 million Satcom 3 that vanished from orbit December 10. The company said that it wanted FCC authority to launch a spare satellite now being built; a complete search for the missing communications satellite could take several weeks, but so far “contact has not been regained.” (W Star, Dec 15/79, C-8)
At “encounter minus 4 days,” JPL issued a Voyager bulletin showing a nine-photo mosaic of Jupiter’s surface constructed from time-lapse photographs taken 7.8 million kilometers (4.7 million miles) from the planet. The bulletin also gave data on expected Sun and Earth occultations by Jupiter offering opportunities for “unique radio science and ultraviolet measurements” and on the close approaches to the five large Jovian satellites that would also occur March 5. (Mission status report 37) I ^ INlfcNHUNAU* preceding page blank not filmed The Voyager project manager, JPL’s Robert Parks, called it “spectacularly successful.” (NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02; mission status reports 38, 39)
NASA declared the August 9 launch of WESTAR-C (known as Westar 3 in orbit) to be satisfactory. The satellite, third of Western Union Telegraph Company’s communications satellites to be launched by NASA, was performing satisfactorily on its station at 91 °W over the equator. (NASA MOR M-492-203-79-03 [postlaunch] Oct 25/79) NASA declared satisfactory the January 30 launch for U.S. Air Force SAM-SO of the SCATHA mission into a transfer orbit from which it went into operational mode, a controlled westward drifting of 5° per day as planned. (NASA MOR M-492-303-79-01 [postlaunch] Oct 25/79)
NASA announced that it would launch the third applications explorer mission, AEM-C, from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Scout on or about October 29. Called Magsat (magnetic-field satellite), the craft would map Earth’s magnetic field and record distribution of crustal anomalies with a resolution of 350 kilometers, first global vector measurements of the nearEarth field. Magsat was a cooperative effort of NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey, which would use the data to update its magnetic charts. (NASA MOR E-662-79-01 [prelaunch] Sept 28/79) During September: The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy announced that the United States and Japan had formally agreed to extend their research and development cooperation into nonenergy fields. A meeting in Tokyo September 20-21 had issued a U.S.-Japan joint communique recalling summit talks in May between President Carter and Prime Minister Ohira on cooperative efforts in basic and applied research; working groups at the September meeting had looked at possible joint projects in areas such as environment, health, and outer space development. Further meetings would be held, the next in Washington. (Executive Office of the President release, no date)
President Carter designated the NOAA to manage all civilian remote sensing from space. A space policy review committee chaired by Frank Press had assessed future U.S. civilian remote sensing requirements and decided that a single agency could best handle operational satellite activities. NOAA had managed three generations of weather satellites to prepare it for responsibilities in land remote sensing as well as atmosphere and ocean. The directive said the United States would continue to supply Landsat data to foreign users; the DOC would foster private-sector involvement in remote sensing and would coordinate and regulate civil remote sensing through a board representing federal and state organizations including NASA and DOD. (Text, Nov 20/79)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that this week it would complete taking over all of its own managerial and operational activities, performed by the U.S. Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) since INTELSAT’s founding in 1964. ComSatCorp had been handing back responsibilities gradually since 1973 and would continue to provide technical and laboratory services under contract. Jobs done by ComSatCorp had included procuring spacecraft and launch services, operating and maintaining facilities, carrying out technical studies, and performing research and development. This would be the first time in INTELSAT history that it would incorporate all of its own executive functions, both administrative and technical. (INTELSAT Release
The Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) reported Japan’s successful launch of an experimental communications satellite Ecs, also called Ayame, from Tanegashima Space Center on an N-l rocket at 5:46 p.m. local time. Early orbit elements were 34,411-kilometer apogee, 193-kilometer perigee, 604-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. Designed for communications tests at very high frequencies, Ayame would later be maneuvered into stationary orbit, the National Space Development Agency said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 6/79)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, its administrator, would head a 13-member delegation of U.S. officials to the People’s Republic of China May 19-June 3 to learn about PRC space activities and discuss areas of planned cooperation, including a PRC domestic communications satellite system and ground station for PRC reception of Landsat data. The U.S. group, including representatives of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, National Security Council, State Department, National Telecommunications and Information Administration, NOAA, and U.S. Geological Survey, would meet with PRC officials in Beijing and tour their space installations. Frosch would return to the United States, after the Beijing meetings. The group had been invited by Dr. Jen Xin-min, head of the PRC Academy of Space Technology and leader of a space delegation that visited NASA and space industry firms in 1978; President Carter and PRC vice premier Deng Xiaoping had signed an agreement on space cooperation January 31, 1979. Meanwhile, the press reported that ComSatCorp president Joseph Charyk had told the corporation’s annual meeting in Washington of talks with PRC representatives on providing ComSat technical assistance in building a network of satellites and ground stations estimated to cost “in the hundreds of millions of dollars,” most of the necessary equipment to be purchased in the United States (NASA Release 79-70; W Star May 16/79, F-l; W Post, May 16/79, D-7)
The Washington Post reported that technicians at Cape Canaveral had lost touch with Satcom 3 December 10 after firing a small engine at 1:57 p.m. to put it on station over the Pacific. RCA spokesman John Williamson said that no one knew what had happened and “there is certainly cause for dismay.” Launched December 6, the 1-ton communications satellite designed for television and telephone relay was in a temporary elliptical orbit at the time of loss. (W Post, Dec 11/79, A-6) —On CBS Evening News, Walter Cronkite and Charles Osgood broadcast a “Night Before Christmas” parody on the loss of Satcom 3, concluding with, “And from somewhere in space comes the seasonal call: Merry Christmas. Good night. And you can’t win ‘em all.” (Text, Dec 11/79) —The Washington Post December 12 ran a feature story about cable television companies that planned to use Satcom 3 for alternative programming, such as Ted Turner who wanted a 24-hour news “superstation” (channel 17 in Atlanta), and two religious networks (“I guess they didn’t pray hard enough,” said an RCA spokesman). NASA had charged RCA $19.9 million to launch Satcom 3, most of it already paid, but RCA. had insured the spacecraft with Lloyds for more than its $50 million market value. (W Post, Dec 12/79, C-D
NASA’s public affairs office reported that the 23,000-pound Pegasus 2 satellite reentered the Earth’s atmosphere at about 4:20 p.m. EST, coming down in the Atlantic Ocean northwest of Ascension Island. The “footprint” of descending "debris would have spread over a path 60 miles wide by 1,500	miles long over the South Atlantic, the report said. (Hq PAO, Nov 3/79)
Photographs of Jupiter’s moon Io taken by Voyager 1 had revealed a strange “blue snow,” identified as volcanic gases released by continuous eruptions in the equatorial region, the New York Times reported. Dr. Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey told the American Geophysical Union spring meeting in Washington, D.C., that wisps of the gas appeared in Io’s south polar area along faults or fractures in the crust; this was the first finding of erupting volcanoes anywhere except on Earth, and the intense volcanic activity was “endlessly repaving [Io’s] surface with volcanic material.” Dr. Edward C. Stone of the California Institute of Technology (CalTech), chief Voyager mission scientist, said that a change in the Voyager 2 plan would include time-lapse photography of Io to pinpoint the nature of the volcanic activity. Dr. John C. Pearl of GSFC said Voyager 7’s infrared detectors showed that the main constituent of the gases was sulfur dioxide, also found in Earth’s volcanic eruptions. Dr. Norman F. Ness, also of GSFC, said Jupiter’s magnetic field extended far beyond Io’s orbit, creating a “big power station in the sky.” (NY Times, May 31/79, B-16) During May: NASA reported that the X-ray telescope on Heao 2 had photographed for the first time an X-ray “burster,” a “bizarre” phenomenon occurring when compact celestial objects less than 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter increase suddenly and intensely in X-ray brightness. Such a burst, releasing more X-ray energy in 10 seconds than the Sun does in a week, was first discovered by a Netherlands/U.S. cooperative satellite carrying Harvard-Smithsonian detectors in 1976. Scientists had not defined the nature of the bursts, which might result from explosions similar to a helium bomb on the surface of a neutron star or from violent instabilities in gas flow down a black hole. Heao 2’s picture, said Jonathan Grindlay of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, established the presence of a “steady” X-ray source in a “globular cluster” called Terzan 2, bringing the number of such clusters known to harbor X-ray sources to at least eight, six of these being bursters. The cores of globular clusters (oldest objects in the galaxy, consisting of round swarms of about 100,000	stars) were under study as possible precursors of black holes or of compact binary systems containing either neutron stars or black holes being formed to produce bursting X-ray sources. (NASA Release 79-65)
NASA announced a new five-year development program to retain U.S. leadership in satellite communications and assigned LeRC to work with private industry, DOD, and other NASA centers to launch a sophisticated communications satellite in 1985 or 1986. Daniel J. Shramo, LeRC director of space applications, explained that NASA in 1973 had “phased down” its work in communications satellite technology because of budget pressures and “the strong capabilities present in the private sector.” Industry since then had been improving antenna performance, increasing the number of circuits per satellite, and decreasing satellite weight per channel. Technical studies already under way at LeRC should result in a communications satellite system capable of transmitting data anywhere regardless of population size or electronic sophistication. (NASA Release 79-143)
The North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) issued a fact sheet on satellite decay predictions by its Space Defense Center, watching over more than 4,500 man-made satellites in orbit around the Earth. The Tracking and Impact Predictions (TIPs) gave time and position for large items such as payloads and rocket motors that might survive reentry and impact on Earth; for smaller objects likely to burn up without reaching the ground, the center would compute only a probable date of decay. Predictions would depend on many variables but were necessary under a 1971 pact between the United States and the Soviet Union that both nations would help identify objects that might reenter over the other’s territory; TIPs would prevent mistaking a reentering object for an incoming warhead and triggering warning networks. (PAO, Peterson AFB, Apr 15/79)
Today reported launch of an unannounced classified payload from Cape Canaveral Air Force Base on a Titan 3C at 7:22 a.m. Monday, September 30. The craft was a reconnaissance satellite, military sources said later, and would be used to photograph Soviet troop movements. (Today, Oct 2/79, 8A)
INTELSAT reported from its meeting just ended in Washington, D.C., that international telecommunications by satellite would increase nearly 100% by 1983.	More than 200 delegates representing more than 100 nations at the week-long meeting had pooled forecasts of services needed from INTELSAT’s satellite system. The biggest growth would be in the Atlantic region, where traffic might increase 114% by year-end 1983. The new Intelsat V satellites soon to be launched could carry 12,000 simultaneous phone calls plus two television channels—double the capacity of present satellites. Planning was under way for satellites with 40,000-circuit capacity. (INTELSAT Release
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
The Washington Post reported that NASA’s failure to tell a contractor about classified information on the USSR’s early-warning radar network had cost the federal government $75 million, the cost of rebuilding the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) to maintain communications with crews on the Shuttle in its first 10 years; of operations. NASA had had to renegotiate a $786 million contract awarded 3 years ago to Western Union, which designed the TDRSS without knowing about the problem of interference from USSR installations located between the Baltic and the Black Seas and using frequencies high enough to overpower transmissions between the TDRSS and the Shuttle orbiter. An unidentified source told the newspaper that U.S. intelligence had given such a “superclassified” designation to data on Soviet radar frequencies and power outputs that NASA could not give the information to Western Union and its subcontractor TRW Systems, Inc. Renegotiation and rework had delayed the satellite system by at least a year, NASA told Congress, but would not impair Shuttle operations already delayed by engine development problems. ( W Post, Feb 17/79, A-9)
NASA reported that LaRC staffers were using the SAGE satellite launched from WFC February 18 to measure and track into the stratosphere the ash and gases from an eruption of La Soufriere, a volcano on St. Vincent island in the Caribbean, between April 13 and 17. The eruption, detected first by SAGE while passing over the island April 23, deposited as much as an inch of dust on neighboring islands and provided an opportunity to study stratosphere distribution of aerosols from a single source. NASA alerted scientists around the world to use ground-based and balloon-borne instruments in checking between 6°N and 20 °N latitudes for effects of the eruption. SAGE might answer questions about the effect of aerosols and ozone on climate and environmental quality. (NASA Release 79-56; LaRC Release 79-29; WFC Release 79-8)
The ESA reported from its November 29 meeting that British Aerospace, chosen as prime contractor for ESA’s Large Satellite, would receive a contract for the first part of a study phase. Contracts for payload studies would go to Selenia (Italy) for a television broadcast payload and a 20-30 GHz transponder payload; to BTM (Belgium) for a 20-30 GHz beacon payload; to United Kingdoms Marconi Space and Defense Systems for a specialized-services payload; and to Marconi with Telespazio (Italy) and Philips (Netherlands) for mission studies related to the 20-30 GHz transponder. Contractor work would be done by April 1980, with launch scheduled for early 1984. Objectives of the Large Satellite program were to build a multipurpose space platform to match user requirements in telecommunications and to demonstrate a service payload that would advance ESA technology, assess potential of new satellite services, and promote satellite usage. (ESA Info Bltn 33) ESA reported that Meteosat 1 had put itself into standby mode November 24, one day after its second anniversary of successful operation in orbit, because of an apparent power overload. Attempts to switch it back to full operating mode succeeded only briefly. ESA had begun a step-by-step unit switching to detect the area of failure and isolate it; the fault apparently occurred in the electronics that turned off the main power supply in case of overload. Periodic instabllity had appeared in this protection unit, but the data collection function was fully operational and Meteosat 1 was able to collect and relay data from meteorological platforms within its field of view. ESA was analyzing the problem for possible effect on Meteosat 2, scheduled for launch in September 1980. (ESA Info Bltn 34)
ComSatCorp announced that it was considering a system to provide subscription television service directly to homes by satellite. For a monthly fee, the service would offer programming over a number of channels simultaneously, broadcast by satellite to small antennas on subscribers’ roofs. Programming “without commercials” would include first-run movies, sports events, educational and cultural programs, transmissions of data or text, and other formats. Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, chief executive officer of ComSatCorp, said technology for such a system already existed and was being tested in Japan; Canada and the United States had already tried it, and ComSatCorp had demonstrated use of Canada’s CTS satellite with a ComSat-developed antenna. The new service could begin as early as 1983, but would require approval by the FCC. (ComSatCorp Release 79-32)
Today newspaper said that representatives of Western Union and Hughes Aircraft Company had announced plans to launch Westar 3, an $8.3 million spacecraft bought in 1974 as a ground-based spare to supplement Westar 1 and Westar 2, launched in 1974, and now in orbit over the equator south of Dallas and southwest of San Francisco, respectively. Western Union said Westar 3, needed because of increasing demands on the other two satellites, would be stationed over the Galapagos Islands in the Pacific west of Ecuador. Western Union had made “substantial savings” in buying the spacecraft five years ago when prices were lower: the same item would cost about $14 million if built today. The firm was holding electronic parts for a fourth Westar in a Delaware warehouse. NASA would launch Westar 3 on a Delta from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station on or about August 9, it said in a release. {Today, July 20/79, 16A; NASA (press kit) Release 79-96)
NASA announced that MSFC had appointed a board to investigate the automatic cutoff of a test firing July 2 at NSTL of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article (three main engines mounted in an orbiter aft section and attached to an external tank). A liquid-hydrogen leak from a main fuel valve caused the cutoff after 18.5 seconds; no explosion occurred, and the gaseous nitrogen and water fire-control systems put out an external fire resulting from hydrogen accumulation around the test article’s aft area. Inspection revealed damage to the aft heat shield and charring of external-tank insulation, but the engines appeared generally in good condition. (NASA Release 79-92) 570 million miles a flood of scientific data and “stunning photographs of the planet and some of its moons,” as the New York Times described them. Scientists at the JPL, control center for the mission, said that the flight was continuing to provide them with “new surprises.” They had modified observing sequences on Voyager 2 to benefit from discoveries by Voyager 1 on its encounter in March. Changes included more darkside images of the planet to measure lightning and aurora; images of Jupiter’s ring, taken away from the equatorial plane; and about nine hours of continuous imaging of Io for volcanic activity. Voyager 2’s inward track past three of the four “Galilean” satellites had let it see regions not viewed by Voyager 1; its path was “more conservative,” as it passed 10 Jupiter radii above the visible clouds compared to Voyager i’s 4.9 radii, for “complementary observations.” Voyager 2 studies began April 25 and would continue for a seven month look compared to Voyager Ts three month look. Voyager 2 had been launched August 20, 1977; Voyager 1, launched September 5, 1977, on a faster and shorter course, had overtaken its sister ship before the end of the year. Scientists found that Jupiter and its moons did not resemble planets or satellites nearer the Sun, nor one another. Surprises in the findings were due, they said, to real differences between the outer and inner solar system and lack of previous knowledge, a result of the distance separating Earth from Jupiter. Before Voyager 1, “we thought we had some idea of what planets were like,” said Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey after seeing Europa images from Voyager 2. Instead of a sphere heavily pocked such as Earth’s moon and Mars from meteor impacts, Voyager 2 images showed Europa “as smooth as a billiard ball,” with hardly any craters on a surface covered by a mantle of slushy snow and ice up to 60 miles deep, with far-reaching shallow marks like cracks in an eggshell. The spacecraft passed Callisto and Ganymede on its way toward Europa and, after its encounter with Jupiter, had begun a 10-hour watch for Io, where it photographed six volcanoes erupting. On its approach to Jupiter, Voyager 2 had encountered radiation so intense that JPL had turned off a sensitive ultraviolet (UV) detector six hours earlier than planned; however, project director Ray Heacock declared “no problems and no failures in any of our instruments.” (JPL Release 901; NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, June 26/79; NY Times, July 10/79, C-l; W Post, July 10/79, A-10; W Star July 11/79, A-4; July 13/79, A-10) The PRC news service told of the difficulties encountered by Skylab and the U.S. government’s offers of assistance and compensation in case of damage or injury, noting that some airlines had suspended flights during the critical period. Tass said that western Australia authorities had “warned the population that some parts of Skylab might be radioactive and urged. .. caution in approaching them.” At a NASA press conference a few days earlier, a reporter asked how NASA could tell if someone brought in a piece of debris claiming falsely that it was part of Skylab. Richard G. Smith, deputy associate administrator, space transportation systems, who had been “actively in charge of Skylab activities for NASA,” replied that “it is very easy to identify an object that’s been in space. The high-energy particles that penetrate it in orbit give an extremely low-level but characteristic radiation background—no radiation for anybody to be worried about.. .But it’s very easy to determine that.” United Press International (UPI) reported July 13 that the Kalgoorlie town hall had squeezed into its lobby the biggest fragment recovered so far, a 6.5-foot by 3.25-foot cylindrical piece of metal bearing a stamped number 102: “very good for the tourist industry,” said Mayor Ray Finlayson. (NASA press conf July 6/79; coord ctr bltns July 9, 10, 11/79; NASA Dly Actv Rept July 12/79; W Star, July 12/79, A-l; UPI, July 14/79, A-7; FBIS, Xinhua in Chinese, July 12/79; Tass in English, July 13/79; AvWk, July 16/79, 22)
The Washington Post reported that Pluto, known for some 40 years as the outermost planet of the Earth’s solar system, would no longer be furthest from the Sun as of this date, when it would edge inside the orbit of Neptune and remain there until March 1999. Discovered in 1930 by Clyde Tombaugh at the Lowell Observatory, Pluto had an elliptical orbit that would bring it inside that of Neptune every 248 years (that is, the crossing last happened in 1731, and before that in 1483) and keep it there for about 20 years. Scientists at the U.S. Naval Observatory said that elliptical orbits of the two planets were so inclined that Pluto and Neptune could never come closer than about 240 million miles to one another. Last year, photographs of Pluto revealed a large satellite visible from only one side of the planet; it was named Charon, for the ferryman on the river Styx in Pluto’s realm of Hades. (Washington Post, Jan 22/79, A-9)
The Washington Star reported that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) had voted to let American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T) and GTE Satellite Corporation, operators of the Comstar satellite system, integrate their domestic communications satellite and ground networks. Before the decision, AT&T could use only ground lines to transmit private line communications. The FCC had put a moratorium on AT&T in 1972 to keep it from cutting circuit costs and further dominating the telecommunications market; since then, the company had been able to use its satellites for some phone service but not for transmission of commercial private-line service. AT&T Comstar craft were currently providing the U.S. mainland with communications to Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. FCC said AT&T would have to file rate schedules if it operated a satellite-only service; the company would integrate the satellites into its “national telephone network,” the Washington Star said. American Satellite Corporation, which already had an operating satellite, wanted the FCC to limit AT&T use of its satellites to services provided through separate subsidiaries; Satellite Business Systems had asked FCC to ensure that AT&T did not fund its satellite services with money from telephone ratepayers. (W Star, July 20/79, E-10)
Dr. Frank Press, director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, told the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space that President Carter’s May directive reaffirmed the policy of five previous administrations: separation of military and “open” civilian space programs; data sharing, hardware sharing, and technology transfer between civilian and military programs; and domestic civilian remote sensing regulated by the government. The United States had spent $100 billion over the past 20 years on federal space activities: about $67 billion for civilian programs ($25 billion for Apollo alone) and $33 billion in military programs. Today, the expenditure was about half and half. The FY79 budget request had been $7.1 billion, and the FY80 request would be $7.9 billion (up by 12%). These sums did not inelude private investment in space, more than $2 billion in communications satellites alone. (Text, Jan 25/79)
NASA held a press conference on the launch of Magsat, scheduled for the end of the month from the WTR. Pitt Thome, director of space and terrestrial applications, described the mission as an effort to obtain a global picture of Earth’s magnetic field, data previously available mostly from ground or aerial surveys and therefore both fragmentary and unreliable. A series of satellites (POGO) in the 1960s and 1970s had done some magnetic mapping, and this would be the first update of that information, used for navigation and for locating natural resources. Magsat would carry both scalar and vector magnetometers, so that it could measure not only the extent but also the direction of magnetic forces in Earth’s crust. Variations in the data from those in previous studies would also shed light on tectonic plate motion, the constant though small movement of rigid plates forming the Earth’s crust. The project scientist, Dr. Robert A. Langel of GSFC and John Denoyer of the U.S. Geological Survey described potential use of the Magsat data. Denoyer said he had been in southeast Asia recently with officials interested in oil prospecting, who would use the data in the next few years to look for petroleum as well as minerals. (NASA Release 79-129 (press kit); briefing text, Oct 22/79)
INTELSAT announced a first step toward intersatellite communications links: an award of a $170,000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Company for design and fabrication of a traveling-wave tube, a vital component of an intersatellite link. Direct transmission via satellite was now possible only between points within one satellite’s coverage area (about one-third of Earth’s surface); messages for locations outside that area had to use land-based links or ground relay to a second satellite. The planned communications links could transmit directly from one satellite to another, saving one down and one up transmission, freeing that link for other use, and making the whole system more efficient and economical by making more stations available to direct access. (INTELSAT Release 79-10-1)
NASA announced that its satellite system ASDAR (aircraft-to-satellite data relay) had started operation as part of the GWE that began earlier this year [see January 7], collecting and relaying weather observations from aircraft in flight and leading to possible million-dollar savings annually in aviation fuel costs. The system, consisting of a power supply, clock, 80-watt transmitter, small computer, and antenna, would monitor and report eight times per hour the aircraft’s location and altitude, together with weather data generated by equipment already aboard each ASDAR-equipped airliner. The system would relay the information through a NOAA satellite to weather data centers and on to the users. Relay of quickly changing weather information to subsequent flights within two hours could save time and fuel by taking advantage of favorable winds or avoiding threatening storms. Also, the 17 widebody jets using ASDAR would regularly cross the southern hemisphere and the tropics, where data were not usually available. Participating countries included England, Australia, the Netherlands, the Scandinavian countries, Singapore, and the United States (NASA Release 79-51) NASA also reported that ARC’s research aircraft Galileo II had gone to Saudi Arabia to join an international study of the monsoon, a storm system bringing nearly all the Asian subcontinent’s annual rainfall in June, July, and August, supplying torrents of moisture for the crops and overwhelming the area in floods. In 1978 the storms killed more than 900 people and left more than 3 million homeless. MONEX (the monsoon experiment) would trace the origin of the storms and attempt to provide weather forecasts that would be “extremely useful” in an area “practically devoid of basic weather data,” according to Joachim Kuettner, director of the U.S. effort. (NASA Release
NASA announced award of a $4.7 million contract to Goodyear Aerospace Corp., Akron, Ohio, for fabricating a high-speed image-processing computer (called massively parallel processor) to analyze data from future Earth-observation spacecraft. Current computers had to process one at a time the thousands of picture elements (pixels) constituting a satellite image, a timeconsuming and expensive procedure. The new computer would use 16,384 simple interconnected elements to process the pixels simultaneously, 10 to 100 times faster than now possible and at a greatly reduced cost. Scheduled for delivery to GSFC in 1982, it would process data in the hundreds of images received there from NASA’s Earth-resources spacecraft. (NASA Release
NASA launched FltSatCom-B, second in a series of five fleet satellite communications system spacecraft, from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur at 2:56 p.m. into a transfer orbit, before firing its apogee kick motor May 6 to move it toward a 23,300-mile altitude synchronous-orbit station over 23 °W, which it should reach in late July. This was the 50th launch by an Atlas Centaur. The TRW-built 4,100-pound FltSatCom 2 was about 880 pounds heavier than any previously launched by this vehicle, requiring it to take a path offset 2.4° from the equator. Like its predecessor FltSatCom 1 launched in 1978, now on station over 100 °W, FltSatCom 2 would link ships, submarines, and planes to various ground-based control centers and would provide service to White House communications centers. The Air Force reported that about 420 surface ships and 90 submarines contained equipment for communicating by satellite, and the number was growing. (NASA Release 79-49; NASA MOR M-491-202-79-02 [prelaunch] May 1/79, [postlaunch] Nov 5/79; W Post, May6/79, 17; LA Times, May 5/79)
At a press conference on NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1980 (FY80), Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said the 1980 budget year would not “go down in history as my favorite.” The request NASA submitted to Congress was just over $4.7 billion, an increase of about $160 million over the FY79 budget, counting in the latter a $185 million supplemental NASA had asked for. The FY80 request would amount to slightly less than the rate of inflation, Dr. Frosch said; not counting the $185 million supplemental in the FY79 budget, the 1980 request would be “about equal to inflation.” Whereas funding sought for space science and applications was up about 20% and the total amount included support for all ongoing programs, it contained no money for “new flight project starts of any major kind” in space sciences or applications. The budget did contain “some increases in aeronautics, where it is more difficult to identity a major new start in any case.” “Current best estimate” for the first Space Shuttle flight was November 9, postponed from September 28, and NASA’s schedule had been adjusted accordingly. Money requested for space science had increased $100 million, about 20% over FY79; this covered major projects and research and development now under way, such as Space Telescope, Galileo (the Jupiter-orbiter probe), the high-energy astronomical observatory, Spacelab, the solar polar mission, infrared astronomy satellite, and solar maximum mission. Applications funding included money for joint multiagency research in crop monitoring and commodity projection by NASA, together with the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior and the Agency for International Development (AID). Funds for aeronautics would increase 14% to cover current research and technology and to continue the aircraft energy efficiency program, with research on reduction of noise and pollution. In manpower, NASA would lose 674 permanent Civil Service positions over FY79 and FY80, part of this the agency’s share of a government-wide 2 % cut in personnel. Frosch summarized the budget as one that “in key program areas continues momentum. . .while it’s tight, we think we can make a good transition to the Shuttle era and we can keep going on the science, the applications, and the aeronautics.. (Text; W Star, Jan 22/79, A-10)
INTELSAT reported that it would turn off Intelsat 3 F-3 this date after 10 years of service that gave the organization the first truly global telecommunications system. The Intelsat 3 series of nine communications satellites was built by TRW Systems Inc., three of them having failed to orbit or destroyed at launch; Intelsat 3 F-3 was the last of the series in operation. Original design life was five years. Launched into synchronous orbit in February 1969, the communications satellite operated over the Indian Ocean until July 1972, carrying among others a worldwide telecast of Prince Charles’s investiture as Prince of Wales. It was placed on standby in May 1977, and its mechanically despun antenna stalled in April 1979, more than 10 years after launch, rendering it inoperable. As it had enough fuel remaining to push it 4,000 to 5,000 kilometers further out into space, INTELSAT would turn off spacecraft electronic systems and activate small propulsion motors to put it where it would need 4 to 5 million years to return to its old altitude, drifting at the rate of a meter a year. (INTELSAT Release 79-28-1)
The New York Times reported that a huge international scientific project supported by 147 nations would begin this week. The $500 million Global Weather Experiment (GWE), part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP), would be a joint effort of the World Meteorological Organization and the International Council of Scientific Unions, financed by the meteorological group. It would expand the existing World Weather Watch, now generating more than 40,000 daily observations, by using 10 satellites, 50 research vessels, 110 aircraft, 300 high-altitude constant-level balloons, and 300 instrumented ocean buoys, in addition to other measuring devices. The widely dispersed instruments and large numbers of scientists would study seasonal weather cycles in Earth’s atmosphere and would gauge the practical limits of present technology for weather forecasting, to compile what would be the most complete record of global weather data ever attempted. Twice daily, about 50 oceanographic research ships from 22 nations would release balloon-borne packages for atmosphere measurements; U.S. researchers would release 150 balloons in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans to monitor winds and temperatures at an altitude of 47,000 feet. Satellites would record wind forces and directions by photographing changes in cloud shapes and positions; they and other spacecraft would record atmospheric temperature and humidity as well as ocean rainfall and sea surface temperatures. The head of the U.S. team, Rex Fleming of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that the belt of tropical oceans around Earth’s equator was an enormous heat sink absorbing solar energy and creating much of the world’s weather and that observations there were meager. “This will be the first time that an annual record of weather data will have been taken over the whole world,” Fleming said. “The world can’t afford to do this every year, but we hope from all this to design a weather-observance system that the world can afford.” U.S. organizations besides NOAA taking part in the GWE would include the Departments of Commerce (DOC), Defense (DOD), Energy (DOE), Interior, State, and Transportation (DOT); the National Center for Atmospheric Research; NASA; the National Science Foundation (NSF); Defense Nuclear Agency; the Air Force, Army, Navy, and Coast Guard; and many academic institutions. (NY Times, Jan 7/79, 1)
NASA said that it had turned off Applications Technology Satellite 6 (ATS 6) and would boost it to a higher orbit August 6. ATS 6 had lost three of its four thrusters and would be a hazard to other spacecraft if it failed on station. Launched in May 1974, it had exceeded its design lifetime by three years; transmitting directly to small ground receivers, it had relayed educational, scientific, and health programs to stations worldwide. “Firsts” included the first educational courses by satellite, first two-way teleconference and “telemedicine,” and first successful satellite-to-satellite communications. (NASA Release 79-81) During June: NASA announced that Arnold W. Frutkin, associate administrator for external relations since November 1978, would retire June 27. For 18 years before his present appointment, he had headed NASA’s Office of International Affairs and was credited with “an extraordinarily successful series” of international space endeavors and policy initiatives including ATS 6 broadcasts, U.S.-USSR arrangements for Apollo-Soyuz, ESA Spacelab agreement, and multinational work on NASA science and applications missions. He had come to NASA from the National Academy of Sciences, where he was deputy director of the U.S. committee for the International Geophysical Year (IGY). (NASA anno June 1/79; NASA Release 79-85) JSC announced the appointment of Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, veteran NASA manager for manned spaceflight projects, to direct JSC operations at KSC, completing installation of the thermal protection tiles and internal vehicle systems on the orbiter Columbia. Kleinknecht, who had joined NACA in 1942, would report to KSC from permanent assignment in Paris as deputy associate administrator for STS (European operations). (JSC Release 79-39) WFC announced that its associate director, Abraham Spinak, would be on special assignment as executive assistant to a special NASA senior-staff group evaluating management of the STS. The group would study Shuttle funding problems, uncertainties of program predictions, and information flow and control. (WFC Release 79-12)
