Further press comment on the USSR launch April 29 of Cosmos 1176 included a Washington Post speculation that the United States might deplore the nuclear-powered vehicle for more reasons than its deterrent effect on United Nations negotiations. Recalling the aborted attempt April 24-25 to rescue U.S. hostages in the Tehran embassy, the Washington Post noted that the Cosmos 1176 launch came only four days later. Just before it began the rescue attempt, the U.S. aircraft carrier Nimitz “sped away from a Soviet spy ship that had been trailing it, and apparently was able to launch the rescue helicopters on their secret mission without notice.” Satellites spying with radar needed nuclear sources for the necessary power; solar cells, e.g., could not produce enough electricity. The new satellite “passing daily over the Indian Ocean and Middle East.. .may well be meant to keep the Kremlin from being surprised again by providing radar surveillance of the U.S. fleet,” the Washington Post said. The Washington Star cited the January 1978 breakup of Cosmos 954 that scattered radioactive debris across a remote region of Canada; one expert suggested that the Soviet Union might have solved the problem causing the Canada crash or might have developed a new nonnuclear power source for the new satellite’s radar. However, U.S. officials were “virtually certain” that the new satellite was, like those in the Cosmos 954 series, powered by radioactive thermal generators creating heat that turned turbines to produce electricity. The United States had already detected radar emissions from Cosmos 1176, indicating that it was looking for U.S. and other ships. Its radar was 90% able to detect objects the size of aircraft carriers, 50% cruisers, and 30% frigates. Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had revealed that such satellites carried about 1001 pounds of uranium; after about 75 days, they were supposed to be rocketed to 500-mile-altitude orbits where they would remain for about 100 years, or until the materials were no longer dangerous. (W Post, May 2/80, A-6; W Star May 2/80, A-l)
NASA announced that JPL’s Dr. Stephen R Synnott, the Voyager project navigator who discovered a 15th moon of Jupiter [see May 6], had done it again: searching through Voyager photographs token in 1979 to confirm discovery of a 14th satellite, he discovered a 16th. The new find was about 40 kilometers (25 miles) in diameter and circled the planet every 7 hours, 4 minutes, 30 seconds, the same process had located the 15th satellite, found by Synnott in March 1980; at that time, he thought he was confirming an earlier sighting of a 14th moon because they had similar sizes and orbits. But, upon comparing data from Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Synnott found that “the object I was looking at was on the opposite side of the planet—it couldn’t be J14, so it had to be a new one.” Before Voyager 1 reached Saturn the planet was believed to have 13 moons; a 14th (the one Synnott was trying to confirm) had been seen in October 1979. (NASA Release 90-139)
INTELSAT announced that it had awarded Ohio State University a $150,000 contract for a rain measurement study that might improve satellite transmission quality in regions with heavy rain. Satellite signals above the 10-GHz frequency would be weakened when sent through rain; the study would help INTELSAT determine how much extra power a satellite would need to compensate for rain effects. Having two stations a few miles apart in heavy-rainfall areas would permit use of the station with better weather during stormy times. The study would send radar signals into rainclouds and measure the return signal to find the rain’s effect on signal strength. (INTELSAT Release 80-07-1)
INTELSAT said that it would reduce by 20% its charges for communications satellite capacity leased to nations for domestic use. The board of governors decided to charge $800,000 (U.S.) per year per transponder; the previous fee had been $1 million. Fifteen nations were currently leasing capacity on INTELSAT spacecraft for their own domestic use. (INTELSAT Release 80-03-1)
NASA issued a prelaunch summary of the GOES-D mission, sixth of a series designed for continuous cloud-cover observation from synchronous orbit. The program had two prototypes (Sms 1 and Sms 2) developed by NASA and follow-on craft (GOES-A through GOES-F), funded by NOAA of the DOC. The NOAA-funded craft were designated Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). Since the Sms 1 launch in May 1974, the satellites had continuously viewed Western Hemisphere weather patterns and relayed video scenes from orbit as part of everyday television weather reports. The reports five were produced by Ford Aerospace; GOES-D, GOES-E, and GOES-F would be from Hughes Aerospace. The primary instrument on previous craft was a visible/infrared spin-scan radiometer with one visible and one infrared channel. GOES-D would be the first of three carrying a modified VISSR sounding the atmosphere in 12 infrared bands, acquiring temperature and moisture data profiles at various levels. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS) program required two operating satellites at all times to cover Atlantic and Pacific ocean approaches, as well as the American landmass. Sms 2 launched in 1975 and Goes 3 launched in June 1978 were covering east and west stations, respectively; Sms 1 and Goes 1 and Goes 2, none fully functional, were on operational standby. GOES-D, initially located at 90 °W for a demonstration of the atmospheric sounder, would later be located either east or west depending on operating need. Should one of the operating craft fail before the demonstration ended, NASA would configure a time-sharing operating mode to continue coverage. (NASA MOR E-612-80-02 [prelaunch summary], Sept 4/80)
Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported the launch March 3 of a DOD ocean surveillance system from Vandenberg Air Force Base on an Atlas F into a 1,115-kilometer by 1,053-kilometer (715 by 654 mile) orbit with 107.1-minute period, and 63.5° inclination. The report said that, on the basis of earlier tests, the system would use three spacecraft carried into orbit on a mother satellite and dispersed into parallel orbits with latitude as well as time/distance separation. (Earlier clusters developed by the NRL under codename Whitecloud were launched April 30, 1976, and December 8, 1977, into orbits having parameters nearly identical to those of last week’s launch.) The feasibility of using multiple satellites to eavesdrop on and direction-find USSR ships and submarines was first demonstrated by three NRL spacecraft launched December 14, 1971, and dispersed into separate orbits. The 1976 and 1977 missions that preceded the March 3 launch incorporated a 107-minute orbital period to allow about 1,666 miles between successive cluster passes. From a 700-mile altitude the spacecraft could receive signals from surface vessels more than 2,000 miles away, offering overlapping coverage on successive passes. Similarity of displacement distances perpendicular to the orbital planes of the 1976 and 1977 clusters indicated the use of interferometry to pinpoint the location of Soviet vessels. Deployment of the active satellites by the carrier normally occurred over a period of days; late last week, NORAD was still logging the mission as a single spacecraft. (AvWk, Mar 10/80, 18) —Aviation Week <4 Space Technology reported that the U.S. Court of Appeals had upheld a FCC authorization of January 1977 that allowed Satellite Business Systems (SBS) to own and operate a specialized all-digital domestic communications satellite system. AT&T, Western Union, AmSatCorp, and the U.S. Justice Department had appealed the FCC ruling. SBS had proceeded to develop the system, its first satellite scheduled for launch in October 1980. (AvWk, Mar 10/80, 22)
Today newspaper said that a 13-nation U.N. committee that met in Geneva, Switzerland, had drafted a report on a proposed satellite system to scan the Earth and spot disarmament violations. Ending a closed two-week session of the committee, the report said that the scientific, financial, and legal experts would meet there again in February 1981 to consider and approve the draft for submission to the United Nations. The statement contained no details of the proposed satellite monitoring system. U.N. Secretary General Kurt Waldheim had appointed the committee after a special General Assembly session in 1978 on disarmament received a proposal by France for U.N. establishment of an international satellite agency to check up on disarmament pledges. {Today, Sept 20/80, 10A)
The FCC called for public comment on ComSatCorp reorganization, to prevent its role as sole U.S. representative in the global communications satellite system from interfering with its growing competitive activities. An official said that this “could lead to changes” in ComSatCorp operations. An FCC staff study earlier in 1980 said that the potential for conflict was substantial enough for ComSatCorp to need two separate parts: one for its role in the global system, the other providing services like a long-distance telephone system or satellite-to-home subscription television. As a result, ComSatCorp had set up a World Systems Division to take charge of its congressionally mandated role in the global system, its competitive activities remaining with its subsidiary Comsat General [see September 23]. However, research and development by Comsat Laboratories would remain in the parent company. FCC noted that the subsidiary could obtain new technology developed by the laboratories either free or below cost, enabling it to undercut competitor prices. It was debating further action to ensure that ComSatCorp did not use the knowledge gained in its monopoly role to compete unfairly with other communications firms. (W Star Oct 14/80, D-7)
NASA declared successful the mission of Magsat, launched Ocober 30, 1979, to measure Earth’s magnetic field. The satellite’s lifetime exceeded that planned for it by three months and met or exceeded accuracy requirements in instrumentation and in attitude and position determination. The mission had met the objectives of developing a worldwide magnetic-field model; acquiring data for crustal magnetic-anomaly maps; and adding to knowledge of Earth’s magnetic field and its temporal variations. (NASA MOR E-662-80-01, Oct 20/80)
NASA launched Intelsat 5A F2, first of a new communications satellite series, from ESMC at Cape Canaveral, Fla., at 6:31 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur, into a transfer orbit with 35,950-kilometer apogee, 166.8-kilometer perigee, and 23.75° inclination. ComSatCorp fired the kick motor December 8 to put the craft into near-geosynchronous orbit at 15 °E for tests. By mid-1981 the communications satellite would be on station at 338.5°E. (NASA MOR 0-491-203-80-01 [postlaunch] Dec 29/80) —NASA issued a press kit describing the spacecraft, which weighed 1,928 kilograms (4,250 pounds) at launch. Built by Ford Aerospace using system components developed by firms in France, the United Kingdom, West Germany, Japan, and Italy, it had a capacity of 12,000 voice circuits and 2 television channels, almost double the capability of earlier Intelsats. Cost of the launch was about $76.6 million, including $34 million for the spacecraft and $42 million for the Atlas Centaur and launch services. INTELSAT, with headquarters in Washington, D.C., would reimburse NASA for costs of the vehicle and launch services, under an agreement signed in May. (NASA Release 80-179)
INTELSAT announced that Guinea became the 105th member in a ceremony at the U.S. State Department when Ambassador Mamady Lamine Conde signed the operating agreement. Guinea planned to operate a ground station using the Intelsat spacecraft located over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-15-1) July 15.'The Wall Street Journal said that ESA would go ahead with a $125 million probe of Halley’s comet because original plans for a $370-$470 million joint mission with NASA had become impossible due to U.S. budget cuts. The original plan called for launch of a Space Shuttle that would have sent a satellite to Halley’s as well as to Tempel 2, a comet much farther out in space. NASA had to scrub the two-comet mission because it couldn’t get the money for a new kind of space engine to make the flight; the Wall Street Journal said that it was still studying a stopgap plan to use an old-fashioned rocket to shoot a spacecraft past Halley’s when it approached Earth. ESA now planned to put up a 750-pound satellite, Giotto [see July 10], from Kourou in July 1985 to rendezvous with Halley’s in March 1986. (IKS'/, July 15/80, 30) July i7.The Washington Star reported that discovery of a “serious potential safety defect” in the nation’s most widely used jet engine had led the FAA to order mandatory inspections for two-thirds of the short- and medium-range commercial jetliners in the United States. The engine was standard on three major planes: the medium-range Boeing 727, with three engines, and two short-range planes with two engines each, the Boeing 737 and the McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Each FAA-ordered inspection on a Pratt & Whitney JT8D engine would take 170 hours to disassemble it to the point where it could be checked. Some of the engines were nearly new; others had been serving for several years: a JT8D would normally be retired after 20,000 cycles in service. When a Hawaiian Airline DC-9 blew up on takeoff at Honolulu June 15, FAA inspection revealed that a portion of the engine was subject to metal fatigue and failure because of the factory machining of the metal. No serious injuries occurred in the Hawaii incident. However, random FAA checking showed that other planes equipped with JT8D engines had cracks in the same engine spot as the Hawaii plane. The potential flaw in the engines was the eighth compressor hub, a 591-pound wheel with an array of blades located in the middle of the 3,000- to 4,000 pound engine. Each engine had 13 compressor hubs, each with a successively smaller set of fans to collect air and force it through smaller areas into the fuel-combustion chamber. Machining of a flange on the eighth compressor hub was ground against the grain of the metal, putting unusual strain on that part. FAA spokesman Dennis Feldman could not estimate the cost of the inspection programs, thought to be in tens of millions of dollars; nor could he give any definitive answer as to whether the manufacturer or the airline would have to cover the cost. (W Star, July 17/80, A-l)
INTELSAT announced that its assembly had agreed to technical and some economic compatibility with seven other satellite systems. Found technically compatible with existing and planned INTELSAT systems were Eutelsat, spare craft for a European communications satellite system; Germany’s TVSat broadcasting system; India’s Insat 1-A and Insat 1-B for television and meteorological use; Indonesia’s Palapa-A system for limited regional service to remote areas in southeast Asia; the Intersputnik system for limited use by Algeria; Japan’s GMS-2 metesat system; and Saudi Arabia’s broadcast-satellite system. Algeria’s proposal was the first instance of an INTELSAT signatory’s seeking use of another system for general international public traffic instead of for limited regional service. INTELSAT said that its permission would apply only through 1985 and to a total of 22 telephone lines; similar proposals by other members would require separate handling. The spec ific request by Algeria for use of Intersputnik would not constitute significant economic harm to INTELSAT at present; however, the assembly noted that INTELSAT’s objective was to promote development of “a single” global communications satellite system, and all signatories must continue to consider that a goal. (INTELSAT Release 80-23-1)
The Washington Star said that the FCC would call for restructuring of Com-SatCorp to differentiate between its regulated and its competitive activities. ComSatCorp, now sole U.S. representative in two global satellite communications systems, would have to put all its competitive operations, including research and development, into a separate subsidiary. Restructuring would answer complaints that ComSatCorp, a congressional creation, could use its unique monopoly status in global communications systems to is advantage in highly competitive ventures it is considering. With two other major companies, it was starting a long-distance telephone system to compete with AT&T; it also had considered a satellite-to-home subscription television service to compete with the three major television networks [see April 8]. ComSatCorp already had a subsidiary, Comsat General, that handled its competitive activities; the FCC said that a sharper separation was necessary between the two: Comsat Laboratories and other research and development, for instance, should be put into the subsidiary to avoid the possibility of cross subsidies. A newly purchased environmental monitoring firm, Environmental Research & Technologies Inc., would have to be in the subsidiary, FCC said. The parent company would include only those activities relating to INTELSAT and INMARSAT (International Maritime Satellite Organization), international systems in which ComSatCorp acts as U.S. representative. (WStar Apr 22/80, C-6; WPost, Apr 23/80, B-l; ComSatCorp Releases 80-22, 80-23, 80-24, 80-25)
NASA reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, its administrator, had signed an agreement November 18 in Bangalore, India, with Dr. Satish Dhawan, secretary of the Indian government’s Department of Space, for launch by NASA of two India communications satellites/metesats. In geosynchronous orbit, India’s national satellites (INSAT) 1A and IB would provide the subcontinent with point-to-point television and voice, community broadcasting, and weather data. Launch would be either by Shuttle or, at India’s option, on Delta (expendable) launch vehicles. Under the agreement, India’s Department of Space would be responsible for manufacture of the satellites (under contract to Ford Aerospace), and for checkout and integration of a spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) to boost them into transfer orbit for maneuver to geosynchronous stations. NASA through KSC would provide all other launch-related services. INSAT 1A was scheduled for Shuttle launch in August 1983, or on a Delta in February 1982; INSAT IB, by Shuttle in December 1983 or a Delta in July 1983. (NASA Release 80-176)
NASA reported that it had begun a three-year program with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources using Landsat data to detect gypsy-moth damage. Under an agreement signed recently, the data would identify and locate damage so that subsequent satellite images could be used to monitor affected areas. Foresters could identify infestations and isolate areas for pest management. Results would be passed on to other states in the eastern United States that could use the techniques to control spread of gypsy-moth damage initially mapped in New England in 1910. Damage to hardwood forests in Pennsylvania over the past 10 years was an estimated $32 million; in 1980 alone, gypsy-moth caterpillars defoliated 440,000 acres of hardwood forest, (NASA Release 80-155)
NASA announced that, after five years of studying Earth resources and environment from an altitude of 920 kilometers (570 miles), Landsat 2 ceased operation when its primary flight-control mechanism failed because of wear. A two-month effort to use other on-board devices to keep the craft pointed at Earth had failed, and NASA staff had put it into an engineering-test mode that would allow further study of the attitude-control problem. Landsat 2, launched in 1975 with a one-year lifetime, was second of a remote sensing series that could also collect data from beacon platforms in remote areas. A major asset of the Landsat system was its repetitive observation, as often as every nine days with two satellites, which would permit immediate detection of short-term changes. Landsat L, launched in 1972, was retired early in 1978; Landsat 3, launched in March 1978, would continue to furnish data to more than 400 U.S. and foreign Earth-resources programs. NASA planned to launch a fourth and more advanced Landsat in 1981. (NASA Release 80-9)
ESA reported that representatives from Canada, France, India, Japan, and the United States, as well as ESA, met in Ottawa May 8-9 to discuss international cooperation in remote-sensing satellite systems. ESA would host a follow-up meeting in 1981. A series of regional meetings with nations planning to use remote-sensing data would bring the needs of user states to the attention of satellite operators and would help in preparing for a 1982 United Nations conference on exploration and peaceful uses of outer space. (ESA Info 11)
NOAA reported that it would submit to OMB by midyear a transition plan for NOAA to assume responsibility for operating a Landsat-type system to be launched in the late 1980s. Based on technology derived from NASA’s experimental Landsat program, the system would provide essential data from space for use in food production, mineral exploration, Earth resources inventory, management of rangeland, forests, and water resources, and environmental protection. NOAA had operated meteorological satellites for 14 years, developing the ability to process, disseminate, and archive “enormous qualities” of satellitegenerated data for users who need it for decision making. NOAA would also have to determine not only the data requirements of various sectors of society but also how quickly the information was needed and in what format. NOAA would hold a series of regional meetings with users of satellite data to develop a system meeting their needs. (NOAA Release 80-48)
MSFC reported successful test firing of the Shuttle main propulsion system May 30 at NSTL. Firing time, 9 minutes 38 seconds, exceeded the duration required to place a Shuttle in orbit. Total test time on the main propulsion system (three engines, external tank, and associated parts of the orbiter) was now 41.3 minutes, in addition to 19 hours of single-engine tests conducted in a separate program. The Shuttle engines were gimbaled (steered) during the test firing, throttled in stages from 100% of rated thrust down to 65%. The Shuttle would have the first human-rated engines capable of throttle control during flight. (MSFC Release 80-79) During May: GSFC reported discovery by a team of its scientists of the largest gamma-ray burst ever recorded and the first tracing of such a burst to a known astronomical object, providing for the first time evidence of the vibration of a neutron star. The burst, trillions of miles away, occurred March 5, 1979, and was recorded by a network of nine satellites. The uniqueness of the event and the time needed to coordinate data from the Soviet Union, France, and West Germany delayed completion of analysis until recently; a GSFC colloquium April 24 heard a report on the theoretical developments. The GSFC team was headed by Dr. Thomas L. Cline and Dr. Reuven Ramaty. Gamma rays, the most energetic form of electromagnetic radiation, exhibit energy from tens of thousands to tens of billions of volts. The amounts of energy required to produce gamma rays had to come from extremely high-energy processes such as explosion of an atomic bomb or a star. Until the explosion of March 5, 1979, astronomers could only speculate that neutron stars went through giant vibration episodes explosively propelling their substance outward, then being pushed just as explosively by external forces back to their original shape. The theory of relativity says that these vibrations should emit gravitational waves. The March 5 burst, said to radiate more energy than the Sun could produce in 1,000 years, was measured by devices on nine spacecraft including five launched by the United States (three Velas, the Pioneer Venus orbiter, and the international Sun-Earth explorer Isee 3; three by the Soviet Union (Prognoz 7, Venera 11, and Venera 12, carrying French instrumentation); and one launched jointly by the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany (Helios 2). The satellites were widely separated in space or in Earth orbit when they detected the burst. By timing and triangulation, scientists could trace the source of the March 5 event to a decaying star (supernova) in the Large Magellanic Cloud (one of two galaxies nearest the Milky Way) and specifically to a supernova remnant identified as N-49. A supernova would have blown its contents all over surrounding space, leaving a large compact body called a neutron star so dense that a spoonful of material from its center would weigh a billion tons. The unusually large output of energy and the fact that its release was very rapid led to the vibrating-source conclusion. Celestial gamma rays are detected only by aircraft above the atmosphere, or by spacecraft; detection of future bursts would require highly sensitive devices like the gamma-ray observatory scheduled for Shuttle launch in 1985. (GSFC Release G-80-23)
NASA announced a change of date to April 1982 for completing orbital flight tests of the Shuttle. “Several factors” such as continuing engineering assessment and improvement of the thermal-protection system led to the decision. First operational flight of Columbia, now slipped from March to September 1982, would carry the tracking and data-relay satellite TDRS-A into a geosynchronous orbit. Other schedule adjustments would be discussed with users at KSC May 29-30. Changes in the manifests had been coordinated with DOD, NASA said; it would make use of Deltas during the transition to full Shuttle operations. Others set to use the Delta included Telesat of Canada, Hughes Aircraft, and Indonesia. (NASA Release 80-74; JSC Release 80-037)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) announced that it had filed with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) a 5% reduction of its basic charges to U.S. common carriers for international communications satellite services. It claimed frequent price cuts, most recently by 15 % in May 1979, since it began commercial service with Early Bird in 1965. (ComSat-Corp Release 80-3)
INTELSAT said that an “extraordinary session” of its signatories in Washington had authorized increasing the organization’s capital ceiling from $990 million U.S. to $1.2 billion to buy a follow-on to the Intelsat V series of satellites and launch vehicles that could fill “booming world demand” for international and domestic communications until the Intelsat VI is available around 1986. INTELSAT’s announcement said that the actual cost per unit of satellite communications was dropping steadily, in spite of the increased investment required; its charges were about a sixth of the level in 1965 when the first Intelsat went into service. (INTELSAT Release 80-18-1)
ComSatCorp announced appointment of Dr. Delbert D. Smith, vice president for corporate affairs, to a three-year term on the board of the International Institute of Communications (IIC) at the latter’s annual conference. Smith led a conference discussion of satellite communications for social and developmental purposes. The IIC, based in London, was set up to further international cooperation in the field of communications; it put out research and policy studies of the impact of media on society and analyzed the implications of communications technology, seeking to eliminate barriers to the free flow of communications. (ComSatCorp Release 80-33)
ComSatCorp announced that it would reduce its charges for international satellite communications by 11.8%. FCC was concerned over the increase in international carrier earnings for these services and had begun a formal rate procedure against ITT WorldCom for the same reason. ComSatCorp president Joseph V. Charyk said that the reduction could save its members about $19 million in 1981 and asked FCC to see that the savings reached the public. (ComSatCorp Release 80-39)
NASA reported that it was studying options for restructuring the Landsat D project because of persistent engineering and management problems in manufacturing the spacecraft instruments and ground systems. Fourth and most advanced of NASA’s experimental Earth-resources monitoring spacecraft, Landsat D was designed to carry an advanced scanner called a thematic mapper, to provide Earth images in more spectral bands and with twice the resolution (30 meters) of earlier Landsats. Hughes Aircraft problems with the mapper resulted in increased cost estimates and delivery delays. Mission-system contractor General Electric was also having problems and had projected schedule delays that would increase costs of both the flight system and the ground system it was building for Landsat D. Both sets of problems would effect Landsat D’s launch schedule, increasing the risk of a gap in data for present users. Landsat 3, launched in March 1978, was still operating but had had problems with its sensor, a multispectral scanner that collected data for conversion to images of Earth’s natural resources. NASA was considering three possibilities: launch Landsat D as soon as possible with a thematic mapper and a multispectral scanner like that carried on Landsat 3; launch Landsat D as soon as possible with only a multispectral scanner, following as soon as possible with another Landsat carrying the thematic mapper and a multispectral scanner; or launch Landsat D with Landsat D Prime (the backup) each carrying only a multispectral scanner. The decision weighing budget constraints against providing an ongoing Landsat data capability should take weeks, NASA said, including consultations with NOAA, which President Carter had designated to manage a follow-on remotesensing satellite system. (NASA Release 80-46)
The FCC authorized the ComSatCorp to begin construction of a $15 million ground station on Saipan, in the western Pacific Ocean, to bring the first satellite communications to the northern Mariana Islands. The ComSatCorp-owned and -operated station would provide direct communications between the northern Marianas and the United States, Hawaii, Guam, Japan, and other points in the Pacific. (W Star, June 12/80, B-7)
Newspapers reported the launch at 8:04 a.m. local time of the 771-pound.Rohini 1 by India’s space research organization (ISRO), making India the sixth country in the world to build and launch its own satellite. Rohini 1 was launched from Sriharikota Island near Madras on a four-stage SLV-3 solid-fuel rocket into an orbit with a 919-kilometer apogee, 306-kilometer perigee, 44;7° inclination, and 97-minute period. “This is a great day for India,” said Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, who estimated the cost of the launch vehicle at $25.2 million.	. The Washington Post said that the launch was remarkable “for a country that still used bullock carts as a prime mode of transportation.” Despite its poverty, India had the world’s third largest pool of technically trained personnel; Dr. Satish Dhawan, head of ISRO, said that the successful launch would pave the way. for liquid-fuel rockets carrying larger payloads up to 1,300 pounds. India’s 17-year-old space program had had setbacks, including a failure in August 1979, when its rocket dropped into the Bay of Bengal about 5 seconds after liftoff because the second stage failed to ignite. Launch of Rohini “underscored India’s place as the most powerful nation of the South Asian subcontinent,” said the Washington Post. (WPost, July 19/80, A-13; W Star, July 19/80, 4; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 21/80)
NASA announced selection of General Electric and TRW Systems, Inc., to negotiate contracts for $500,000 six-month design studies of the gamma-ray observatory mission. One of the contractors would be chosen to build and operate the satellite under a follow-on contract after Congress approved the mission. If approved, the observatory would carry five large gamma-ray instruments into space to observe gamma-ray sources and obtain fundamentally new information about stars, the galaxy, and the universe. It would be a Shuttle payload in the mid-1980s designed for retrieval after a two-year mission lifetime; GSFC would manage the project. (NASA Release 80-30) During February: Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, 59, the “legendary aerodynamicist” inventor of the area rule and the supercritical wing, retired February 29 after 37 years of service with NASA. Graduated in 1943 with honors in mechanical engineering from Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Whitcomb said an article in Fortune magazine impelled him to apply for a job at NACA’s Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory. His “brilliant career” there included three landmark ideas, all radical departures from conventional aerodynamic theory, all developed in Langley wind tunnels, and all successful. His honors included the Collier Trophy for applying his “area rule” to design of supersonic aircraft, and the U.S. Air Force exceptional service medal (highest civilian award) in 1954; NACA’s first distinguished service medal in 1956; NASA’s medal for exceptional scientific achievement and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautic’s Sylvanus Albert Reed award, 1969; the National Medal of Science, highest honorary scientific award of the U.S. government, 1973; in 1974, the National Aeronautic Association’s Wright Brothers memorial trophy, the AIAA aircraft design award, and a $25,000 cash award (largest ever given by NASA to an individual) for invention of the supercritical wing; in 1978, the National Business Aircraft Association award. (NASA Release 74-148, 80-38)
Press reports said that the FCC had voted 7 to 0 to approve construction and launching of 20 new communications satellites by 8 companies, tripling the number of commercial satellites providing domestic communications service, in what the New York Times called “in a single action the greatest impetus ever to the expansion of satellite service.” Besides alleviating a shortage of satellite capacity faced by cable television and other industries, FCC said that the decision would open the way for investment of more than $2 billion by the eight companies. This was their first chance to compete directly in the long-distance field with AT&T, instead of tying their local networks to the Bell System. Already operating their own satellite networks were three companies operating eight commercial communications satellites: Western Union Telegraph Company with three, RCA-American Communications, Inc., with two, and Comsat General Corporation with three leased entirely to AT&T and General Telephone & Electronics (GTE). Also Satellite Business Systems had finally launched its Sbs in November, making nine. All four current owners would expand operations under the new policy: AT&T and GTE as well as Hughes Communications and Southern Pacific Communications would build their own systems for the first time. Continental Telephone Corporation and partner Fairchild Industries would enter the field through purchase of 50% of WU’s Space Communications Corporation. (NY Times, Dec 5/80, D-1; W Post, Dec 5/80, E-2)
The Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported that Air Force Secretary Dr. Hans M. Mark proposed establishment of a consolidated space operations center near Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado, combining two major mission elements of the U.S. Air Force: satellite control and direction of future DOD Shuttle operations. The Colorado location, prime candidate out of 13 potential sites, would offer proximity to the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) complex at Cheyenne Mountain; it would employ about 300 military, 100 U.S. Air Force civilian, and 1,400 contractor employees. (AFSC Newsreview, Feb/80, 1)
NASA reported that GSFC had chosen Canadian Astronautics, Ltd., to negotiate a $3,042,500 contract for local-user terminals to process signals from search-and-rescue instruments aboard the NOAA-E, NOAA-F, and NOAA-G satellites in the early 1980s. The instruments would relay signals from distressed ships and aircraft to the terminals, which would use them to locate the distressed craft and aid rescue operations. The first terminal would be at Kodiak, Alaska, with others at Scott Air Force Base, 111., and the Coast Guard station at San Francisco. The Soviet Union, Canada, and France would demonstrate the search-and-rescue capability. (NASA Release 80-87)
NASA reported studies by Western Union and U.S. Telephone & Telegraph warning of a fivefold increase in satellite video and data traffic by the end of the century. By the year 2000, executive telecommunications would be a substitute for business travel; 90% of the messages would need real-time (instantaneous) service and only 10% (such as electronic mail delivery) would be non-real-time. The demand for telecommunications would saturate domestic communications satellite capacity in the 4-6 GHz (C-band) and 11-14 GHz (Ku-band) frequencies. Having decided to resume advanced communications satellite research, NASA would work toward opening the frequency band at 20 -30 GHz for commercial use in the next two decades. This band had not yet been used in the United States. The 20-to 30-GHz (Ka-band) offered a far greater range than the C-or Ku-band; capacities of communications satellite systems using it would be 50 to 100 times greater than those working in C-band. (NASA Release 80-19)
NASA announced selection of Ball Aerospace Systems to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract estimated at $21 million for an Earth Radiation-Budget Satellite ERBS and mission operations support. The satellite would be integrated, tested, and delivered for Shuttle launch by April 1984. Working with NOAA-F and NOAA-G, it would become part of a three-spacecraft system using scanning and nonscanning radiometers to measure solar radiation received and reflected from various regions of Earth. NASA’s experimental Nimbus 6 and Nimbus 7 carried radiation-budget instruments, but the (ERBS) would offer for the first time measurement of radiation on a global basis 24 hours per day. (NASA Release 80-178)
The Washington Post reported that Great Britain’s postal service June 17 became the first international public service to send letters by satellite. In-telpost, the new system, used a satellite 25,000 miles above Earth to send documents and letters by facsimile, an electronic means of transmitting the written word from one place to another. The first letter using the new system took just over 1 minute to get from Great Britain’s Post Office chairman-designate Ron Dearing to a receiving center in Toronto. (WPost, June 18/80, C-2)
GSFC said that a team of its scientists and technicians had pioneered a stereo-imaging technique for studying hurricanes, using photographs of the top of the same hurricane taken by two spacecraft, geostationary operational environmental satellites Goes East and Goes West, hovering over the equator at 75 °W and 135 °W. The team combined time-lapse cloudcover photos of Hurricane Frederic over the Gulf of Mexico September 12 in a stereo display showing changes in the storm as seen from space and allowing estimates of its intensity. (NASA Release 80-181)
DOC reported that the Nimbus 7 satellite successfully tracked between October 16, 1979, and June 15, 1980, the 800-mile journey of a 2121-pound loggerhead turtle called Diane from a point south of Gulfport, Miss., past Louisiana and Texas to an area in the Gulf of Mexico near Brownsville, Tex., where Diane apparently shed the signal transmitter. (NOAA officials said that, after a break in transmission, a mystery developed when the signal resumed, moving inland to stop in Kansas—far from the turtle’s ocean or river habitat. A fisherman had found the 7-pound transmitter on a beach near Port Arthur, Tex., and had taken it home, where he used the $5,000 device as a doorstop.) Robert Timko, electronic engineer at NOAA’s Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) laboratory in Galveston, said that no technology except satellite tracking could have followed a wide-ranging and generally inaccessible animal like the loggerhead turtle (a threatened species) over so large an area. NMFS would use the data to identify feeding, nesting, and mating areas to help manage the stock of sea turtles. The test was inspired by previous work with polar bears, which were tracked from 60 to 90 days. (NOAA Release 80-102)
JSC reported that parts of the remote-manipulator system (the robot crane that would handle inflight transfer of Space Shuttle cargo) were being tested in its Shuttle avionics integration laboratory. The system would be used on the Shuttle beginning with the second flight to place or retrieve satellites in space, to assemble structures or components, or if necessary to rescue crews by transferring them to another vehicle. The manipulator was a 50-foot arm with movable joints at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist; associated motors, gears,and sensors; and an end-effector serving as an ingenious hand. The test parts were a display and control panel, rotational and translational hand controllers, and an interface unit for manipulator control belonging to the electrical subsystem. The arm and its movement would be simulated by computers in the lab. In the tests, engineers and technicians from NASA and the contractor Space Aerospace, astronauts, and representatives of the Canadian Research Council would try to duplicate events to be encountered while operating the space crane in orbit. Astronauts Drs. Sally Ride, Judy Resnick, Norm Thagard, and Story Musgrave would controls arm movement by using the hand controllers in a mockup of the orbiter’s aft station. System operators would watch a computer-generated television scene duplicating the view the crew would have out of the cockpit aft window. The difficulty would come in operating the arm with the dynamics induced by arm movement: in the weightlessness of space, once a mass (the arm and its load) were moved, it would keep going until stopped by an equal and opposite force. When a command moved the arm, the control system had to be ready to command a counteracting move. Also, the orbiter would move in response to the arm, and vice versa. Interaction between arm and orbiter controls must be explored before flight; the simulations in this investigation were among the most sophisticated ever attempted at JSC. (JSC Release 80-034)
INTELSAT said that the full launch sequence for Intelsat 5A F2, world’s largest and most advanced commercial communications satellite, was completed successfully December 10 when the craft unfolded its antennas upon command from the Washington, D.C., control center relayed through a ground station at Fucino, Italy. Launched December 6 on an Atlas Centaur into a highly elliptical orbit, the satellite went into near-circular orbit when the apogee motor was fired December 8. For the next two days the control center staff had been activating it into operational configuration, unfurling its giant 51-foot (15.6-meter) solar arrays and locking its sensors on the Earth, spinning up the momentum wheel to stabilize it facing Earth’s surface. Final operation was antenna deployment. Intelsat 5A F2 would now drift in equatorial orbit to its station as primary Atlantic Ocean communications satellite by May 1981, when it would begin serving as communications link between the western hemisphere and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. (INTELSAT Release 80-29-1)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch conducted a press briefing on the FY81 budget, assisted by Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, deputy administrator; C. Thomas Newman, deputy comptroller; and Dr. Anthony J. Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications. Warning the reporters that the information was “embargoed” until President Carter formally gave his budget address to Congress January 28, Robert J. Shafer, NASA deputy director of public affairs, cited the releases on Frosch’s recent trip to China as “not embargoed.” Frosch said that, although NASA’s budget was increasing at a slower rate (9.8% for research and development [R&D] and 11.5% for space science), he considered it a “good start” for the decade, compared to last year when extra costs of the Space Shuttle had precluded new space science program starts. The figures included an extra $300 million requested as a 1980 supplement for Shuttle development expenses, which Frosch said were increased by delays last summer that threatened mission schedules. NASA’s 1981 request included new-start money for the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), to be funded jointly with DOD and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as well as a gamma-ray observatory to explore the most energetic form of radiation known, exploiting the discoveries of the small astronomy satellite Sas 2, ESA’s Cos B, and the first high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1. Frosch replied to a question that NOSS would be the first scientific satellite shared with DOD and said its cost would be split among DOD ($13.9 million) and NOAA and NASA, which would pay about $6.4 million and $5.8 million, respectively. NASA’s total budget request was $5,736 billion, including $4,569.5 billion for R&D, $120 million for facilities construction, and $1,047 billion for program management. (Briefing text, Jan 26/80; NASA Releases 80-7, 80-11, 80-13; W Star, Jan 28/80, A-7, B-2; Nature, Jan 31/80, 416)
NASA launched SBS-A, the SBS spacecraft, from ESMC on a Delta at 5:49 p.m. EST into a transfer orbit. At 5:30 p.m. EST November 17, the apogee motor fired it as Sbs 1 into a circular geosynchronous orbit over 176 °W. The final station would be over the equator at 106 °W, south of Santa Fe, N.M., for coverage of the continental United States. Sbs 1, first of a new satellite series built by Hughes Aircraft, was a spin-stabilized 1,212-pound (550-kilogram) craft 216 centimeters (7 feet) in diameter, 282 centimeters (9 feet, 3 inches) high when stowed for launch. In geosynchronous orbit, extension of its telescoping solar-panel cylinder and communications antenna would make its height 660 centimeters (21 feet, 8 inches). Sbs 1 would also be the first U.S. domestic communications satellite to use the less congested 12- to 14-GHz (K-band) high frequencies. Its highspeed all-digital 10-transponder system could relay up to 480 million bits per second, equal to more than 10 million words. It would begin early in 1981 to provide integrated all-digital interference-free transmission of telephone, computer, electronic mail, and videoconferencing to SBS business and industrial clients. This launch was also the first use of a new McDonnell Douglas solid-fuel payload-assist module (PAM) as part of the SBS-A payload, to increase Delta capability on launches to geosynchronous orbit by 20 % over that of the usual Delta third stage. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Nov 19/80; NASA Release 80-167)
NASA announced that the GOES-D meteorological satellite, scheduled for early launch from KSC for NOAA, would carry a new type of instrument: the visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) atmospheric sounder. GSFC would join with the University of Wisconsin in long-term evaluation of the VISSR’s usefulness in predicting severe local storms, hurricanes, and other short-term weather phenomena. Earlier spacecraft in the series had provided 24-hour two-dimensional cloudcover photography; the new sounder would measure temperature and moisture in various altitude layers besides returning high-resolution images. The synchronous GOES satellites, useful in observing storms during development, required observation schedules, data processing, and data analysis markedly different from those for polar-orbiting satellites such as the TIROS series. GSFC, NOAA, and the University of Wisconsin had set up facilities over the past few years to handle the atmospheric sounder data. (NASA Release 80-137)
INTELSAT announced that Niger on April 14 had become the 103rd nation to join the organization. Niger was already linked to the INTELSAT system through a ground station at Niamey that operated with an Intelsat IV-A satellite over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-08-1)
Press reports said NASA faced a $760 million (14%) cut in its FY81 funding as President Carter announced a $20 billion cut in the entire federal budget. The Washington Post said Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, had protested the size of the cut to the Office of Management and Budget. The White House had originally asked NASA to suggest reductions of $630 million. Defense/Space Business Daily said the cuts would eliminate two new NASA starts in FY81, the gamma-ray observatory and the national oceanic satellite system, as well as the Galileo mission to Jupiter. On March 5 the House subcommittee on space science and applications had unanimously passed NASA’s $300 million FY80 supplemental request for Shuttle-development funds; subcommittee chairman Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) said NASA should share the FY81 cuts, but 18% was too high. (D/SBD, Mar 6/80, 25; W Post, Mar 7/80, A-2)
Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that his space science subcommittee would hold hearings at the Severe Storm Forecast Center in Kansas City, Mo., on the consolidated storm information system, a joint NASA-NOAA program. The committee heard about the project in July 1979 when it was merely a concept; “it will be a pleasure to see it coming to fruition.” When fully operational, the system would give a forecaster real-time atmospheric data such as temperature, air pressure, and wind forces, from around the globe, a substantial improvement on current systems requiring several hours to obtain the data. It would combine communications links with data sources, such as environmental satellites and atmosphere soundings, into a single computer system. (H Comm Sci Release 96-235)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Southern Pacific Communications Company (SPC) had applied to the FCC for authority to build a domestic communications satellite system starting with two satellites in orbit and a third maintained as a spare. Capacity of the system would exceed that of any other domestic system now in orbit or in construction; each proposed satellite would have twice the capacity of the largest communications satellite now in domestic service (AT&T’s Comsat or RCA’s Satcom) and a voice or digital-data capacity 60% higher than Western Union’s Westar. SPC predicted that the demand for transponders would triple between 1980 and 1985 and said that no existing or planned system would be adequate to provide SPC with the capacity it would need by mid-decade. It had petitioned earlier to deny requests of RCA for orbit slots at 132 °W and 83 °W, of Western Union for 83 °W, and Hughes for 79 °W and 75 °W. Given authority to orbits its satellites at 132° and 83 °W, with assignment of a third slot at 79 °W, the company said it would provide service to all 50 states, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. It would also build a control center in Maryland and launch its communications satellite in 1982-1983. {AvWk, Mar 31/80)
NASA announced plans to join a university research team in first-time transcontinental laser-radar soundings of the volcanic veil still hanging in the upper atmosphere over the United States from the eruptions of Mt. St. Helens. Using NASA’s SAGE satellite with an aircraft “crammed with the latest in laser and electronic remote-sensing and near-sensing technologies,” scientists from LaRC and WFC and from Drexel University, the Universities of Maryland, Arizona, and Alaska, Dartmouth College, Michigan Technological University, and the Oregon Graduate Center would study volcanic aftermath. This joint effort scheduled for September 17-21 by teams for the SAGE program and the Research on Atmospheric Volcanic Emissions (RAVE) project funded by NASA and operated through the universities would measure quantities of gases ejected by Mt. St. Helens and atmospheric dispersion of aerosols. Launched in 1978, SAGE had used a four-channel solar radiometer to track volcano plumes and take profiles of ozone and aerosols in the stratosphere, site of most of the ozone preventing harmful solar radiation from damaging life on Earth. (NASA Release 80-143; LaRC Release 80-61)
ESA announced it would undertake a new scientific project called Hippar-cos, an astrometric satellite to measure positions, proper motions, and parallaxes of celestial bodies and define the position and displacement velocity of about 100,000 stars. The data would help solve fundamental problems in astronomy. The 376-kilogram advanced-design satellite with a 2.5-year lifetime would be launched into a geostationary orbit by Ariane in mid-1986. (ESA Info Bltn 7) March 7; Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) reported that test pilot John Manke had made test flights in the Gossamer Albatross, part of a joint DFRC-LaRC program using the humanpowered vehicle to collect data on large lightweight craft. Manke’s first flights were human powered, as he pedaled a bicycle-like arrangement to turn the propeller; for later flights, under the direction of veteran Albatross pilot Bryan Allen who had flown it over the English Channel, he used small battery-powered samarium cobalt motors providing about 0.7 horsepower. Manke reached an altitude of 15 to 20 feet, more than he “ felt comfortable with,” and reported that the Albatross was nothing like anything he had flown before, requiring concentration to keep it going straight. Short flights did not require an extra amount of legpower to keep it gomg, but longer flights would be “an exercise in exercise.” (FRC X-Press, Mar 7/80, 3)
FBIS carried Tass and other Soviet news reports on the flight of Salyut 6 and Soyuz 35 with cargo ship Progress 9. On May 2, cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, in their fourth week of flight, used “bilateral television communication” to visit with their families who had come to the mission control center. A May 6 report said that for the first time in manned space flight the crew had pumped water from the freight ship to containers on the station, using a system called Rodnik. The crew had completed unloading the food, regenerators, and fresh equipment from Progress 9 and refueled the joint propulsion unit; they would use the cargo ship to dispose of used material. On May 8, the chief of the aerogeology organization said Ryumin and Popov before the launch of Soyuz 35 had flown over certain linear and ring geological structures to acquire data for comparison with satellite observations; the Soyuz 26 crew (Romanenko and Grechko) had identified 25 such structures in the Soviet Union that proved to contain mineral deposits. By May 13 the crew repaired the on-board videotape recorder and replaced a motor in the biogravistat and a filter in the gas analyzer; some items would be returned to Earth for study. On May 16 they were putting plant sprouts in various stages of development into a special solution for study on Earth; they also used the Progress 9 propulsion unit for another orbit adjustment. The cargo ship separated from the orbital complex May 20 at 21:15 hours Moscow time; on May 22 ground command switched on its engine, and it “ceased to exist” upon entering the atmosphere. The next big event was launch at 21:21 hours Moscow time May 26 of Soyuz 36 carrying veteran Valery Kubasov and Bertalan Farkas, first Hungarian cosmonaut, to join Popov and Ryumin who had occupied Salyut 6 since April 9. Docking occurred at 22:56 hours Moscow time, and the visitors went aboard Salyut for a 7-day program of international research. Kubasov and Farkas would return to Earth in Soyuz 35, leaving Soyuz 36 for later use. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 2-27/80)
A small device flown in space for the first time had detected small changes in the Sun’s brightness over periods of days to months, NASA said. An experiment on the Solar Max satellite had registered fluctuations of about a tenth of 1% in solar radiation, corresponding to a change of up to 10°C (18 °F) in the Sun’s average temperature. This trend lasting for several years could make major alterations in Earth’s climate; measurement of even the slightest change in the Sun’s emitted heat and light might enable scientists to predict future changes in climate. A drop of 1% in the output of solar radiation would lower Earth’s mean temperature by more than a degree (2°F); if solar radiation decreased by only 6%, the entire Earth would be covered with ice. Evidence showed that Earth had been cooling down for about 90 million years; it was about 8°C (15°F) warmer 150 million years ago than it was today and might cool by 10 ° or more in the next several million years. Cycles with frequencies ranging from 22 years to millions of years had caused ice ages ranging from glacial epochs to “little ice ages.” Most recent of the latter, beginning in the mid-17th century and lasting about: 200 years, was a 1.5 ° drop from mean global temperature of 14°C (58 °F): it resulted in observable increase of glaciation in the Alps. (NASA Release 80-124) August 7.The Washington Post reported that schoolteacher Janice Brown, 32, piloted Paul MacCready’s solar-powered Gossamer Penguin as high as 12 feet off the ground for 14 minutes, 21 seconds, going 2 miles along a desert streambed at Edwards Air Force Base in the first sustained flight by an aircraft powered only by the Sun. The top speed was 16.5 mph. The Gossamer Penguin had a 72-foot wingspan and weighed about 68 pounds, including the bank of 2,800 photovoltaic cells mounted above the wing. Unlike other electrically powered aircraft, Penguin had no storage batteries and relied only on direct solar power. (WPost, Aug 8/80, A-6; Indl Dsgn, Sept/Oct 80, 18; FRC X-Press, Aug 22/80, 2)
DOC announced that it had upgraded the satellite division of NOAA and renamed it the National Earth Satellite Service (NESS), reflecting broader responsibilities for the former National Environmental Satellite Service. Earlier in 1980, NOAA became responsible for developing and managing a remote-sensing satellite system based on NASA’s experimental Landsat program. Since 1965, NOAA had managed operational weather satellites whose data served in navigation, commercial fishing, and water-resource management as well as weather forecasting. The greater resolution of the Landsat system should offer similar monitoring as well as data for uses such as farming, urban planning, and mineral exploration. (DOC Release 80-106)
The Washington Post said the mystery explosion detected by a U.S. Vela satellite September 22, 1979, was still a mystery, although additional data had come to light since the State Department announced a suspected nuclear explosion. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) had told “a few select committees of the House and Senate” that the Union of South Africa was conducting a secret naval exercise in the area where Vela saw the explosion. A committee aide briefed by the CIA said the explosion might be “a rocket launched from one of those South African ships.” On the same night, scientists using the world’s largest radiotelescope had seen a ripple in the ionosphere over Puerto Rico a few hours after Vela saw a double flash 4,000 miles away; it had come “from the right direction and at the right velocity to have been caused by a nuclear explosion near South Africa.” Ever since the State Department announcement, the Carter administration had tried to discount the possibility of a nuclear explosion, convening a panel of scientists who first said Vela saw a freak lightning strike that coincided with a meteor burnout, then suggested the sighting was either a malfunction or a mistake. However, the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory said that Vela had picked up the “unmistakable” signature of an atomic explosion, a “double flash” caused by a fireball blacked out momentarily by a shockwave surrounding the explosion, then showing 99 times more intense as the shockwave dissipated. The Vela, it turned out, had carried not one but two optical detectors: one very sensitive instrument to spot fireballs from small nuclear explosions and a less sensitive one in case an atomic blast overloaded the first instrument. As both instruments saw the flash September 22, instrument mistake was unlikely. Also, the ripple arrived at the Arecibo observatory at the proper time to have been the shockwave of an explosion seen by Vela. No radioactive debris had appeared in southern-hemisphere rainwater to confirm an atomic explosion, but the United States had taken up to three weeks after last year’s explosion to sample rainwater in the area. (W Post, Jan 30/80, A-l)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) reported that it had bookings for 260 hours of international satellite television when the winter Olympic games opened at Lake Placid, N.Y.; a tally after the games showed that 448 hours had been used, nearly double the original demand. Countries receiving direct broadcasts of the games included the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Yugoslavia, Australia, Japan, Mexico, and Venezuela; these would have relayed many of the telecasts to a large number of other nations through Earth networks, INTELSAT said. (INTELSAT Release 80-02-1)
The Washington Star reported that SBS had bet its future on the launch of a $20 million satellite as the basis of a revolutionary long-distance telephone service. SBS had promised new communications at lower rates than those of AT&T; its network would be the first in the world to use satellites and ground stations alone to transmit voice, data, and video messages from one place to another. Telephone firms had previously transmitted messages by underground cable or microwave-relay towers. The system would connect a firm with its faraway offices without reference to local phone lines: it would use a 16- to 25-foot-diameter antenna installed on a roof or in a parking lot to signal the satellite, which would relay the signal to ground stations at distant company offices and give service not presently available. Computers at far locations could talk to each other at speeds 20 times faster than was now possible; facsimile pictures could be transmitted 200 times faster; and the system would allow customers to hold videoconferences with executives located all over the United States. SBS had had difficulty in selling its services, designed for companies or government agencies conducting a large amount of nationwide business. It estimated a need for 25 to 30 private-line customers to break even by 1983. Two of its owner companies, IBM and Aetna, were among its 10 customers, and General Motors had asked for three stations to link Detroit, Atlanta, and Dayton. SBS said that the launch, scheduled for November 15, should attract attention and more customers to the company. (W Star, Nov 14/80, B-5)
Nature magazine described equipment problems on Heao 2, also called the Einstein observatory, that might end the mission prematurely. Launched in 1978, Heao 2 carried the first X-ray telescope “as sensitive as ground-based optical telescopes”; it had a planned lifetime of only one year. Its success in generating new scientific data had led to extension of its mission; until the recent setback, NASA scientists hoped that it would continue to return data well into 1981 when atmospheric drag would take it from orbit. The outcome would depend on the “behavior of the gyroscopes used to position it.” Data transmission was halted three weeks ago when two of the six gyroscopes failed after a temporary blackout. Heao 2 needed three functionPRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED S	lNTF.NIIONftLlY BUN* ing gyroscopes for positioning. One of the other four was already dead; another, running erratically, was on standy. NASA, was working on software for backup control using the two gyros still functioning, along with either a Sun sensor or star tracker on the satellite. (Nature, Oct 2/80, 379)
NASA announced signing of an agreement in Jakarta December 9 by Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, and Drs Suryadi, Indonesia’s director general of posts and telecommunications, for NASA launch of two Indonesian communications satellites. Satellites Palapa B-l. and Palapa B-2 in geosynchronous orbit would offer voice, video, telephone, and high-speed data service to member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) including, besides Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore. NASA would launch B-l between January 1983 and January 1984, depending on Shuttle availability, and B-2 between January and March 1984; it had launched earlier versions of Palapa in 1976-77. (NASA Release 80-183)
ESA observed the fifth anniversary of its first satellite, Cos B, designed for an operational life of one year. ESA commended the quality of the spacecraft and its subsystems, especially the spark chamber for which no space experience existed at the time of its construction. The eighth satellite built by European industry for ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization (ESRO), Cos B made the first complete detailed survey of the Milky Way in high-energy gamma-ray spectra and discovered a score of new gamma-ray sources. The spacecraft was made by the CESAR consortium led by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom with industrial firms of seven ESA member states: Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. (ESA Info 21)
NASA held a press briefing on the solar maximum mission slated for launch February 14. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said that exploration of Earth’s nearest star was significant both scientifically and technologically. Dr. Harold Glaser of NASA’s solar terrestrial division noted that the Sun, dominant energy source for the Earth, was a variable star in that its energy output varied in periods running from 10 minutes to ll years (the so-called solar cycle) as well as over periods of centuries. The solar variations causes variations on Earth; for instance, the solar flares known to have a periodicity of 11 years. In short time periods, a flare is the most energetic manifestation of solar changes, with significant effects: Earth suffers communications problems along with atmospheric heating and other phenomena, and the trillion kilotons spewed into the solar system would affect almost all the planets. The focus of the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) would be to understand more about solar flares in order to predict their occurrence. The magnetic field of the Sun had also been found to vary with a 22-year periodicity, strongly correlated with drought in the U.S. western plains. During the 17th century, solar activity apparently ceased for about 80 years, a period called the Maunder Minimum which featured a “mini-ice Age” documented in northern Europe. This seems to have happened more frequentBLANK NOT FILMED ly than previously realized. Space research during the last 20 years had produced these data, Glaser said, including evidence that the Sun might be changing sides, with a corresponding increase of luminosity or incident radiation. Also, the Sun appeared to oscillate rather like a fluid, probably because of interior activity whose nature was as yet unknown. Joseph Purcell of GSFC, standing in for project manager Peter Burr who was ill, described the spacecraft and its planned retrieval by the Space Shuttle, and the modular design that would allow it to be serviced in orbit if necessary. The SMM would be the first NASA satellite designed for retrieval and first to include the tracking and data-relay satellite capability; at 5,000 pounds, it would also be the heaviest payload launched by a Delta. Purcell explained the 24-hour computer watch on the SMM, calling it an operation with “very intense man-machine relationships.” Kenneth J. Frost, also of GSFC as SMM project scientist, described the payload as essentially one experiment to determine the nature of solar flares, using seven instruments and a “very detailed scientific game plan.” Investigators needed a 24-hour watch to evaluate the plan’s progress and to react to targets of opportunity on the Sun. For instance:, a flare on the Sun’s west limb would be observed on Earth and by a series of spacecraft in orbit around the Earth, so that the quality and completeness of the observations would “far outstrip anything we’ve ever had before.” The SMM spacecraft would have a productive lifetime of about two years, Frost said, and the scientific group at GSFC would consist of investigators prepared to spend that much time away from their home institutions. In response to a question, he pointed out that the broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum to be investigated by SMM could not penetrate Earth’s atmosphere. (Text, Feb 8/80; NASA Release
NASA announced appointment of Roy S. Estess as deputy manager of NSTL, replacing Henry F. Auter, who retired in February 1979. Estess joined NSTL in 1966, working on the Saturn V acceptance tests and directing the advanced planning for Shuttle testing at NSTL. Since 1977 he had managed satellite remote-sensing research in NSTL’s Earth resources laboratory. (NASA anno Aug 29/80) —The New York Times reported the death from a heart attack at her home in California of Jacqueline Cochran, first woman to fly faster than the speed of sound and director during WWII of the Women’s Air-Force Service Pilots (WASPS), which trained more than 1,200 women to fly transport planes. Brought up in poverty and working in a cotton gin in Georgia at the age of 9, she took her first flying lesson when 22 and in 1935 was the first women to enter the Bendix transcontinential air race, winning the Bendix trophy in 1938. She had married Floyd Odium in 1936 and served as a captain in the British Air Force Auxiliary, returning to the United States after Pearl Harbor. She set more than 200 flying records, breaking the sound barrier in 1953 in an F-86 jet fighter plane. In 1961 she set a new altitude record of 55,253 feet and in 1964 a women’s world speed record of 1,429 mph in an F-104G SuperStar. She retired in 1970 as colonel in the Air Force Reserve. (NY Times, Aug 10/80, 40)
NASA’declared the mission of Heao 3 successful in its prelaunch objectives. Launched September 29, 1979, the satellite had in its first six months of operation made a full gamma-ray sky survey and detected a wide range of cosmic-ray elements. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said Heao 3 should “continue to provide excellent scientific data.” (NASA MOR S-382-79-03 [postlaunch] May 13/80)
The Washington Post reported that AT&T would launch and operate its own satellites for use with its domestic satellite communications system. The firm filed with the FCC a plan to launch three satellites—one each in 1983, 1984, and 1986—to replace three Comsat satellites it had been leasing from Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of ComSatCorp). It would use its satellites to provide long-distance telephone service and specialized business services for 10 years in the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Each satellite would be able to handle up to 21,600 simultaneous telephone conversations. (W Post, Apr 30/80, B-4) During April: NASA announced appointment of Robert E. Smylie, deputy director of GSFC since December 1976 and acting director from June 1979 to February 1980, as Headquarters associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. He had joined NASA in 1962 at JSC, where he worked in various positions until assigned to Headquarters in 1973 as deputy associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology. He was previously employed by Douglas Aircraft Company. (NASA anno Apr 2/80; NASA Release 80-41)
FBIS reported launch of Japan’s second commun ications satellite CS-B from Tanegashima Island at 5:35 p.m. local time. CS-B would replace Ayame (Iris), whose signal was lost when it collided with its apogee motor 12 seconds after ignition February 5, 1979. Ayame 2 would reach sta tionary orbit over northern New Guinea by March 1CT First stationary comsat designed to use millimeter-wave transmissions in communications experiments, Ayame 2 was 1.4 meters long and 1.6 meters tall, weighed about DO kilograms, and cost 6 billion yen; it would be Japan’s fifth stationary satellite. [FBIS reported February 25 that, 8 seconds after firing an apogee motor to put the spacecraft into a circular orbit, Japan’s National Space Development Agency lost radio contact with Ayame 2 also. Willi 30 billion yen spent to build and launch llie two experimental comsats, llie successive failures were “a shock to llie agency and llie Science and Technology Agency.” Japan’s tracking stations continued to send radio signals in an effort to restore contact, officials said, but llie two failures would cast a shadow on future satellite-launching plans.] (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 22, 25/80)
an arrangement under which the initiating company would share the cost of satellite data gathering, but the technology developed would be available to all other timber companies. In 1977 St. Regis had begun a test program with NASA to see if Landsat data could improve the company’s data base on forest lands; it wanted to use the information to plan timber harvesting, leasing and buying new timber lands, and monitoring more than 2.3 million acres across the southern United States [see A&A77, Oct 25]. The success of the project led to the authorization by St. Regis Southern Timberland Division in Florida of more than $300,000 new capital investment for an information system using Landsat data to support its general operations. St. Regis was the first private company to participate in NASA’s test program on resource-observation applications. The program began a unique relationship between NASA and the private sector, because St. Regis (not NASA) initiated the project and the company shared in the cost. NASA said that the entire forest industry would gain by the venture because technology from the St. Regis experiment would be in the public domain, available to other firms. NASA and St. Regis planned to conduct a symposium in 1981 to demonstrate Landsat data interpretation to timber industry management. The program was managed by JSC and Purdue University’s Laboratory for Applications of Remote Sensing, as well as by St. Regis. (NASA Release 80-44)
Newspapers said Voyager Vs Saturn approach had discovered two new moons, a 13th and 14th, and confirmed existence of three previously shown in Earthbound observations. Until the recent discoveries, the giant planet was thought to have only nine satellites. Closing on Saturn at 45,000 mph, Voyager 1 should come within 77,000 miles of the surface on or about November 12 and obtain high-resolution photographs of the planet and its satellites. It was already returning pictures with resolution far higher than those taken in 1979 by the less sophisticated Pioneer 11. Images relayed over the past 10 days showed dozens of divisions never seen before between Saturn’s rings, meaning that the six known rings would have to be recounted. “Almost everything we’re seeing at Saturn right now is brand new,” said Dr. Bradford Smith, head of the Voyager imaging team. JPL’s Ray L.	Heacock, project manager, said that 9 of Voyager’s 10 instruments were working, 1 having failed after encounter with Jupiter, and the spacecraft was in good shape after traveling 1.3 bilion miles through space. (NY Times, Oct 29/80, A-20; W Post, Oct 29/80, A-2; IV Star, Oct 29/80, D-18)
Comsat General announced that it was providing consulting service to Alascom Inc., based in Anchorage, on a new generation of communications satellites to meet Alaska’s future communications needs. Alascom was now leasing 15 to 17 transponders on a domestic Satcom to relay communications throughout Alaska, but growth by the late 1980s should require double that number. Comsat General would help design a spacecraft to meet increased transponder demand. (ComSat Gnl Release 80-5)
NASA announced that a JPL scientist, Dr. Stephen P. Synnott of the Voyager optical navigation team, had discovered a 15th moon of Jupiter from Voyager 1 photos taken in March 1979. Checking March photos to confirm the discovery of another satellite (1979 Jl) in October 1979 photos taken by Voyager 2, Synnott detected an unexplained shadow on the planet that, once recognized, was evident on seven earlier images. The new satellite, labeled 1979 J2, had a 16-hour orbit around Jupiter between moons Amalthea and Io; 1979 Jl had a 7-hour orbit. (NASA Release 80-61; JPL Release 930)
ComsatCorp said that it had signed a contract with MultiVisions, Ltd., of Anchorage for the first commercial use of a new 10-meter multiple-beam torus antenna, a revolutionary design allowing a user to work with as many as seven geosynchronous satellites at the same time. The usual parabolic dish antenna could work with only one satellite at a time. The torus, scheduled to be in operation in Anchorage next year, would be equipped initially to receive television programs from three satellites simultaneously. With three dual-polarization receive-only feeds, the new antenna could receive up to 72 different programs from 72 different transponders from U.S. domestic satellites, and additional feeds would provide even greater capacity. Where access to more than one satellite was needed, the torus would be cheaper both to build and to operate than the two or more conventional antennas that would usually be required. It would also reduce the amount of real estate needed for several parabolic antennas and the amount of interference in congested frequency areas (of which Anchorage was one). ComSatCorp had asked the FCC for permission to locate torus antennas at Etam, W. Va., Andover, Maine, and Jamesburg, Calif. (ComSatCorp Release 80-30)
NASA launched the fourth geostationary orbital environmental satellite (GOES-D) for NOAA from ESMC on a Delta at 6:27 p.m. EDT. The Delta put Goes 4 into a synchronous transfer orbit close to nominal. Firing an apogee kick motor at 8 a.m. September 11 would put it into geosynchronous equatorial orbit over 90°W for flight testing, after which it would be turned over to NOAA for operational use of the VISSR [see August 29]. The 103-day gap since NASA’s unsuccessful launch of NOAA-B May 29 almost set a record for inactivity. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 11/80; Df Dly, Sept 12/80, 62; Spacewarn, Sept 30/80)
Radio Corporation of America (RCA) said it would lease capacity on an American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) satellite to make up for its own satellite that disappeared after launch [see December 11, 1979]. Eleven cable television companies that were to use the lost satellite could now begin sending programs to cable systems as early as April 1. Loss of RCA Satcom 3 had threatened the cable television industry; twenty channels were in use on one RCA satellite, and eleven more had been scheduled for the lost satellite. Under the arrangement with AT&T, RCA would pay $70,000 a month for each channel which it would then lease at $40,000 a month; an 18-month lease would lose RCA about $5.9 million including expenses. (W Star, Feb 21/80, C-9)
U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Lew Allen, Jr., said in an interview that a current chill in U.S.-USSR relations would accelerate the development of weapons designed to wage war in outer space or knock down USSR satellites for spying, navigation, and communications. Allen said that, although he still hoped for an agreement on continued noninterference with satellites maintained in space by both the United States and the Soviet Union, the U.S. Air Force was experiencing pressure to move quickly on antisatellite weapons. He indicated that extra money would go for weapons already in the works such as the “flying tomato can” (operating by collision with a target) rather than more distant possibilities such as lasers. (W Post, Jan 11/80, A-l) This was the first time the Chinese press had mentioned training of space crews. FBIS said that the new publication would contain an article on space food and that the simulations of space life had already been made into a documentary film. The Wen Hui article did not say when or if China would send someone into space; however, during U.S. Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s visit, a deputy chief of staff for PRC armed forces said a manned space program was not one of China’s top priorities. FBIS also reported publication in a Shanghai paper of pictures of a dog that had returned from space; an editorial in that paper called China the third nation to master the technology of satellite retrieval. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua, Jan 12/80; Hong Kong Wen Wei Po, Jan 14/80; W Post, Jan 13/80, 16)
INTELSAT said that its board meeting in Bogota approved use of time-division multiple-access equipment with its global communications satellite system; the new devices, to be installed in the 1980s, would offer three times more telephone channels on INTELSAT satellites than available from frequency-modulation (FM) equipment now in use. (INTELSAT Release
The Washington Post reported that SBS was “having a hard time getting off the ground” with launch of its first satellite put off for the third time in a month. Technical problems with the Delta had delayed the launch of SBS 1, built by Hughes Aircraft, first of its kind to offer a high-frequency interference-free signal. Liftoff had been postponed to November 6 because of insulation damage, then to November 12 when a motor bolt broke. The latest problem was a leak in the liquid oxygen system. (WPost, Oct 31/80, E-3)
The Washington Post reported that two Florida launches had lit up evening skies with brilliant colors and a streak of light that prompted calls to authorities from as far away as Nashville, Tenn. In the second of four tests to see whether ionized clouds blocked communications among aircraft, satellites, and ground stations, a U.S. Air Force rocket from Eglin Air Force Base in the Florida panhandle sprayed the ionosphere 116 miles above the Gulf of Mexico with 106 pounds of barium Sunday, December 6, creating a pink, green, and purple haze monitored by scientists on the ground and in airplanes. One aircraft was positioned so that the barium cloud passed between it and an experimental satellite in orbit 25,000	miles up. About 30 minutes later, the Intelsat 5A F2, largest communications satellite ever built, roared into orbit with the rocket trail familiar to Space Coast residents. (W Post, Dec 8/80, 4)
ESA reported that INMARSAT had awarded it a five-year contract at U.S.$1 million a year for leasing MARECS satellites A and B when located over the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The completed INMARSAT system would cover the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans by using those satellites with Intelsat Vs carrying maritime communications payloads, and with one of the MARISAT satellites already in orbit. For the first time a European-built satellite would let ships at sea dial shore-based subscribers directly and establish telephone and telex links with them, through the real-time highly reliable MARECS system operating in the 4- and 6-GHz band and on 1.5- to 1.6-GHz frequencies. (ESA Info 28)
NASA reported that astronomers using data from the international UV explorer were continuing to study the halo discovered around the Milky Way in early observations by the satellite. The halo material was found to be hot (about 100,000°), to extend 50,000 light-years from the galaxy, and to contain oxygen, sulfur, iron, silicon, and carbon. Iue launched January 26, 1978, was a joint mission of the United States, the United Kingdom, and ESA. For most of history, visible light was the only medium for studying celestial objects, but many types of electromagnetic radiation were now available for observation: radio waves, infrared, X-ray, gammEi rays, and ultraviolet rays. Earth’s atmosphere blocked most of these types of energy, which must be studied through spacecraft above the atmosphere. Iue, in a synchronous orbit keeping it in continuous touch with either the United States or the European ground station, could be used by astronomers located either at GSFC or the Villafranca station in Spain (Vilspa) much like a ground-based telescope but observing in the ultraviolet instead of visible-light spectrum. A scientific colloquium at GSFC during May heard 92 papers on Iue, findings; Prof. Robert Wilson, University College London, said “there is hardly an area of modem astronomy that hasn’t been affected.” Scientists from 25 countries were participating, and 478 astronomers had been assigned observing time on the satellite. (NASA Release 80-67)
NASA announced plans to launch NOAA-B on or about May 21 from WTR on an Atlas F. A third-generation environmental-monitoring spacecraft operated by NOAA for the National Operational Environmental Satellite System (NOESS), NOAA-B would join NOAA-A (Noaa 6) in acquiring quantitative data as input for GARP (the Global Atmospheric Research Program). Known as the “TIROS twins,” the NOAA satellites would be the only civilian operational spacecraft whose orbits cover the polar regions. (NASA MOR E-615-80-02 [prelaunch] May 13/80; DOC Release NOAA 80-67)
Aerospace Daily reported that the Soviet Union today launched Cosmos 1176, possibly the first nuclear-powered ocean-surveillance satellite since radioactive fragments of Cosmos 954 crashed into Canada in January 1978. Orbit parameters were 265-kilometer apogee, 260-kilometer perigee, 89.6-minute period, and 65° inclination. Until the 1978 incident, the Soviet Union had routinely used radar-carrying satellites powered by nuclear sources traveling in pairs in similar orbits to detect ships; at end of mission, the nuclear source would be propelled into higher orbit to decay in outer space, but Cosmos 954 had malfunctioned. (A/D, Apr 30/80, 338)
NASA announced an MSFC award to Martin Marietta and Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company of contracts to define a liquid-propellant boost module for the Shuttle external tank, to increase its cargo-carrying capacity to 5,400 kilograms (12,000 pounds). Under the new terms, modifying initial program-definition contracts let earlier in 1980, the two firms would study adapting Titan hardware and systems to the boost module. They had been building Titans for years; the U.S. Air Force had used Titan 2 in the mid-%1960s to launch Gemini and was still using it. Martin Marietta, under a contract valued at $1.18 million, would carry out follow-on studies and design activities on the overall system; Aerojet, under a contract for $782,500, would work on modification of the Titan 3 stage 1 engine. A modified version of Titan had launched communications satellites and other Earth orbiters as well as deep-space Viking and Voyager payloads. The first use of the augmenting booster would be in 1986. (NASA Release 80-154; MSFC Release 80-126)
INTELSAT announced that it would buy an additional Intelsat V satellite from Ford Aerospace and an additional NASA Atlas Centaur vehicle to launch it. The first Intelsat V launch had been scheduled for December 1980. The ninth in the Intelsat V series would help fill domestic and international demand until higher capacity comsats became available in the mid-1980s. INTELSAT’S decision would add about U.S. $70 million to the cost of the Intelsat V program, estimated at U.S. $650 million. (INTELSAT Release 80-19-1)
The Washington Star said that Boeing Company had awarded Fairchild Industries, Germantown, Md., a multimillion-dollar contract to build forward-fuselage parts for a new-generation 757 jetliner. The award by Boeing Military Aircraft Company as subcontractor for Boeing Commercial Aircraft Company was the third given to Fairchild, which received in October a contract for fuselage above the wing and in November a contract for leading-edge wing slats. The twin-engine 757 would fly in 1982. (W Star, Jan 8/80, B-4) —The United States should develop a way to send nuclear wastes into outer space, Stanley G. Rosen told an American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in San Francisco. The Washington Star said Rosen, a test manager for the U.S. Air Force Defense Satellite Communications system, described the problem of ’’extremely toxic" residues from nuclear-power programs around the world. Extraterrestrial disposal of such wastes would have a “short-term risk” during launch and injection, but “zero risk” thereafter, he said. (W Star, Jan 8/80, A-5)
The Department of Commerce (DOC) reported that more than 700 representatives of business firms, trade associations, educational institutions, and state and local government agencies had responded to NOAA’s request for assistance in developing a national civil operational land remote-sensing satellite system. At March meetings in Seattle, Chicago, Tallahassee, Washington, D.C., and Albuquerque, NOAA satellite managers received many suggestions for using such a system in food production, mineral exploration, land-use planning, resource assessment and management, and environmental protection. Wilbur H. Eskite, Jr., of NOAA’s task force, who chaired the meetings, said that interest in an operational system offering a continuity of data within specific timeframes was “larger than we had believed” before the meetings [see April 6]. Questions raised at the meetings that would require policy decisions included what instruments to carry into orbit, their capabilities, how quickly and in what form users should receive the data, and whether education and government agencies should pay the same fees for data as profit-making companies. The White House made NOAA responsible last November for moving to an operational program of satellite remote sensing. (NOAA Release 80-55)
ESA announced the inauguration March 6 in Geneva of the Stella experiment using the Ots satellite to transmit scientific data at high speeds between high-energy physics laboratories. Participating in the ceremony would be Roy Gibson, ESA director general; J.B. Adams, executive director of the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN); L. van Hove, research director for CERN; and F. Braun, director general for the European communities commission on internal market and industrial affairs. Some 1,600 scientists from ESA member states used CERN’s accelerators and high-energy particle detectors for fundamental research into the structure of matter. Stella would transmit electronic data at speeds up to 1 megabit (1 million bits of data) per second from CERN to member-state laboratories at Hamburg, Germany; Saclay, France; Didcot, United Kingdom; Pisa, Italy; Dublin, Ireland; and Graz, Austria. The speed of transmission would be similar to the working speeds of computers in the participating laboratories, eliminating the delay of sending magnetic tapes through the mail. (ESA Info Bltn 6)
A military communications satellite fired into orbit from Cape Canaveral in an Allas Centaur January 17 had “settled into temporary orbit” and was performing superbly, according to U.S. Air Force Col. George Breton, mission director. The 4,100-pound Fleet Satellite Communications spacecraft originally was scheduled for launch in December 1979. (WPost, Jan 19/80, A-9)
The Washington Post quoted a White House source as saying that “We’re running out of patience on the Space Shuttle.. .There’s a feeling here that we can’t tolerate any more delays in the Shuttle program.” Noting the six postponements that had done “serious harm to the space agency’s credibility,” the Washington Post said that “in fairness.. .the delays caused by engine and tile troubles are not all its fault.” When Pratt & Whitney lost the engine contract to Rocketdyne, it sued NASA, delaying engine tests for a year; lack of money also caused delay. JSC Director Christopher Kraft pointed out that money cutbacks in 1978 meant that “we delayed building the tiles, and that naturally delayed our test procedures, which naturally delayed us from getting at the answers we now have.” The custom-built tiles, each shaped to fit a specific place on the fuselage, took 25 hours apiece to install. After many were attached, NASA found that half had lost their strength in the bonding process; technicians had to remove and coat the tiles before replacing them. When NASA shipped the Shuttle orbiter piggyback on its Boeing carrier from Palmdale, Calif., to Cape Canaveral in 1979, only 10% of its 30,922 tiles were in place, and some of those fell off during the trip. NASA enlisted a force of 1,200 workers to install the tiles, working two 10-hour shifts six days a week at the Cape. When the coating problem developed, the crews were attaching 750 tiles a week but removing 100. About 5,000 cavities on the frame remained to be filled, and NASA forecast August as the finishing date for the task. The other technological challenge was the Shuttle’s engine cluster, three liquid-hydrogen engines, each 10 times as powerful as the largest jet engine and burning 1,000 degrees hotter than any engine before it. These were the first liquid-fuel rockets designed for reuse; said Shuttle program manager Robert Thompson: “We had to expect that in heating it and stressing it with repeated use we were going to run into problems.” During tests, engines had caught fire and even blown up; 6 of the last 12 tests of the three engines firing together had to be stopped because of overheating. By summer’s end the tests would have cost $1 billion more than the $500 million NASA estimated. NASA’s costs by the time the first Shuttle flew would be $264 million for solid-fuel rocket engines; $381 million for tiles; $442 million for the external fuel tank; $1.5 billion for development of the main liquid-rocket engine, amounting to an overrun of almost $1.6 billion. Money was a lesser concern, however, than the slips in schedule. The Shuttle was the first civilian vehicle designed to carry surveillance satellites for the DOD; those due to fly in 1983 were the biggest and most sophisticated ever built, weighing up to 25 tons each, too big to be carried by any other rocket including DOD’s Titan. Former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.), ranking Republican on the Senate subcommittee on space, said that DOD would have to alter its craft to fit on the Titan if they could not fly on the Shuttle in 1983. (W Post, June 3/80, A-2)
Aerospace Daily reported that malfunction of a portable life-support system caused a flash fire April 18 at JSC in which Robert Mayfield (employed by the contractor, Hamilton Standard Division, United Technologies) was hospitalized with second-degree burns. The system included two tanks of oxygen pressurized at 3,000 pounds per square inch. The fire started during a performance test when a regulator was switched to the extravehicular activity mode. Extensive damage occurred to a test spacesuit and the life-support system as well as the cleanroom at JSC’s crew systems laboratory. Mayfield was reported in stable condition April 20. JSC had appointed a board to investigate the accident. (A/D, Apr 22/80, 289) —Aerospace Daily reported an Aerospace Corporation study for the U.S. Air Force on the risk that a large active satellite might collide with debris from inactive satellites or launchers. Probability of collision for a large satellite on a 1,000-day mission in low orbit (500 to 1,500 kilometers up) was high because of the great concentration of debris at those altitudes. As the objects were moving in different directions, velocity for any satellite would be at a maximum. Collision in synchronous orbit was less likely to the extent that the objects were all moving in the same direction; however, debris in those orbits tended to collect at certain points because of Earth’s gravity. (A/D, Apr 22/80, 294)
NASA issued a summary of Saturn encounter events for the period August 22 through December 15, beginning with “in-bound movie sequences” from Voyager 1 through Saturn-Titan close approach and ending with a postencounter movie sequence. Subjects of Voyager research at Saturn would be the planet itself, its rings, its satellites (especially the Mercury-size Titan), and Saturn’s magnetosphere; the summary listed points of special interest and the unique properties to be investigated. (NASA Release 80-145)
NASA announced that scientists studying data from Heao 2 had confirmed the emission of X-rays from Jupiter, making the giant planet the only one besides Earth to produce X-rays. Heao 2, launched November 13, 1978, carried a focusing X-ray telescope with four different instruments that could be positioned at the focus, including the imaging proportional counter used to view Jupiter. Dr. Albert Metzger of JPL, leader of the scientific team making the discovery, reported it to a meeting of the American Astronomical Society at the University of Maryland last week. The X-ray find indicated the power needed by the intense radiation belts in the Jovian magnetosphere: from the brightness observed, scientists said that energetic electrons in the system emitted nearly a quadrillion watts of power. To maintain the radiation belts, an equal amount of power had to come from the planet’s rotational energy and the force of the solar wind. Also, energetic ions and electrons impacting the surfaces of satellites orbiting inside the Jovian radiation belt might also produce X rays; observing those X rays might help determine the composition of Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. (NASA Release 80-98)
Nature reported that the ESA council voted to transfer launch capability to the private firm of Ariane-Espace, which would handle production and launch of all future ESA satellites. (Nature, Jan 31/80, 422) During January: The Washington Post reported the death January 13 of James J.	Donegan, 63, “a pioneer in space technology” at NASA since 1958. An aeronautical engineer specializing in spacecraft tracking, data acquisition, and computing techniques at GSFC, Donegan was an original member of the ground instruments unit attached to the first Space Task Group (STG) formed in 1958 to meet the challenge of Sputnik. He was a designer of the original manned spaceflight network and directed GSFC’s manned spaceflight activity until 1973, when he became head of a new Operations Support Computing Division responsible for computer support to both manned and unmanned scientific spacecraft. He was operations director for Project Mercury and coordinated instantaneous computer services for Gemini and Apollo flights, receiving NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1969 for his work on Apollo. {W Post, Jan 18/80, C-10)
MSFC reported signing a $2,271,391 contract with a small business, OAO Corporation of Beltsville, Md., for design, assembly, delivery, test, and checkout within 18 months of a database management system to handle an “immense volume” of instrument data transmitted at “extremely high rates” by spacecraft during missions between 1985 and 1995. The system would accept data at rates tip to 50 million bits per second (44,650 pages of computer printout per minute). “Firsts” to be included in the system would be a data bus of fiber-optic cabling for use in a computer configuration and use of lasers to transmit and receive data at the high rates required. (MSFC Release 80-141) During October: NASA appointed Dr. Jack L. Kerrebrock, head of MIT’s aeronautics and astronautics department, as associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology as of June 1, 1981. Replacing Dr. James J. Kramer who retired in October 1979, he would be responsible for aeronautics, space and energy research, and technology programs. Dr. Walter B. Olstad would act as associate administrator in the interim. (NASA Release 80-156) —JSC announced that Dr. Edward G. Gibson, scientist-astronaut, would leave October 31 to become advanced systems manager for TRW Defense and Space Systems Group. The science pilot on the record 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-1974, he had left NASA in 1974 to work for Aerospace Corporation and for ERNO but had rejoined the agency in March 1977. (JSC Release 80-057) —C.A. Syvertson, ARC director, named Angelo Guastaferro of the Headquarters Office of Space Science as his deputy, replacing A. Thomas Young, recently named director of GSFC. John Boyd, associate deputy director, would remain acting deputy director for six months. (ARC anno Oct 31/80; NASA Release 80-165) —The NAA newsletter reported that Maurice Bellonte, copilot of the first east-to-west transatlantic nonstop flight in 1930, was guest of honor at the National Air and Space Museum on the 50th anniversary of his flight from Le Bourget airfield near Paris to Curtiss Field, NY. In 1929 Bellonte and his copilot Dieudonne Coste had set a world record for longest nonstop flight, 4,788 miles from Paris to Manchuria in 51 hours, 39 minutes. The Atlantic crossing had taken 37 hours, 18 minutes. (NAA nsltr Sept-Oct 80, 2) —The New York Times reported that after long service in orbit and “a galaxy of discoveries” the astrophysics observatories Copernicus and Galileo were nearing the end of their useful lives. Copernicus (Oao 3, launched in August 1972 and named to honor the 500th birthday of the Polish astronomer) carried the first UV telescope above Earth’s atmosphere and made precise measurements of the amount of deuterium in the universe. Galileo (Heao 2, launched in November 1978) carried the only imaging X-ray telescope ever orbited and mapped X-ray emissions from every known quasar. (NY Times, Oct 31/80, A-19) —INTELSAT announced that its Italian signatory member, Telespazio, had set up an award of U.S.$10,000 for contributions to the field of satellite communications. Established on the 10th anniversary of the death of Dr. Piero Fanti, first general manager of Telespazio, the award would go every two years to a researcher or student in an INTELSAT member country who made a contribution of significant value to the field. (INTELSAT Release 80-22-1)
Responding to press reports on the Ariane, ESA issued a statement on its program of four flight tests, the second of which failed when the first stage malfunctioned. ESA had identified the trouble and taken steps to rectify it. Test 3 would now take place in June 1981 and test 4 in the autumn of that year, a timetable ESA said was compatible with its commitments to put scientific and communications satellites into orbit in late 1981 and 1982. Financing arranged at the outset, which included 20% for contingencies, would cover the additional studies and tests needed. (ESA Info 31)
The Washington Star reported that cable television operators awaiting a replacement for the lost RCA Satcom 3 had found that they would need big new dish receivers for signals from the Comstar satellite RCA planned to lease. {W Star, Feb 27/80, C-3)
The Washington Star reported that the American Newspaper Publishers Association (ANPA) approved a proposed system of satellite communications between wire services and newspapers. A joint task force representing ANPA, UPI, and Associated Press (AP) conducted a two-year study of economic, technical, legal, and regulatory aspects of such a system. (W Star Apr 22/80, C-6)
The NY Times reviewed advances in phototypesetting technology, including satellite transmission, that had made it possible for publications to print identical copies simultaneously anywhere in the world. “Cold type,” the first generation of phototypesetting, replaced use of individual characters with a matrix of symbols on a transparent material. Light sent through characters produced an image on high-contrast photographic paper. The second generation of typesetting machines also used a photographic negative to generate characters, but used digital computer scan to produce the symbols, recreating them on a cathode-ray tube as a series of minute dots or lines reproduced on photographic paper. The third generation, developed in the late 1960s, encoded text on a disk and printed out entirely by computer, working 10 times as fast as previous machines. By the 1970s, publications such as U.S. News and World Report, Newsweek, and the New York Times had switched from either hot type or less sophisticated cold type to the third-generation technology, which was amenable to satellite transmission. Some of the machines could produce entire pages of newspapers and magazines, including advertisements, artwork, and text, reducing time and cost of publication. A fourth generation would abandon photographic imaging altogether: using lasers, it would produce characters directly on paper without use of a cathode-ray tube. One such unit had the advantage of producing its output on nonphotographic paper, made without silver, at a price a third that of conventional light-sensitive paper. (NY Times, Sept 8/80, D-5)
INTELSAT announced that its board of governors had decided to purchase three more Intelsat 5A satellites in addition to the nine already on hand for the Intelsat 5 series, the latter to be launched by the end of 1982. Launching of the 5A series would begin in 1984; basically similar to Intelsat 5, they would have increased reliability and 25 % more communications capacity, handling 15,000	telephone calls compared to 12,000. (INTELSAT Release 80-30-1)
The Washington Star reported a warning from the Center for Defense Information (“an unofficial defense study group”) that technological progress in U.S. and Soviet space programs could spark an arms race in space. The United States had a 12xl3-inch device—the miniature homing interceptor vehicle—that could home in on infrared radiation “to destroy a target satellite by high-speed impact,” the group said; if the device were actually tested in space, “it could destroy more than the target satellite: it could destroy U.S. and Soviet negotiations aimed at limiting antisatellite warfare as well.” The group said that the Pentagon believed that the Soviet Union had an operational but limited antisatellite weapon that had been tested about 17 times; 7 of the tests were failures, but 10 were “possible successes” in that the interceptor passed less than a mile from the targets. No target was destroyed, suggesting that the Soviet Union might be working on inspection of foreign satellites. PRC reconnaissance satellites traveled in orbits like those of the Soviet test targets, and an interception program might be aimed mainly at the Chinese, the group said. Rear Adm. Gene LaRocque (USN-ret.), head of the center, said wars might begin in space “but they’re going to end right here on earth. It won’t be a Star Wars show with a lot of robots. . .vaporizing each other in the remote regions of space.. . . Once those nuclear missiles start to fly, the science-fiction drama will be over.” (W Star, Oct 21/80, D-10)
NASA reported that France and West Germany signed an intergovernmental agreement today for joint development of a direct-broadcast television satellite to be launched on Ariane late in 1983. The two nations would split the cost of the initial three-satellite system, estimated at $250-$300 million. The sponsors said major return on the investment would come from sales of 15 to 20 such television satellite systems over the next 10 years to third parties such as Scandinavia’s Nordsat, Radio Luxembourg’s Luxsat, and People’s Republic of China. ESA would continue definition work on LSat, a parallel television-satellite effort without French and German participation. (NASA Actv Rpt, May 1/80)
NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
Joseph B. Mahon, director of NASA expendable launch vehicles program, said that NASA would use such vehicles in 18 missions through the end of September 1981. Of these, 7 would be flown on Deltas, 7 on Atlas Centaurs, 3 on the solid-fuel Scout, and 1 on the Atlas F. Two flights would carry NASA science satellites; NASA would launch the other 16 (for which the energy would be reimbursed) for other government agencies or private firms. The latter would include three weather satellites for NOAA; five DOD payloads; and eight commercial geosynchronous communications satellites for SBS, RCA, Comsat General Corporation, and the INTELSAT consortium. The Office of Space Transportation Systems Operations would run the program. (NASA Release 80-140)
Since Mt. St. Helens erupted May 18, NASA reported what it called the most complete observations to date of volcanic aerosols in the stratosphere. Large volcanic eruptions had previously changed Earth’s weather (short-term) and climate (long-term). ARC had collected Mt. St. Helen’s data for its aerosol climate effects (ACE) program, using the U-2 aircraft in sampling missions on May 19, 22, and 27, and June 14 and 17. A preliminary analysis of the volcanic plumes showed solid ash and sulfuric acid, the proportions varying in different samples. The acid in the stratosphere was several hundred times greater than before the eruptions. The first flight found ash particles as large as 30 microns, of composition similar to ash on the ground near the volcano. (Largest particles found on later flights were about 3 microns.) Gaseous sulfur dioxide also increased: levels on the first flight were 10 to 1,000 times ambient levels, and on the second flight were 100 times normal. The second flight found water vapor in the plume to be 10 times the normal amount, showing that volcanic water was injected into the stratosphere. A July 1979 ACE flight over Alaska gave baseline levels for comparison with conditions after the eruption. On the day of the eruption, one of NASA’s SAGE teams in Wyoming launched instruments on a balloon to enter and measure the dust plume; it detected dust concentrations 400 to 1,600 times normal in the stratosphere. The SAGE satellite launched in 1979 tracked the Mt. St. Helens’ clouds as it had those of two previous eruptions. WFC sent an Orion P-3 a plane on an “underflight” as the cloud went over North Carolina and the Atlantic Ocean, along with a Super Loki rocket; these flights gave scientists simultaneous data readings from above and below the atmosphere. By late June, LaRC scientists decided that, although Mt. St. Helens could have boosted stratospheric aerosols by 50%, there was as yet no sign of adverse climate change. (ARC Release 80-62; NASA Release 80-107) July 22.NASA unveiled the first scientific and applications payload for the STS (Shuttle) at GSFC’s clean room, where instruments were installed in the package planned as an alternate payload on orbital test flight 4, scheduled for April 1982. (Prime payload for this flight belonged to DOD.) Called OSS-1 for NASA’s Office of Space Science, the entire payload was designed, built, tested, and integrated by a team of GSFC engineers and scientists headed by Ken Kissin, OSS-1 mission manager, and Jon Busse, project manager for Shuttle payload integration and rocket experiment. Project scientists were Drs. Siegfried Bauer and Werner Neupert. The seven principal OSS-1 experiments were in the disciplines of space plasma physics, solar physics, astronomy, and life sciences, each represented by one or more instruments. (NASA Release 80-114, 80-117)
The New York Times and Aerospace Daily said the Soviet Union tested a “killer satellite” in space, ending a two-year gap in testing antisatellite weapons. (A killer satellite is an orbiting vehicle designed to wreck other satellites by hitting them in direct collision or exploding nearby, or by directing a force such as a laser beam against them.) Cosmos 1174, launched from Tyuratam April 18, apparently neared its target (Cosmos 1171, launched from Plesetsk April 3) on its first orbit and exploded. Sources said the test was a failure. The Soviet Union first tested an antisatellite weapon (ASAT) in 1963 and apparently was successful in destroying targets at altitudes up to 150 miles. The Soviet tests aroused concern because of U.S. dependence on satellites for a number of military uses: reconnaissance, communications, and early warning of attack. Though many U.S. satellites orbit 20,000 miles or more from Earth’s surface, many systems for reconnaissance and electronic intelligence might be vulnerable. In 1978 Defense Secretary Harold Brown announced that the Soviet Union had an operational ASAT capability; after launching a killer satellite in May of that year, it had suspended tests when talks began on controlling such weapons. U.S. sources said Moscow stopped the tests as proof of its interest in a treaty to limit strategic bombers and missiles. A treaty was signed, but President Carter asked the U.S. Senate earlier this year to hold off action because of Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. Talks on limiting ASATs was also suspended. A U.S. antisatellite system in preparation but not expected before 1982— the Vought miniature homing craft carrying a heat-seeking guidance unit—was a small rocket for launch from high-altitude aircraft. The DOD was also working on a laser-powered system for possible deployment in the 1990s. With talks on limiting ASATs now suspended, and the outlook for arms control increasingly bleak, officials said the Soviet Union might have decided to revive its space weapons program. Any agreement in the near future was said to be unlikely. (NY Times, Apr 19/80, 28; A/D, Apr 21/80, 280)
FBIS carried a Tokyo Kyodo story that Japan’s Space Development Council had decided that the failure last February of its Ayame 2 communications satellite was caused by malfunction of the apogee motor. The ground station lost contact with Ayame 2 three days after launch when engineers tried to fire the motor to put it into proper orbit. The council report called for domestic production of the apogee rocket and other major satellite components in future; the apogee motor had been made in the United States. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, June 12/80)
July 7NASA said that it had agreed with ESA to let two European scientists enter the mission-specialist training program for Shuttle astronauts at JSC [see May 30]. The Europeans, Claude Nicollier of Switzerland and Wqbbo Ockels of the Netherlands, were both ESA employees and, as Spacelab 1 payload-specialist candidates, had undergone a screening and selection process like that of U.S. candidates. NASA agreed to train them in view of Spacelab delay and in recognition of ESA’s contribution to the STS in funding Spacelab development; ESA would reimburse NASA for the cost of training the two. (NASA Release 89-106; ESA Info 19) July S.WFC observed the 35th anniversary of the launch on July 4, 1945, of its first research rocket, a 17-foot Tiamat. Since it became a rocket range, Wallops Island had seen the launch of about 12,000 research vehicles of from 1 to 7 stages, sent as high as 19,000 miles above the Atlantic at speeds over 38,000	mph, and the launch of 19 satellites. From Wallops, rhesus monkeys Sam and Miss Sam rode into space on a Little Joe booster in 1959-60 to test the Mercury spacecraft before Alan Shepard took it into space; first test of the Echo balloon also occurred here. Early research at Wallops collected aerodynamic data at transonic and low supersonic speeds as part of the push to break the sound barrier; today, the launches gathered data on space, aeronautics, and characteristics of aerospace flight and tested ideas and devices for future spaceflight. NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), put its Pilotless Aircraft Research Station on Wallops Island under the direction of LaRC; its mission was aeronautical research to supplement wind-tunnel and laboratory work at LaRC. When NASA came into being in 1958 and took over LaRC and other field centers and research facilities, it put the Wallops station directly under NASA Headquarters and renamed it Wallops Flight Center in 1974. (WFC Release 80-8)
NASA announced award by LeRC of parallel 1-year $1 million contracts to TRW’s Defense and Space Systems Group and to Hughes Aircraft Company for designing an advanced commercial communications satellite system. Operating in a high-frequency 30- to 20-GHz band not used in the United States commercially, the system would help handle: the increased communications expected in the next 20 years which would saturate existing domestic communications satellite capacity. The new system, a network of ground stations using two shuttle-launched spacecraft, would lower costs of services such as videoconferencing, teletext, and electronic mail delivery. (NASA Release 80-84)
The Washington Post reported that a U.S. Air Force estimate of the cost of building a West Coast launch pad for the Shuttle was $82 million short. Less than 3 years ago, the estimate was $118 million for a Vandenberg Air Force Base pad to launch polar-orbiting (as opposed to equatorial-orbiting) satellites. Military satellites used a polar orbit to cover the globe as it rotates; spacecraft could not use the Florida facility for launches into polar orbit because of the danger of coming down on land in case of a mishap. First phase of the Vandenberg program (excavation of the area where the launch pad would be built) was complete, the U.S. Air Force said, but bids for the second phase ranged from $103.9 to $112 million instead of the $79.6 million U.S. Air Force had estimated. Bidders said inflation caused the higher bids, especially the price of assembled electrical equipment and copper cable. U.S. Air Force could ask permission of Congress to reprogram funds from other construction projects to the Vandenberg construction. (W Post, Apr 17/80, A-14)
MSFC said several companies had proposed definition studies to demonstrate performance of a large space antenna in low Earth orbit. Wide use of such a system could revolutionize satellite communications and radar and radiometry. Large space antennas might solve problems preventing expansion of satellite communications, Earth-resources survey, weather research, and other services. Dozens of small satellites, each with its own antennas, were now providing such services, but their growing number had crowded the transmission frequencies and filled up the orbital slots. The MSFC study would define the structure of a large antenna as well as packaging, transportation, and orbital deployment. (MSFC Release 80-54; NASA Release 80-48)
ESA said that Erik Quistgaard, its director general, would meet in London November 27 with Olof Lundberg, director general of INMARSAT, to sign a contract for lease to ESA of 2 Marecs satellites [see Nov. 20]. The contract, worth about U.S.$65 million, would go into effect in 1982. ESA was first of three entities expected to contract with INMARSAT for satellites to provide a new worldwide maritime telecommunications service for the international shipping community. (ESA Info 29)
INTELSAT announced that its “assembly of parties” in Florida last week had agreed to technical and economic coordination of the proposed Arabsat communications satellite system, as Arabsat would lack significant economic impact on, and would be technically compatible with, the INTELSAT system. It would be the third regional system coordinated with INTELSAT; others were the European and Indonesian systems. (INTELSAT Release 80-06-1)
