Digital techniques would cope with “the coming world telecommunications explosion” and cut the cost of overseas transmissions as well, said INTELSAT Director General Santiago Astrain in his keynote address to the fifth international conference on satellite communications in Genoa, Italy. In the first use of the giant new Intelsat V (launched December 6, 1980, from Cape Canaveral into geostationary orbit 22,300 miles up), the speech was heard simultaneously in three countries. The telecast also marked INTELSAT’s first use of the 14/11 GHz frequency band. Receiving stations were two small 3-meter antennas at Genoa; a 10-meter torus antenna at COMSAT laboratories in Clarksburg, Md.; and 19-meter antenna at Goonhilly, England. (INTELSAT Release 81-5-1)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported that Heao 2, NASA’s second high-energy astronomy observatory (Heao), had expended its control-gas supply and ended its mission. One of a family of three “highly successful” scientific satellites managed by MSFC, Heao 2 (like its predecessor, Heao I) had performed twice as long as its predicted design life; a third observatory was still operating. Launched November 13, 1978, Heao 2 carried the world’s largest focusing X-ray telescope and an array of astronomical instruments; it had provided data on X-ray output of normal stars, content of supernova remnants, distribution of mass in galaxies, and the origin of the extragalactic X-ray background. MSFC said that participating astronomers would need years to analyze all the data received. Unable to maintain attitude after exhausting its control fuel April 25, the spacecraft was powered down April 26. Reentry and burnup would probably occur early in 1982. (MSFC Release 81-52; NASA Release
NASA launched SBS-B from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) on a Delta at 7:09 p.m. EDT into a transfer orbit. Owned by Satellite Business Systems, Inc. (a consortium of IBM, Comsat General, and Aetna Insurance Company), the Hughes-built cylinder was second of four commercial communications satellites planned for launch by NASA at a fixed cost to SBS Inc. of $22 million. Called SBS 2 in orbit, the spin-stabilized communications satellite 660 centimeters high and 216 centimeters in diameter weighed 555 kilograms on station. It would be the first to offer routine commercial service in the K-band, 12-14 GHz. (NASA Release 81-130; NASA MOR 0-492-213-81-02 Iprclaunch] Sept 21/81, [postlaunch] Jan 27/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 25/81, 2)
NASA reported “encouraging initial results” from a two-month experiment that it conducted jointly with the FAA, National Center for Atmospheric Research, and Northwest Airlines. An instrument on Nimbus 7, called total ozone-mapping spectrometer, sent GSFC experimenters data on the total ozone profile in the atmosphere. Within three hours the GSFC scientists relayed the data, processed to indicate upper-air patterns and meteorological activity, such as rapidly moving fronts, to Northwest Airlines meteorologists in Minnesota for use in forecasting. Knowing the location of the fronts could help in avoiding them, both because they were associated with clear-air turbulence and because ozone encountered by airlines at high altitudes had caused shortness of breath as well as eye, nose, and throat irritation among airline passengers. Further research would lead to deduction of troposphere heights from total-ozone data for comparison with satellite temperature-sounding data. (NASA Release 81-90)
NASA’s Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications (OSTA) announced its selection of 9 experimental and 10 theoretical teams to participate in the upper-atmosphere research satellite (UARS) program designed to provide data on energy input, chemical composition, and dynamics of Earth’s stratosphere and mesosphere. Interest in this area had increased with the realization of potential damage to the ozone layer from high-flying aircraft and from chemicals in aerosol sprays, refrigeration, air-conditioning, and foam-blowing operations. The experimental teams would develop instruments for direct measurement of upper-atmosphere winds, solar-ultraviolet radiation, energetic-particle interaction with the upper atmosphere, and variation of chemical content with altitude. Theoretical teams would develop upper-atmosphere models to be used with new acquired data for assessing the impact of man’s activities on the delicate processes in the stratosphere and for improving understanding of upper-atmosphere chemistry and dynamics. (NASA Release 81-190)
ARC reported the effects of weightlessness on physiological processes shown in 14 U.S. experiments carried on unmanned Soviet satellite Cosmos 1129 in 1979. This was the only U.S. opportunity for biological research in space since 1975. The Vostok spacecraft sent into elliptical orbit and recovered within the Soviet Union 18 Vi days later was like those of two previous Cosmos missions in which the United States had participated in 1975 and 1977. Use of Cosmos vehicles was inexpensive for the United States because the Soviet Union paid for spacecraft, launch, and support activities; 40 scientists from 18 U.S. universities and research organizations shared in the mission. The U.S. experimenters found changes in enzymes and in animal bone strength, growth rate, and mineral content, like the changes experienced by astronauts and cosmonauts; the results would help explain some of the problems of weightlessness. The Soviet Union provided 37 white rats and 60 fertile quail eggs, shared by the experimenters; U.S. scientists provided carrot-tissue cultures and plantlets and carrot slices inoculated with tumor-forming bacteria. One of two control groups of white rats kept in Moscow lived in ordinary cages and ate the flight diet; the other, called “synchronous control,” was housed in an identical spacecraft on the ground and subjected to vibration and gravity forces like those of launch and reentry, experiencing whatever changes in environment the orbiting Cosmos transmitted to earth. The only difference between the synchronous control group and the mammals in flight was the weightlessness. After the Cosmos flight, the animals were recovered immediately, before they could readapt to Earth gravity, and a recovery team set up a mobile lab at the landing site to autopsy about a fifth of the rats. The rest were flown to Moscow, where some were autopsied after 6 days of readaptation to gravity, and the rest after 29 days. The Cosmos rats showed a 20% deficiency in bone mineral content compared to the synchronous-control subjects. In the rats readapting to normal gravity, some changes reversed within a few days; others took longer to return to normal. Under normal conditions, the total amount of bone in an adult human or animal remains constant, with bone continually resorbed and replaced by newly formed bone. In spaceflight, production of new bone seems to slow down, but resorption continues, resulting in net loss of bone and a decrease in strength. The greatest change is in weight-bearing bones, but even those not bearing weight (as jaw bones) show changes in mineral content and the cells forming new bone. The experiments included the first attempt to breed animals in spacemating the rats and examining how embryos developed in a weightless state. This experiment did not succeed, however, and no litters were produced; the control group, to the surprise of Soviet and U.S. scientists, showed the same results. The scientists were still seeking a reason for the failure. The quail eggs provided no information on embryo development because the incubator failed on the 13th day of flight. The plants showed no ill effects; carrot embryos and plant tumors grew in space just as on the ground, suggesting that spaceflight had no effect on carrot tissue. (ARC Release 81-21)
NASA said that investigators at GSFC and the University of Maryland had discovered a natural infrared laser on Mars, a find that could help detect new planets in the universe and require rewrites of books on general physics of the planetary atmosphere. Members of the team were Dr. Michael J. Mumma, Dr. David Buhl, Dr. Gordon Chin, Dr. Drake Deming, Fred Espenak, and Dr. Theodore Kostiuk, all of GSFC, and Dr. David Zipoy of the University of Maryland. The discovery was reported in Science magazine. Optical lasers since their 50-year-ago invention had proved extremely useful not only in scientific laboratories but also in everyday life; for example, as price scanners in supermarkets. However, the investigators said, no naturally occurring laser had ever been reported, although “the extreme variety of physical and chemical environments of extraterrestrial objects.. .arguefd] that natural lasers must exist.” In theory, “natural” lasers would occur whenever atoms or molecules were stimulated to release photons in transition from higher to lower energy states. A Goddard-developed device (an infrared heterodyne spectrometer) used with the McMath solar telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona had detected such a process in the Mars atmosphere (made up almost entirely of cabon dioxide) between January and April 1980. The new device let the scientists confirm occurrence of a molecular-population inversion, necessary for lasing. The natural laser on Mars, identical in principle to man-made lasers with commercial, scientific, and military applications, had a total continuous power output of more than a million megawatts, equivalent to that generated by a thousand large hydroelectric-power projects; in fact, the Mars laser generated more than five times the total power output of the United States. The investigators said orbiting satellites might eventually be able to extract power from the natural laser and beam it wherever needed. (NASA Release 81-78)
LaRC reported on a meeting of representatives from industry and six NASA centers to review the agency’s large space antenna program. Shuttle flights in the mid-1980s would include models of several antenna concepts: the large antennas designed for communications and other Earth-oriented applications, as well as for purely scientific studies of the solar system and the universe, would be transported into space folded into the Shuttle’s cargo bay and deployed in Earth orbit. Previous work concentrated on the structural and material requirements of each concept; the meeting would identify work still needed on system technology, ground testing, and technical resources to complete development. (LaRC Release 81-9) February JO: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) was undertaking the first mass shift of satellites at 22,300 miles altitude in space, moving three meteorological satellites to new areas to improve their product and to prevent possible collision of one of them in its present crowded location, the Department of Commerce (DOC) reported. NOAA would move Goes 4 (the geostationary operational environmental satellite launched in September 1980) from 98°W to 135 °W as backup for failing Goes 3\ NOAA would not move Goes 3 while it continued to function, but would put Goes 4 as near as possible without its interfering with communications. On January 29, NOAA moved a third meteorological satellite, Goes 2, from 105 °W to 109 °W to reduce the danger of collision with other craft or space debris; this satellite served primarily to relay weatherfax charts to ground stations. NOAA had to operate two geostationary satellites at all times: “Goes Fast” for the eastern United States and Canada and for most of the Atlantic, and “Goes West” for the western United States and Canada, for Alaska, and for the Pacific westward to Hawaii. On January 29, NOAA also boosted its 7-year old Sms 1 into a 22,600 mile high orbit, where it would remain indefinitely. After NASA’s launch of a seventh geostationary satellite, planned for March, NOAA would move Sms 2 from its station at 75 °W to a nearby location on standby. (NOAA Release
Science magazine said that Congress was in a “stir” because the administration planned to let a U.S. company sell materials for an advanced communications satellite to an Arab consortium that included the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Ford Aerospace would sell satellite parts to the French firm Aerospatiale, which was under contract to build three communications satellites for a group called Arabsat, composed of 22 governments, among them Libya, Syria, South Yemen, and the PLO. Libya has been “an avowed enemy” of the United States. The $135 million contract would cover satellites similar to but less sophisticated than the one Ford Aerospace was building for global communications system INTELSAT: Arabsat would offer 8,000 simultaneous twoway telephone conversations and one television channel. These services would cost less if bought directly from INTELSAT, but the Arab group apparently preferred to operate its own system. The matter came up November 3 during hearings before the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, when Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger said that he knew nothing about the deal; the next day, Secretary of State Alexander Haig also said that he knew nothing about it. The Arms Export Control Act required State Department approval of exports of high-tech items, even those having no direct military application. (Science, Nov 20/81, 891)
FBIS reported the launch at 9:30 a.m. local time of Astro-A, a scientific experimental satellite, by the University of Tokyo’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science. The launch from Kagoshima had been postponed twice, from February 18 to 19 and again to February 21, because of rain. NASA’s Space Tracking and Data Network (STDN) supported both this launch and that of Comsat 4. Called Hinotori (fire bird) in orbit, the new satellite was Japan’s 22d object to orbit and its 7th scientific satellite. It was the heaviest (190 kilograms) ever launched on the MU-3S rocket. In an elliptical orbit with 695-kilometer apogee, 568-kilometer perigee, and 37-minute period, Hinotori would study X-rays, gamma rays, and other aspects of solar flares. Its data would be of particular value because the Solar Max satellite launched by the United States in February 1980 on a similar mission was having instrument trouble. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb 21/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 23/81)
NASA launched Intelsat 5-CF3 from ESMC at 6:35 p.m. EST on an Atlas-Centaur into a highly elliptical transfer orbit with 35,953-kilometer apogee, 165.8-kilometer perigee, and 23.7° inclination. Firing of the apogee motor by INTELSAT would put it in geostationary orbit at 15 °E for tests by Telespazio at Fucino, Italy. It would later become the primary Atlantic communications satellite at 335.5°E, replacing Intelsat 5 FI, which would move to an Indian Ocean location at 62 °E to begin service next March after launch of another communications satellite as a spare. The two-ton F3, capable of 12,000 simultaneous telephone conversations plus two international color television channels, was third of the 5 and 5A series of 15 communications satellites planned by INTELSAT to handle international communications, such as telephone, telegrams, telex, data, and television. (NASA MOR 0-491-203-81-03 [prelaunch] Dec 1/81, [postlaunch] Jan 9/82: NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 16/81; Spacewarn, Dec 29/81; INTELSAT Releases 81-27-1, 81-32-1; A/D, Dec 22/81, 268)
After a series of delays, NASA launched GOES-E, fifth of a series of geostationary operational environmental satellites funded by NOAA, from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) at 6:29 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 49,768-kilometer apogee, 192-kilometer perigee, 921-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. The craft would move into synchronous orbit at 85 °W by the first week of June for testing. The Hughes-built 875-pound satellite, Goes 5 in orbit, carried a new visible-infrared radiometric atmospheric sounder (VAS)—modified from the original visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) first carried by Goes 4 in September 1980—to provide not only visual imagery of Earth surface and cloud cover and infrared sea-surface temperature but also temperatures and amount, distribution, and movement of water vapor at various altitudes. Goes 5 would ultimately replace an older craft at 75 °W, now serving as “Goes East” to monitor the eastern United States and Canada, Central America, South America, and much of the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA MOR E-612-81-03 [prelaunch] Apr 28/81, [postlaunch] July 23/85; NASA wkly SSR, GSFC, May 28/81; D/SD, May 29/81, 156; AvWk, June 15/81, 53; Spacewarn SPX-332, June 30/81)
NASA launched Dynamics Explorer A and B from the WSMC at 2:56 a.m. PDT (5:56 a.m. EDT) on a Delta into polar orbits with 24,945-kilometer(15,500-mile) and 1300-kilometer(808-mile) apogees, 675 kilometer(420-mile) and 306-kilometer(190-mile) perigees, 90° inclination, and 409 and 97.5-minute periods. The orbits, lower than predicted, were still suitable for the full scientific mission. Launch had been delayed three successive days by command-system discrepanies, high winds at the launch site, and problems with a tracking aircraft. Called DE-1 and DE-2 in orbit, the satellites would study the interaction of solar energy with near-Earth space, simultaneously acquiring data on auroras (northern lights) produced by solar energy entering Earth’s magnetic field and their effect on radio transmission and basic weather patterns. (NASA Releases 81-95, 81-114; NASA MOR S-850-81-03 [prelaunch] July 28/81, [postlaunch] Aug 7/81; W Star, Aug 4/81, D-5)
NASA launched a 90-pound solar mesosphere explorer from WSMC, Vandenberg Air Force Base, at 7:27 a.m. EDT on a two-stage Delta into a polar orbit at an altitude between 535 and 550 kilometers with 95-minute period and 97.4° inclination. The satellite, carrying five sensors to monitor atmospheric constituents between 19 and 50 miles up, would study conversion of molecular oxygen to ozone, a layer protecting Earth against ultraviolet radiation and possibly being depleted by refrigerant chlorofluorocarbons. The University of Colorado Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics developed the instruments and would manage the mission under contract to JPL. Riding piggyback atop the Delta was a smaller craft built by amateur radio operators at the University of Surrey in England. Uosat (University of Surrey satellite) was ninth in a series of Oscar (orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio) satellites launched as a second payload on U.S. rockets. Using a voice synthesizer, it could broadcast ionosphere data to amateur receivers. (NASA Release 81-106; NASA MOR S-887-81-01 [prelaunch] Sept 17/81, [postlaunch] Oct 16/81; NY Times, Oct 7/81, B-ll)
The Washington Post said that a USSR satellite that fell into the sea off the coast of China August 23 might have “lost its way to the Moon.” The Soviet foreign ministry said that Cosmos 434 was not nuclear-powered and posed no danger of nuclear contamination: the Washington Post said that the Soviet Union seemed eager to allay any fears of radioactive debris like that Cosmos 954 strewed over Canada’s “sparsely inhabited” Northwest Territories in January 1978. The Soviets said that the reentered craft was an “experimental lunar cabin.” This description tallied with a long-held belief that Cosmos 434 was relic of an unsuccessful manned lunar mission planned in the 1960s by the Soviet Union to rival the U.S. Apollo program, which had put 12 men on the Moon by the time it ended in 1972. Between November 1970 and August 1971, the Soviet Union had launched four unmanned satellites that performed complex maneuvers in Earth orbit simulating those of a lunar-landing mission. A two-volume book on the Soviet space program published in 1979 by the American Astronautical Society said that the satellites (Cosmos 379, Cosmos 382, Cosmos 398, and Cosmos 434) seemed to be practicing acceleration toward the Moon, braking into lunar orbit, landing on the Moon, and returning to Earth. The Soviet Union never disclosed the purpose of the satellites, but U.S. analysts believed them to be flight tests of a propulsion unit for manned lunar spacecraft. As the 50th anniversary of the 1917 Bolshevik revolution neared, observers thought it likely that the Soviet Union would mark 1967 by putting a man on the Moon; in 1968; the year before the first U.S. moon landing, Soviet cosmonauts were saying that, when the Americans reached the Moon, Russians would be there to greet them. The Soviet program apparently had a series of setbacks that “cooled the leadership’s enthusiasm,” the Washington Post said. In June 1969 the first attempt to launch the G rocket (a giant new booster like the U.S. Saturn 5) was said to have ended in a mammoth explosion demolishing the launch complex. It also apparently exploded in the early stages of flight during two other tests, in the summer of 1971 and on November 24, 1972. (W Post, Aug 30/81, A-25)
NASA Headquarters held a press briefing on scientific results of Voyager 7’s Saturn encounter in 1980. On hand were project scientists Dr. Edward C. Stone, California Institute of Technology (CalTech); imaging-team leader Dr. Bradford Smith, University of Arizona; and project manager E.K. Davis, JPL. Initial results included discovery of a ring system vastly more complex than imagined and a thick nitrogen atmosphere around Titan, Saturn’s major moon. Voyager 1 took 17,500 photographs of Saturn and its satellites between August 22 and December 15, 1980. The closest approach was November 12—126,000 kilometers (78,000 miles) from Saturn’s cloud tops. From the spacecraft, as from Earth, the atmosphere of Saturn looked grossly similar to Jupiter’s, with alternating light and dark zones, circulating storm regions, and other distinguishable cloud markings. Unlike Jupiter, however, Saturn’s markings were blurred by thick haze above the visible cloud tops; the haze layer at Jupiter was not as optically dense as Saturn’s. Wind speeds were substantially higher than on Jupiter and did not appear closely tied to belt-zone boundaries. Highest winds, blowing eastward at the equator, were four times stronger than on Jupiter; velocity decreased to near-zero at about 40° latitude north and south. Saturn’s atmosphere consisted mostly of hydrogen, helium accounting for only 11% of atmospheric mass above the clouds compared to 19% at Jupiter. The difference was consistent with separation by gravity of helium and hydrogen in Saturn’s interior and could explain the excess energy radiated by Saturn over that received from the Sun. Voyager 1 found that the A, B, and C rings visible from Earth consisted of hundreds of small ringlets, a few of them elliptical; the classical gaps also contained ringlets. Intertwining (“braiding”) of the rings was not explainable, although it might stem from electrostatic charging of their dust-sized particles. Voyager 1 discovered three new satellites, photographed the D and E rings, and confirmed the existence (2.8 Saturn radii from planet center) of a new ring postulated on the basis of Pioneer 11 findings. The flyby observed all of Saturn’s known satellites except Phoebe; Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, Dione, and Rhea, all appeared roughly spherical and composed mainly of water ice. Titan was the most interesting from an Earth viewpoint because of its atmosphere, similar to what would have evolved on Earth had it formed at Titan’s distance from the Sun. Previously considered the largest satellite in the solar system, Titan was found to be slightly smaller than the largest satellite of Jupiter (Ganymede). Both are larger than the planet Mercury. Titan’s atmosphere consisted mostly of nitrogen, the main constituent of Earth’s atmosphere; pressure near the surface was 60% greater than Earth’s. The surface was not visible in photographs from Voyager 1 because of the haze layer, though the southern hemisphere was slightly brighter than the northern, possibly a seasonal effect. Titan’s density seemed about twice that of water ice, indicating that it, like Ganymede, was made of equal amounts of rock and ice. Voyager 1 was now headed out of the solar system, and its platform instruments were turned off December 19. Most fields-and-particles instruments on Voyager 1 were still monitoring the solar wind and its changes with distance and time; exact location of the heliopause (outer edge of the solar wind) was unknown, but might be reached around 1990, Voyager 2 would reach Saturn in August 1981 and proceed on a trajectory to Uranus. (NASA Releases 81-41, 81-44)
NASA announced the selection of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), a consortium of 14 universities, for final negotiation of a contract to establish, operate, and maintain a science institute for the 13.1-meters (43-foot) Space Telescope scheduled for launch on the Shuttle early in 1985. The space telescope science institute, making scientific investigations using the telescope for at least 15 years, would be located on the Homewood campus of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The estimated contractor cost for an initial 5-year contract would be $24 million. Additional funding would be needed later for a guest-observer and archival-research program. The contract had options for three 5-year extensions. The institute would receive data sent from the telescope via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and NASA’s communications network through the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), where the institute would operate a space telescope support center. Investigations would be able to ask GSFC to point the spacecraft at any desired field-of-view. The 2.4-meter (96-inch, mirror in the telescope could image 350 times the volume of space now visible from Earth. (NASA Release 81-12; MSFC Release 81-11; Nature, Jan 29/81, 339)
NASA declared the mission of Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 successful. Launched September 5 and August 20, 1977, each of the spacecraft had traveled more than 2.4 billion kilometers during the past four years and had conducted scientific investigations at seven major bodies of the solar system. They had made comparative studies of the Jupiter and Saturn systems, including their satellites, rings, and fields and particles environments. They had also measured characteristics of the interplanetary medium from Earth to Saturn. Achievements included: —acquiring more than 62,000 images from the outer solar system —discovering rings around Jupiter and unusual braiding, spokes, ringlets, and shepherding satellites in the rings of Saturn; new satellites of Jupiter and Saturn; lightning on Jupiter; eight active volcanoes on Io; and new sources of radio emissions in the Jupiter and Saturn systems —measuring atmospheric composition, temperature, pressure, and dynamics, magnetospheres; and particle environments of Jupiter, Saturn, and Titan. (NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02 [postlaunch] Dec 10/81)
NASA’s acting administrator, Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, signed a memorandum of understanding with Hans-Hilger Haunschild of the Federal Republic of Germany’s (FRG) ministry for research and technology on FRG use of the STS (Shuttle), with NASA furnishing launch and support services on a reimbursable basis. NASA said that the Federal Republic had “long been a supporter” of STS and had contributed 40% to ESA’s development of Spacelab, soon to be a Shuttle payload with laboratory facilities like those on Earth but adapted for zero gravity. The Federal Republic of Germany had already paid NASA for two reimbursable Spacelab missions: D-1, materials processing and life-sciences experiments, and D-4, astrophysics experiments; it also planned to launch an X-ray satellite (Rosat) from the Shuttle in 1986. In addition, private and scientific organizations in West Germany had reserved 25 small self-contained payloads for eventual shuttle flight on a space-available basis. (NASA Release 81-58)
**** - AS i .-INTENftONAUf fiLAIft Aeronautics programs canceled or deferred included efforts in vertical/ sidewise takeoff and landing (V/STOL) systems, supersonic cruise research, the variable-cycle engine, and the proposed numerical aerodynamic simulator. A initiative in large, composite primary aircraft structures was eliminated. Other programs affected were materials processing in space, AgRISTARS, instrumentation for an upper-atmosphere research satellite, and the Spacelab flight schedule. Lovelace said that adjustments in FY81 figures would reflect impact of decisions on the FY82 budget: an increase of $60 million in 1981 Space Shuttle changes and upgrading would “provide added schedule confidence” in Shuttle development and testing and in production of orbiter vehicles. The amended budget reflected NASA’s decision announced in January to discontinue the three-stage version of an inertial upper stage and to modify the Centaur upper stage instead. The modified stage would allow NASA to fly the Galileo mission to Jupiter on a single launch in 1985 and could be used for a restructured solar-polar mission in 1986 and VOIR in 1988. (NASA Text, Mar 10/81) March 12:	The Soviet Union announced the launch of Soyuz T-4 at 10 p.m. Moscow time to link with the orbiting space complex Salyut 6-Progress 12. Salyut 6, in space since September 29, 1977, had docked January 26 with cargo craft Progress 12, which refueled it automatically on ground command and used its engine to raise the orbit. Soyuz T-4 carried as commander Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, veteran of Soyuz 25 that failed to dock with Salyut 6 in October 1977 and of Soyuz 29, which docked there for 140 days in June 1978. Also on the T-4 flight was Viktor Savinykh as flight engineer. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 12/81) —Tass said March 13 that the Soyuz T-4 had docked with the Salyut 6-Progress 12 complex March 12 at 11:33 p.m. Moscow time and the cosmonauts had transferred into the space station, being the 15th crew to occupy it in the 3Vi years. They would check on-board systems and equipment, do maintenance, and replace instrumentation as necessary. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 13/81)
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) launched 3 experiments in space physics on a single rocket, making a total of 11 manmade Earth satellites sent into space by that country since 1970. FBIS quoted PRC press service Xinhua in reviewing the successful series that began April 24, 1970. Previous reports had said the Great March 3 rocket would use a liquid hydrogen and oxygen mixture “slightly less powerful than the European Ariane system,” in which the People’s Republic had “shown close interest.” Both the rocket and its payload were “wholly Chinese manufactured.” (FBIS, Xinhua in English, Sept 20/81; Hong Kong AFP in English, Sept 14/81; Paris AFP in English, Sept 10/81)
NASA signed an agreement with the West German firm Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom (MBB) covering the first flight of shuttle-pallet satellite SPAS-01 scheduled for orbit on STS-5, the first operational Shuttle flight, in September 1982. This would be the first payload deployed and retrieved by the Shuttle’s Canadian-built remote-manipulator system (RMS). The 1,814-kilogram (4,000-pound) payload would operate inside the payload bay and would also be a free flyer when deployed, using an on-board stabilization and control system. NASA would use it to test RMS capabilities during the five-day mission, with a 70-mm camera on the payload to record deployment, free flight, retrieval, and reberthing. MBB would conduct materials-processing experiments while the payload was in the shuttle bay. The agreement was signed for NASA by Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, and for MBB by Dr. Johannes Schubert and Dr. Peter C. Bittner, general manager and commercial director of MBB’s space division. The pact would cover KSC and JSC launch services as well as NASA’s use of the payload for RMS testing. (NASA Release 81-80)
Shuttle orbiter Columbia on its 747 carrier landed at the Shuttle landing facility runway at KSC at 11:24 a.m. EDT. Demating began in preparation for moving it into the processing facility for 72 hours of troubleshooting. CBS-TV News said hundreds of employees and their families were on hand for the arrival; reporter Bruce Hall said that, although the orbiter’s condition was “excellent,” a number of NASA officials did not expect the next launch to take place before 1982. Jules Bergman of ABC-TV said that work on the orbiter would include installing a miniature remote-control arm to deploy satellites and retrieve them on future missions. The second flight, STS-2, would test the arm only. NASA’s current target date was said to be mid-October, though much work remained to be done on the reusable boosters and the launch pad. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 29/81; DOD RadioTv Rpts, Apr 29/81)
The Soviet Union launched an Intercosmos-Bulgaria 3000 satellite into an orbit with 906-kilometer apogee, 825-kilometer perigee, 81.2° inclination, and 101.9-minute period. A Tass report said that the satellite would study ionsopheric plasma and high-energy charged-particle flux, magnetic fields, and upper-atmosphere glow in the ultraviolet and visible bands of spectrum. The Soviet Union and Bulgaria cooperated on the design of the craft and would continue to work together in data processing and analysis. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 7/81)
Press reports said that test firing of a rocket built by Space Services Inc. (SSI) seeking to be the first private company to launch satellites for profit, ended with an explosion on the launching pad while 18 of its crew watched. The 53-foot Percheron [see July 23] broke into four major parts, costing the firm more than $1.2 million and delaying the project at least six months. Flight plans had called for the rocket to climb to 14,500-feet and drop into the Gulf of Mexico about three miles from the site. (NY Times, Aug 6/81, B-7, W Star Aug 6/81, A-8)
Biggest and best customer of the Space Shuttle, developed and operated by a civilian agency, would be the Department of Defense (DOD), said the Washington Star in one of a series of articles on the Shuttle program. At least 21 of 75 spaceflights planned before 1986 would be military missions, and neither NASA nor DOD would say what the flights were for. DOD had contributed millions of dollars to the Shuttle program in hardware and personnel, including a multibillion-dollar facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base for launches into polar orbit. Although the Shuttle would serve both civilian and military purposes, the two sides showed differing degrees of confidence: current boosters had reached orbit only 90% of the time, 10% dumping expensive satellites into the sea. “We have yet to achieve routine access to space,” said Lt. Gen. Richard C. Henry, commander of the U.S. Air Force’s Space Division. Shuttle reliability should be “as close to 100% as you can get.” Most NASA missions slated for the 1980s and beyond could not be flown without the huge cargo bay of the Shuttle. The military, however, would keep its Adas and Titan expendable boosters just in case. Space, said Henry, was the high ground, “crucial for collecting and disseminating information, for reducing the confusion of battle, even for improving combat efficiency. . . . Everything we put up is supportive of our national security, but nothing is combative.” DOD, he added, had “made commitments far in excess of any civil users.” (W Star, Mar 24/81, A-8)
NASA launched Comstar-D, last of a series of four domestic communications satellites built by Hughes Aircraft for Comsat General, from KSC at 6:23 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. The 6.1-mile (20-foot) high cylinder called Comstar 4 in orbit, weighing 1,516 kilograms (3,342 pounds) at launch, had 12 transponders (channels), each capable of relaying 1,500 two-way voice circuits (overall capability of 18,000	simultaneous high-quality two-way phone transmissions). A postlaunch report said the apogee motor firing February 23 was successful. (NASA Release 81-27; NASA MOR-O-491-201-81-04 [prelaunch summary] Feb 10-12/81, [prelaunch] Feb 17/81, [postlaunch] June 17/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 24/81, Feb 25/81; ComSat Gnl Release 81-6; D/SD, Feb 25/81, 286; Feb 26/81, 294; A/D, Feb 26/81, 292; Spacewarn, Mar 31/81, 2)
ESA reported that it had successfully tested injectors for the five Ariane engines to be used in the L03 flight, now scheduled for the latter part of June. The L03 vehicle could carry a tech capsule to monitor equipment and environment; a second flight model of the Meteosat 2 aimed at putting ESA into the Earth-observation field; and an India communications satellite known as Apple (Ariane passenger-payload experiment) at Kourou, French Guiana. (ESA Info 3)
Johnson Space Center’s (JSC) Space News Roundup said that a conference sponsored by NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), attended by representatives of major U.S. industries, heard briefings on systems developed for the space program that were applicable to Earth-based activities. Representatives of Dow Chemical, Exxon, ITT, Johnson & Johnson, Teledyne, 3M, Xerox, and numerous other corporations learned about pharmaceutical production in Earth-orbiting laboratories, life-support systems designed for space suits, and an electromechanical alternative to conventional hydraulic actuators. Bryan Erb of JSC’s Earth-resources division described the use of satellite observations to predict crop growth or locate mineral deposits or oil sources. From 1974 to 1978 JSC had managed the Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE), showing how sensors on an orbiting platform could read and relay to Earth the characteristic signatures of Earth features used by scientists and engineers to make mathematical models on a worldwide basis. The AgRISTARS (agricultural resources inventory survey through aerospace remote sensing) project was carrying the measurements further, reading out thermal conditions, predicting soil moisture, and analyzing crops in the visual (as compared to infrared) spectrum. Erb said a worldwide remote-sensing system should be available within the next 20 years for managing Earth resources. Another innovation would be to work in space with living cells and proteins to develop products for fighting disease. Products like beta cells, enzymes, and immunoglobulins produced by kidney cells were already available in hospitals, but at astronomical cost. JSC’s Dennis Morrison said that on the ground this kind of work was limited to a microbiological level; working in space with larger amounts would mean a 20 to 50% improvement. Pituitary, kidney, and pancreas cells would be among candidates for spaceflight, even though weight limitations would delay early commercial processing. (JSC Space News Roundup, Jan 30/81, 4) During January: NASA reported Orbiting Astronomical Observatory Oao 3 (Copernicus), the heaviest and most complex observatory ever launched by the agency and instrumental in discovery of the first black hole (Cyg X-l), had finished its career at the end of 1980 after 8.5 years of operation. Launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) August 21, 1972, with a life expectancy of 1 year, its performance was “astonishing,” said GSFC engineers and scientists. Orbiting at an altitude of 740 kilometers (460 miles), Oao 3 used its supersensitive ultraviolet telescope, largest ever put into orbit, to view the heavens “with a precision and clarity never before possible,” producing spectral readings invisible to ground-based observatories because of the obscuring effects of Earth’s atmosphere. The telescope was capable of pointing accuracy equivalent to seeing a volleyball from a distance of 400 miles. During its lifetime, Oao 3 served more than 160 investigators from the United States and 13 foreign countries in observing more than 450 unique objects. Formal scientific investigations using Oao 3 ended December 31, 1980, but a series of engineering tests would continue into mid-February, when NASA would terminate contact with the spacecraft. GSFC engineers were not sure whether it would orient itself permanently toward the Sun, begin a permanent orbital tumble, or combine the two. (NASA Release 81-10; Goddard News, Jan 5/81, 1)
A U.S. Air Force launch team from WSMC, Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, launched NOAA-C under NASA direction from WSMC at 6:53 a.m EDT on an Atlas F into a polar orbit with 863-kilometer apogee, 845-kilometer perigee, 101.9-minute period, and 98.9° inclination. The 371-centimeter-high spacecraft, 188 centimeters in diameter weighing 723 kilograms in orbit, was fourth of eight advanced weather satellites to be launched in the Tiros-N series to measure Earth-atmosphere temperature and humidity, sea-surface temperature, and proton-electron flux near the Earth. Designated NOAA 7 in orbit, the spacecraft with a two-year design life carried the most versatile scanning radiometer ever launched, gathering visual and infrared images and other measurements in five spectral channels. (Two earlier craft in the series carried four-channel radiometers: NOAA 6 was still operational, but Tiros N was turned off February 21 after operating for twice its design life.) NOAA 7 also carried a joint U.S. Air Force-NASA instrument to monitor in the spacecraft vicinity any environmental contamination from its propulsion systems; such contamination could degrade performance of future instruments planned for launch on similiar satellites. Successful launch of NOAA 7 meant that two polar-orbiting satellites would circle the Earth, viewing virtually all of its surface at least twice each 24 hours. NOAA routinely used data and imagery from the polar orbiters as well as from two geostationary spacecraft it was operating. NOAA 6 and NOAA 7 would transmit unprocessed sensor data in real time to ground stations in more than 120 nations, while passing overhead. Four more satellites in this series would be launched through 1985 on a call-up basis to ensure uninterrupted data flow. NOAA 7, built by RCA Astro-Electronics, under contract to GSFC, industry interface for NOAA, cost about $15 million to build and $7.5 million to launch. (NASA MOR E-615-81-03 prelaunch summary, June 2/81; [prelaunchj June 9/81; NASA Release 81-76; NASA wkly SSR, June 25/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 24, 30/81; SPX-332)
NASA launched RCA Satcom 4 from the ESMC on a Delta at 8:37 p.m. EST into a transfer orbit with 19,356-kilometer apogee, 100-kilometer perigee, and 25.5° inclination. The objective of the commercial communications satellite was to transmit video programs to cable television (CATV) systems throughout the United States. The 500-kilogram box-shaped craft, fourth in a series of large 24-transponder communications satellites, managed by a subsidiary of RCA, carried a payload-assist module (PAM) to put it into geosynchronous orbit at 132 °W, joining three other RCA satellites providing television, voice, and high-speed data to all 50 states and Puerto Rico. More than 4,000 Earth stations had direct access to these spacecraft. GSFC had project-management responsibility for the launch vehicle; RCA Americom, which managed the Satcom program, including spacecraft acquisition and tracking, telemetry, and command systems, would reimburse NASA $22 million for the launch and launch support. (NASA Release 81-172; NASA MOR 0-492-206-81-04 [prelaunch] Nov 18/81, [postlaunch] Jan 27/82)
ESA successfully launched its Ariane rocket from Kourou, French Guiana, at 2:33 p.m. local time, carrying Indian-built comsat Apple and ESA’s own Meteosat 2 into an orbit with 36,206-kilometer apogee and 201-kilometer perigee and “breaking a quarter-century two-power monopoly on space achievements,” as the Washington Post and Washington Star agreed. Michel Bignier, ESA’s director of space and transport systems, said “space is no longer the exclusive preserve of a few powerful nations but now belongs to all of humanity.” Pierre Morel, director general of the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), said the third Ariane launch “opens the way to European commercial exploitation of space.” ESA had hoped for a third of the 180 to 200 satellite launches scheduled for the next decade; Ariane had firm contracts for 7 launches through 1985 and options for another 14. Ariane’s second launch in May 1980 had ended in failure when the rocket burst into flames moments after leaving the pad. The first test in December 1979 had been successful, but that rocket carried no satellites. The $1.6 billion Ariane program was funded by 10 nations, with France (contributing about 64%) and West Germany (about 20%) as major participants. (ESA Info 10, 11, 12; WPost, June 20/81, A-9; WStar, June 20/81, D-2; Nature, June 25/81, 604)	'
The Soviet Union launched India’s satellite Bhaskara 2 into an orbit with 557-kilometer apogee, 514-kilometer perigee, 95.2-minute period, and 50.7° inclination. It carried television and microwave radiometers to study Earth’s natural resources. Tass said that India and USSR stations were receiving data. (FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 20/81)
NASA launched the U.S. Navy’s improved Transit navigational satellite Nova 1 at 2:07 a.m. from the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) on a Scout vehicle into a polar transfer orbit with 935-kilometer apogee, 353-kilometer perigee, 90.16° inclination, and 97.67-minute period. The solar panels deployed, and the payload was in a housekeeping mode. A multiple-burn spacecraft motor fired on later orbit would raise the 368-pound spacecraft’s altitude to about 600 nautical miles. This 102d launch of a Scout was the ninth success in a row. NASA provided the launch under a June 1962 agreement with DOD to reimburse NASA for the cost of Scout vehicles, Western Test Range (WTR) launch services, and mission support, as required. So far, NASA had launched 15 Transit satellites and 3 Transit improvement program satellites, of which 5 were currently operating. The Navy would reimburse NASA about $7.6 million for services and hardware provided for the program ($1,825 million for launch-vehicle hardware; $0,950 million for WTR launch services and mission support; $4,825 million for FY81 support services). (NASA MOR 0-490-603-81-01 [prelaunch] May 13/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, May 18/81; SF, Oct 81, 274)
ESA announced that it had “rejected” NASA’s decision to cancel the U.S. spacecraft that would have been part of the joint International Solar-Polar Mission (ISPM). NASA told a meeting of the two organizations in New York that the cancellation resulted from budget cuts imposed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in preparing the Reagan administration’s budget proposal. ESA responded that canceling the satellite without consultation was a unilateral breach of a memorandum of understanding between the agencies and was unacceptable. ESA asked that NASA restore the program to its original level, noting that unilateral actions of this kind would be detrimental to future space cooperation between the United States and Europe. ESA said that, when its science-program committee decided to pursue ISPM in 1979, they chose that mission over a number of purely European missions because of the value ESA put on transatlantic cooperation. Because of NASA’s decision, European scientists from 17 institutions who supplied experiments for the NASA spacecraft would not be able to fly them. The experiments, “in an advanced stage of development” with more than half of the costs committed, ESA said, would be lost with no corresponding scientific return. ESA’s director general immediately asked all of its member states to protest, through their ambassadors in Washington, the decision taken by NASA. Timing was crucial, because Congress would consider the federal budget in March. (ESA Inf 2)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) reported that it had signed an agreement with the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) to provide satellite communications services to ships. INTELSAT would put at the service of INMARSAT three of its satellites to be launched between mid-1981 and mid-1982: two Intelsat Vs over the Indian Ocean, one over the Atlantic. The maritime communications subsystems (MCS), each with a capacity of 30 voice channels plus data, would operate for up to seven years and would bring more than $100 million (U.S.) to INTELSAT. In addition to the MCS, each Intelsat V could carry up to 12,000 simultaneous international telephone calls and two television channels. (INTELSAT Release 81-1-1)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that it had awarded four contracts totaling more than $7 million for design and development of a modified Centaur launch vehicle and components to be used as a Shuttle upper stage. A $1,545 million contract with Teledyne Industries called for five digital computer units and nine remote multiplex units. A $1,593 million contract with Honeywell was for three inertial-measurement groups, part of an automatic navigation and guidance system. A $3,412 million contract with General Dynamics was for design and development of two modified Centaur vehicles. A $.933 million contract with United Technologies Corporation would cover building four RL10-3-3A rocket engines, two of which would provide primary thrust for one Centaur. Work under these contracts would con PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED tinue through September 1981; they were all to support the Galileo mission to Jupiter, scheduled for launch in 1985, and the international solar-polar mission in 1986. The Centaur for these missions would resemble the one used over the past 15 years as an upper stage for Atlas and Titan boosters on Mariner missions to Mars and Venus, Pioneer missions to Jupiter and Venus, Viking and Voyager missions, and the cooperative Helios missions with West Germany. It had carried low Earth-orbit missions for NASA, such as the Heao series and commercial and military geosynchronous satellites. (LeRC Release 81-26; NASA Release 81-75)
Japan reported that its National Space Development Agency successfully launched the first N-2 vehicle from Tanegashima carrying the 21st Japanese satellite—the engineering test satellite Ets 4 (Kiku 3)—into a transfer orbit with 36,000-kilometer apogee, 230-kilometer perigee, and 10.5-hour period. The 650-kilogram satellite would monitor vehicle performance. Japan would launch seven N-2s between August 1981 and February 1986 to meteorological and communications satellites and aeronautical experiments. Although used for five years, the N-l did not have the power to carry big geostationary spacecraft into orbit. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb 11/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 12/81)
NASA launched the world’s largest telecommunications satellite, Intelsat V-2, from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur at 6:42 p.m. EDT into a highly elliptical transfer orbit with 35,960-kilometer apogee, 172-kilometer perigee, 633.9-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. Originally scheduled for May 21, the launch was delayed by computer problems in the rocket’s main safety-control system. The huge communications satellite, weighing more than 2 tons, was second in a new series of nine international communications satellites the first having been launched December 9, 1980, as an on-orbit spare for the Atlantic network, which would eventually consist of four satellites. The first five Intelsat Vs would be launched by Atlas Centaur; the next three, by Europe’s Ariane booster. Average estimated cost of an Atlas Centaur launch was $42 million; that of an Ariane launch was $27 million. Overall cost of the Intelsat V program was $680 million, or some $76 million for each mission; estimated average cost of each satellite was $34 million. Intelsat V-2, after coming on station at 355 °E for a month of testing, would be operational by July at 335.5 °E, handling communications between the Americas and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. It could transmit 12,000 telephone calls simultaneously in addition to two television color channels, having twice the capacity of Intelsat IV-As previously launched by NASA for INTELSAT. The 106-nation organization jointly owned and operated 12 satellites over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans in order to handle two-thirds of the world’s overseas communications, from telegrams and telephone calls to television and data. In 1984, INTELSAT would begin a series of three improved Intelsat V-As capable of 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels; 1986 would inaugurate Intelsat Vis, each handling more than 40,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels and designed for launch by either the Ariane or the Space Shuttle. (NASA MOR-491-203-81-02 [prelaunch] May 20/81, [postlaunch] June 17/81; NASA Release 81-60; INTELSAT Release 81-10-1; W Post, May 24/81, A-3, D/SD, May 27/81, 140; A/D, May 28/81, 151; Spacewarn SPX-332, June 30/81)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency conducted, for the first time, a successful 30-second firing test of its huge H-l liquid-fuel rocket. Japan’s LE5 engine fueled with liquid oxygen and hydrogen would serve as the second stage of H-l, which was scheduled to launch a 500-ton satellite into orbit in February 1986. Japan was now the fourth country to have a liquid-hydrogen engine,1 in addition to the United States, ESA, and China. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Mar 26/81)
ESA launched Marecs-A, first European maritime communications satellite, from Kourou in French Guiana at 1:29 a.m. GMT on the fourth Ariane booster into a highly elliptical orbit with 35,820-kilometer apogee, 220-kilometer perigee, 632-minute period, and 10.5° inclination, preparatory to a boost into geosynchronous orbit at 26 °W. The Ariane also carried a technological capsule (CAT 4) enclosing an experiment called Thesee (Theseus) that would remain in the original orbit. The European Space Operations Center (ESOC) would test Marecs before handing it over to INMARSAT, which would lease its communications capacity over the Atlantic Ocean. A Marecs-B spacecraft was being readied for launch in April 1982 for INMARSAT use over the Pacific Ocean. (ESA Infos 29, 31, 32, [81], 1 [82])
NASA postponed the second Shuttle launch to November 4 because of tile damage caused by an oxidizer spill September 22. Tile replacement was “proceeding well,” and measures had been taken to prevent further spillage. Science magazine described the “minor problems” causing previous postponements: tests that took longer than expected and various handling mishaps. The Shuttle’s complexity would “resist attempts to operate with aircraft-like efficiency,” the article said. NASA had already decided to trim its Shuttle flights by 30% over the next three years, from 44 missions to 28: it had less money to spend on flying its own satellites and science experiments, as it had to pay for Shuttle modifications and construction of more orbiters. The delicate instruments planned for the second flight had almost been delayed to a later mission by the discovery that pressures from the solid-fuel boosters against the KSC module launch pad could damage the experiments: the shock had been 2.4 pounds per square inch, not the expected 0.6, enough to buckle a strut supporting a fuel tank near the cabin. If the tank had been jarred enough to leak or malfunction, the first-flight crew would not have been able to orient the Shuttle properly for landing. NASA engineers devised a system of nylon water troughs to disperse the shock and redesigned the launch platform to allow jet watersprays to dissipate the pressure. (NASA Release 81-160; W Post, Oct 9/81, A-15; Science, Oct 9/81, 160)
