The New York Times said that the Soviet Union had assembled six, possibly eight, intelligence-gathering satellites over the south Atlantic to watch Argentine and British military movements around the Falkland Islands. U.S. sources said that they assumed information from the satellites was being relayed to the Argentine government but had no proof of this. A senior official at the State Department said that leaders in Argentina had told Security of State Alexander Haig that they would not accept such help from the Soviet Union. The United States had two satellites over the area and was passing information from them to the British. The Soviet satellites were communications interceptors Cosmos 1346 and 1354; radar-sensing craft Cosmos 1345 and 1351; and photoreconnaissance craft Cosmos 1347 and 1352, and possibly 1350 and 1353. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-14; AvWk, May 3/82, 22; W Post, Jun 7/82, A-20)
LeRC said that it had developed a device called MIAMI (micro-wave ice-accretion measurement instrument) to warn airplane pilots of dangerous ice buildup. This was the only device able to measure actual ice thickness and rate of accretion, besides giving a warning. Unlike other such instruments, MIAMI was imbedded in, instead of projecting from, the surface under study; projecting probes tended to collect ice and confuse detection of how much was actually forming on the surface. The microprocessor in the device could tell the difference between ice and other substances (oil, dirt, grease, insects) and signal only the formation of ice. (LeRC Release 82-56) LeRC also reported the completion of a five-year $39-million program of engine improvements to conserve fuel in commercial jet aircraft through identifying areas for cost-effective refurbishment and of performance loss. The specific goal was to reduce fuel use by up to 5 % for current jet engines. Much of the cost would be repaid by contractors Pratt & Whitney and General Electric; under the reimbursement feature of the program, repayments over a 10-year period would be based on sales of improved components. So far, NASA had recovered nearly $1 million from the contractors, with a potential of $19 to $20 million. (LeRC Release 82-57) Salyut 7 had been visited twice by the other crews: on June 24 two veteran cosmonauts arrived with French test pilot Jean-Loup Chretien, the first nonAmerican from the West to travel in space; on August 19, a second set of visitors arrived, including Svetlana Savitskaya, the second woman to fly in space. Cargo ship Progress 16 had docked with the combined Salyut 7-Soyuz T-7 November 2 bringing fuel, research materials, supplies for the crew, and mail. On November 18 the cosmonauts launched from Salyut 7s airlock Iskra 3, a small communications satellite created by student designers at the Moscow Aviation Institute to make experiments in amateur radio. Student receiving stations in Moscow and Kaluga would control Iskra 3 and receive and process incoming data. (NY Times, Nov 15/82, B-6; FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 2, 9, 16, 18, 22/82) November. 15-19: Press reports said that problems November 15 with new million-dollar space suits had canceled the first space walk scheduled in nearly nine years and would bring STS-5 to a conclusion November 16. The walk was canceled when the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit quit and the device maintaining oxygen pressure in William Lenoir’s backpack behaved so erratically that flight directors feared a breakdown during any space walk. Program managers said that the walk could be done on a later flight; Glynn Lunney at JSC said that the program was “still right on track.” The next three flights would carry space suits for any unexpected problems, such as cargobay doors that refused to close. The next flight was scheduled for February 1983. Inspectors after the November 16 landing said that Columbia came through the fifth flight better than previously: an inboard tire on the left side was shredded and flattened on landing by a brake jamming against it, but only 4 of the 33,000 protective tiles were damaged or came loose during reentry. A seven-man panel investigating the space-suit failure said that they hoped to have answers within a week. One possibility was that the suits were dropped while in their cases or when removed and stowed in the ship. Engineers were baffled by the failure of both suits at the same time for different reasons. The New York Times said that the suits, “most complex human garments ever made,” differed from those used in Apollo moon landings, or for Skylab in 1973 and 1974, which functioned well but were too stiff for easy handling of tools needed by Shuttle astronauts. Shuttle missions had called for production, by United Technologies’ Hamilton Standard Division, of 43 suits and 13 backpacks at a cost of about $2 million each; the suits had been tested by the company 160 times while unmanned and 70 times while manned, said a company spokesman. (W Post, Nov 16/82, A-l; Nov 18/82, A-7; NY Times, Nov 16/82, C-3)
ARC said that it had developed, with the aid of General Electric, a portable remote-communications system: a terminal and a folding antenna sized to fit inside two suitcases and be carried aboard an airplane and powered by either an ordinary AC outlet or the cigarette lighter in an automobile. Working with experimental communications satellite ATS 3, operated by NASA since 1967, an operator anywhere in North or South America or most of the nearby Atlantic and Pacific Oceans could contact any of several ground stations at any time. The system would fit into two ordinary suitcases that could be carried as luggage in an automobile or on public transportation; one suitcases contained the collapsible antenna, the other an alphanumeric terminal to send or receive messages. The alphanumeric system would not disturb voice communications over the satellite, so that a NASA-authorized user could use it at any time without prior scheduling. ATS 3 had already served in many emergencies. When Mt. St. Helens erupted in May 1980, an Air Force jeep at the disaster site maintained voice communications through ATS 3 and a GE station near Schenectady, showing the need for rapidly deployable long-distance systems not dependant on land lines, often destroyed in emergencies. Organizations, including the state of California and the National Association for Search and Rescue, were working with NASA on further uses of the technology. (NASA Release 82-195; ARC Release 82-48) During December: George B. Kistiakowsky, 82, a developer of the first atomic bomb who later became a leading opponent of nuclear weapons, died of cancer at his home in Cambridge, Mass. In 1944 he headed the explosives division at Los Alamos Laboratory of the Manhattan project, where he designed the arrangement of conventional explosives needed to detonate the atom bomb, receiving the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work. After he saw the first nuclear bomb explode at Alamogordo July 16, 1945, he said “I am sure that at the end of the world—in the last millisecond of the earth’s existence—the last human will see what we saw” ( W Post, Dec 9/82, C-17) —Jack Swigert, the former astronaut elected to Congress by Colorado’s 6th district voters, who knew he was fighting cancer, died December 27 at the age of 51 a week before he was to be sworn into office. He had flown on the aborted Apollo 13 Moon mission in April 1970, substituting at the last minute for Thomas K. Mattingly who had been exposed to German measles and was not immune. Swigert left NASA in 1973 to become executive director of the House committee on science and technology and had worked for two energy firms in Denver before resigning to run for Congress. (MiHrld, Dec 29/82, 1A)
A JSC release described a space operations center (SOC) concept completed by a special JSC study team. A manned center in space to exploit the Shuttle and allow incremental growth was the “essential next step in exploitation of space”; it would become a space-base and marshaling yard for large and complex payloads, including an upper-stage propulsion system in low Earth orbit. It would serve as “garage space” for reusable cryogenic stages for easier access, lowering costs of geosynchronous space operations. It could be a manned base with Department of Defense (DOD) military capabilities or a manned platform for science and applications research. It could provide a manufacturing facility in a weightless environment. The JSC design was for an SOC operating continuously, with maintenance and resupply, for 10 years; parts would be delivered and assembled by the Shuttle orbiter in a low Earth orbit (230 to 280 statute miles). An 8- to 12-man center, about 435 feet long tip to tip, would weigh about 245,000 pounds. Initial launch would put into orbit an energy section, a short cylinder carrying two booms with solar arrays, antennas, reaction-control system, and radiators, weighing in total between 34,000 and 43,000 pounds. A second launch would bring a command module to be joined to the energy section, completing phase 1; this module would have one docking and nine berthing ports, airlocks, command station, guidance and control, data management, open-loop lift support, and accommodations for two (but able to support a crew of four, in an emergency). Weight would be between 40,000 and 50,000 pounds. The next launch would bring a second command module to the other end of the energy section. Each of the next two launches would bring a habitat module able to accommodate a crew of four; the two habitats would provide emergency accommodations and life support for a crew of eight. Each habitat would weigh between 25.000 and 28,000 pounds. After phase 3, the SOC would be ready for long-term manned occupations by eight to twelve persons; the platform could now handle full flight support, satellite servicing, and space construction. (JSC Release 82-009; AvWk, Feb 15/82)
NASA went before the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to ask for a market test of a “land mobile satellite service” to complement cellular systems and other mobile arrangements now being planned or in use. NASA asked the FCC to reserve frequencies, for commercial companies offering to establish communications by satellite to rural America via portable radiotelephones that could switch calls between vehicles and local telephone networks. Present “cellular radio” systems were land-based, difficult to install in remote areas amid mountains and other barriers. The FCC had denied a similar NASA request last year but would not comment on the new request. NASA said that other nations were developing mobile satellite communications services on frequencies provided by the 1979 World Administrative Radio Conference; if the FCC failed to provide the United States with frequencies, it could jeopardize its leadership “in satellite communications and in mobile communications equipment.” The application said that mobile systems in the United States had been “available only through terrestrial facilities... limited in range” and restricted mostly to urban areas. A satellite system could include up to 288,000 rural subscribers by 1990, NASA said. W Post, Nov 30/82, C-7) November SO: Former Apollo 13 astronaut Jack Swigert, elected November 2 as congressman from Colorado’s 6th congressional district, was hospitalized in Denver after undergoing chemotherapy for bone-marrow cancer. He would remain there “another few days,” an aide said. (NY Times, Nov 30/82, A-17)
NASA’s Solar Max satellite had detected an 18-month decrease in solar-energy output that might have caused an unusually harsh winter in 1981 and 1982, said JPL. In the first direct observation of cause-and-effect between solar output and changes in Earth’s climate, a solar telescope—Solar Max’s active-cavity radiometer irradiance monitor—recorded a steady decrease from February 1980 to August 1981 of a tenth of 1% in total solar energy reaching Earth. Systematic increases or decreases as small as 0.5% over a century had produced vast changes in Earth’s climate: the “Maunder minimum” in the 17th century, when sunspot activity almost vanished, had coincided with a period known as Europe’s little ice age. A 1% decrease could lower mean global temperature by more than 1,000 (2°F), and less than 10% decrease could freeze Earth’s entire surface. Earth lifeforms existed in the bioshell, an area 10 kilometers (6.2 miles) on either side of mean sea level, with temperatures fed by solar-energy input and interaction between atmosphere, ocean, and land masses. The time needed to cool down the atmosphere and ocean would allay short-term changes in solar input. JPL’s Dr. Richard C. Willson noted that “if you turned off the sun tomorrow, you wouldn’t see its full effects on earth for three years.” Solar activity peaked about every 11 years. The current cycle peaked about the time Solar Max was launched early in 1980; the decrease might represent the general decline since then but might also indicate a longer term lowering of solar input. (Telescope at the High-Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colo., had recorded images of what seemed to be a shrinking sun that might have grown as much as a tenth of 1% smaller every 100 years for the last four centuries.) Solar Max had lost pointing capability in December 1980, and only three of its seven instruments were still returning data. It had been designed for retrieval by the Shuttle, and NASA was seeking authorization for a Solar Max repair mission. (NASA Release 82-57; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-6) During April: Dr. Noel W. Hinners, director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, would become director of GSFC June 14, succeeding A. Thomas Young. Dr. Hinners was associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters from June 1974 to April 1979, when he took over at the museum; he had also been director of lunar programs in NASA’s Office of Space Sciences. He had joined NASA in 1972 as deputy director and chief scientist of Apollo lunar exploration. (NASA anno Apr 1/82; NASA Release —Col. Joe H. Engle, commander of STS-2 in November 1981, was temporarily assigned to the STS office at NASA Headquarters in conjunction with recent organization changes. As deputy associate administrator for manned space flight under Gen. James A. Abrahamson, his special experience would help simplify the integration process for Shuttle users and ensure maximum use of its manned capabilities. He would retain astronaut status and return to JSC to train for his next flight. (NASA Release 82-71)
The Washington Post said that STS-5, the first operational Shuttle mission, would include simulation of a space repair job to practice for the salvaging of an orbiting satellite, Solar Max, in April 1984. The 5,000-pound Solar Max cost $70 million at its launch in February 1980 to study the Sun during maximum sunspot activity. Less than six months later, the devices pointing its instrumentation at the Sun broke down, and the satellite wa practically useless. Congress allowed $18 million to put the Shuttle alongside in a 308-mile-high orbit so that astronauts could ground a dozen cables, cut seals holding them to a panel, and pry the entire group from the panel. The greatest expense was for training the spacesuited crew to use tools and to handle the Solar Max as it orbited at 17,500-miles-per-hour alongside the Shuttle. {W Post, Oct 7/82, A-23)
NASA launched Canada’s Telesat-G, called Anik D-1 in orbit, from ESMC on a Delta at 7:10 p.m. EDT. Transfer-orbit parameters were 36,358-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, and 24.5° inclination. Firing of a booster motor at 5:29 p.m. EDT Augusl 29 put Anik D into synchronous orbit, and it was maneuvered to a station 104°W above the equator. Anik D, weighing 2,370 pounds at liftoff, was the heaviest payload launched into transfer orbit by a Delta from that site. Initial on-station weight was 1,454 pounds. This was a 30th consecutive success for the Delta, a new record. The 24-channel communications satellite would provide Canada with television, data, and voice communications. Anik D was Canada’s tenth satellite and fifth in a series of domestic commercial communications satellites owned and operated by Telesat Canada. It would be a backup in orbit for three aging Anik A satellites (launched 1972, 1973, and 1975) and Anik B (1978). (NASA MOR M-492-201-82-05 [prelaunch] Aug 24/82, [postlaunch] Jan 17/83; NASA Release 82-126; Spacewam SPX-346, Aug 31/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 1/82; SSR, Sept 2/82; A/D, Aug 31/82, 343; AvWk, Sept 6/82, 53) During August: Dr. Christopher C. Kraft announced his resignation as director of JSC. He had retired from federal service in March 1980 but had stayed on at the request of the NASA administrator to see the Shuttle program through the flight-test phase that ended July 4. Kraft had begun working for NASA’s predecessor organization, NACA, in 1945 and was appointed director at JSC in 1972. He would be succeeded by Gerald D. Griffin. (NASA Release —Pravda announced the death of Nikolai Pilyugin, 74, a key figure in development of the Soviet space program. An obituary signed by President Leonid Brezhnev said that Pilyugin, who had headed a large research institute for 20 years, was an outstanding designer in the field of space-rocket engineering. He was credited with designing the control system for Soviet launch vehicles, space ships, and interplanetary stations. (FBIS, Pravda in Russian, Aug 3/82)
NASA announced the crews for the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shuttle flights. On STS A, Thomas K. Mattingly would be commander, and Henry W. Hartsfield, pilot. Scheduled for launch early in July, the seven day STS-4 would be the last of four orbital flight tests to verify Shuttle hardware and software. Mattingly, 47, orbited the Moon 10 years ago on Apollo 16: Hartsfield, 48, was a rookie. STS-5, a five-day mission planned for mid-November to deploy commercial communications satellites, would be the first to use mission-specialist astronauts. Vance D. Brand, 50, who was command-module pilot on 1975’s Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, would be mission commander. This would be the first spaceflight for Robert F. Overmyer, 45, the pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. Joseph P. Allen and Dr. William B. Lenoir. Columbia would be the spacecraft for both STS-4 and STS-5. STS-6, planned for January 1983, would be the first flight of the orbiter Challenger, a two-day mission to deploy NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), one of an eventual two-satellite system providing comprehensive voice and data coverage between orbiting shuttles and the ground. Commander would be Paul J. Weitz, 49, who was pilot on Skylab /; copilot would be U.S. Air Force Col. Karol J. Bobko, 44, another rookie. Donald H. Peterson and Dr. Story Musgrave would fly as mission specialists. NASA would no longer assign Shuttle backup crews; its pool of experienced pilots at JSC would readily permit interchange of crewmen. (NASA Release 82-33; JSC Release 82-012; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-9)
Marine Col. Robert F. Overmyer, named as copilot with Vance D. Brand on the STS-5 flight, told a JSC preflight press conference that the mission would carry four astronauts, the largest number to fly on any U.S. spacecraft; the other two would be physicists Joseph P. Allen and William B. Lenoir, both making their first spaceflight. Overmyer said that it would take four men to launch the two communications satellites set for deployment from STS-5 over the Pacific between Hawaii and Chile. The Shuttle’s two ejection seats would be replaced with three nonejectable cockpit seats. The fourth crewman would ride in a seat installed in the middeck of Columbia’s cabin next to the airlock leading to the cargo bay, designed for use in the first Shuttle space walk. The report said that the crew did not seem bothered to be “the first to fly the shuttle without being able to eject if the spaceliner is damaged during liftoff.” (W Post, July 21/82, A-l)
The first Maritime European Communications Satellite, Marecs A, launched December 20, 1981, began service at midnight. The spacecraft and its payload, leased to the International Maritime Communications Satellite (INMARSAT), was working well and already improving communications between land and ships and oil rigs in the Atlantic. The Marecs program would lease two satellites to INMARSAT: Marecs A would cover the Atlantic ocean; Marecs B, the Pacific. Launch of Marecs B on an Ariane L5 had been put off to September 1982 to allow time for modifications reducing the effects of electrostatic discharge that had caused the Marecs A command system to malfunction during tests in February. (ESA Info 15)
NASA launched Western Union’s Westar 5 commercial communications satellites from ESMC at 8:23 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 36,469-kilometer apogee, 167-kilometer perigee, and 27.5° inclination. Firing of a booster at 5:20 p.m. June 11 would move it to station at 123°W over the equator. Westar 5, heaviest of the series of satellites owned and operated by Western Union, weighed 585 pounds in synchronous orbit, was double the size of Westar 1, Westar 2, and Westar 3, and had about four times their capacity. Like Westar 4 it had 24 transponder channels, all under lease; a 10-year design life; and 40% more transmitting power than most domestic communications satellites. It would replace Westar 2 in service. (NASA Release 82-82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 9/82; NASA MOR 0-492-203-82-05 [postlaunch] July 6/82; NASA Wkly SSR, June 10/82; NY Times, June 10/82, D-4)
NASA announced signing of agreements with Telesat Canada for launch of five Anik communications satellites, four on the Shuttle and one on a Delta. The launches would cost Canada’s domestic satellite communications corporation about $75 million; the spacecraft would be worth about $130 million. The third-and fourth-generation Anik C and Anik D communications satellites would be the backbone of Canada’s system until the 1990s, carrying new pay-television, voice, video, and data links, private business networks, and other special services. First of the D series would be launched in August from KSC; the next Telesat launch would be an Anik C, one of two communications satellites scheduled for the Shuttle’s fifth flight and first commercial mission. (NASA Release 82-101) and development, manufacture, and use of propulsion systems for aircraft and space, surface, and marine vehicles. Glenn, keynote speaker, received an award commemorating the 20th anniversary of his orbital flight. Representatives of European and Asian firms presented papers, and a group from the People’s Republic of China attended. Beggs, luncheon speaker, said that foreign competition in high-tech research required a new partnership between government and industry. Although NASA-industry cooperation over the past 25 years was a major factor in U.S. world leadership, many foreign firms had been able, with “far-sighted planning [and] government-industry cooperation,” to move from idea to manufacture to delivery in half the time the United States needed. The world edge once enjoyed by the United States in many high-tech areas has “been eroded,” he said: France was ahead in nuclear power; West Germany, in chemicals; Japan, in optics and metallurgy. “The Japanese have managed to capture some 70% of the American market for the 64K random-access memory, which can store 64,000 information units.” The Harvard Business Review had even suggested that U.S. firms look abroad—even to Iron Curtain countries—to tap foreign technology. What was needed, Beggs said, was a more balanced cooperation between government and industry, geared to investment in projects leading to speedy adoption of new technologies. “No one ever ran a race by standing still. And we are in a race, a dead serious one. The stakes are high. They include not only our own economic security but the economic security of the Free World,” he concluded. (LeRC Releases 82-30, 82-34)
NASA launched the fifth flight (STS-5) of Space Shuttle Columbia on time at 7:19 a.m. EST from KSC with a four-man crew, largest ever to take off from Earth at the same time. Feeling none of the motion sickness suffered by three of the first four Shuttle crews, the astronauts were so busy preparing for deployment from orbit of the first of two communications satellites that they had no time for chitchat with mission control. Astronaut Joseph Allen took off his shoes and socks to work barefooted inside the Shuttle cabin: “it’s like having four hands,” he explained. He and William Lenoir maneuvered the first of twin satellites (one U.S., the other Canadian) into space at 3:17 p.m. EST, while Vance Brand and Robert Overmyer flew the 100-ton Shuttle, positioning Columbia to avoid smearing its windows with exhaust from the satellite engine. The astronauts would use the same procedures November 12 to deploy the Canadian satellite on a similar flight path. The first commercial cargo carried by the Shuttle was a 21-foot-tall cylinder worth almost $50 million, owned by Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a firm begun as a partnership of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of Communications Satellite Corporation—ComSatCorp), and International Business Machines (IBM). Boeing, General Motors, and General Electric were among its more than 300 clients who used SBS satellites to transmit coast-to-coast computer traffic and telephone calls. Transmissions to SPS satellites were at 14GHz, twice as high as frequencies used by other U.S. communications satellites and were relayed at 12GHz to avoid interference. President Reagan held a telephone conversation with the astronauts at 10:26 a.m. November 11, repeating his request to an earlier crew to “pick me up and drop me off in California.” He added that “if more of us could see [the earth] from that angle we might realize that there must be a way to make it as united in reality here on earth as it looks from outer space.” Brand replied, “We’re in total agreement on that one.” (NASA MOR M-989-82-05 [prelaunch] Nov 5/82, [postlaunch] Dec 7/82; USA Today, Nov 12/82, 1A; W Post, Nov 12/82, A-l, D-8)
The Washington Post noted the 25th anniversary of the USSR’s launch of an orbiting satellite, saying that “no single event in history assaulted America’s image of itself as did Sputnik.” Subsequent U.S. space ventures “did nothing but tarnish that image,” the Army and Navy arguing over which would launch the first satellite, while the Soviet Union orbited dogs, rats, and mice and took pictures of the dark side of the Moon. The Navy got the first opportunity December 6, 1957, with Vanguard on the pad at Cape Canaveral and “literally blew it.” The Army was given four days in January 1958 to launch Explorer from the Cape. When the launch finally took place after being delayed two days by unsafe winds, sea air had so corroded Army tracking radios in the Caribbean that, the Cape never received the signal that the satellite was in orbit. In 1961 “the roof fell in” when Yuri Gagarin became the first man to orbit the Earth, and Gherman Titov orbited 17 times. The “best U.S. orbital effort that year was that of Ham the chimpanzee.” Not until 1962 did John Glenn orbit the Earth, and then for only three orbits. By the end of that year the Soviet Union had sent four cosmonauts into, space.	. President John F. Kennedy had told Congress May 25, 1961, that the U.S. goal would be to put a man on the Moon and return him safely “before the end of the decade.” By the time a three-man crew in Apollo 8 orbited the Moon in 1968 at Christmastime, “the space race was over. What happened to the Soviets?” Former JSC Director Chris Kraft said in an interview that the Soviet Union PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED INTFNU0NAUt RUN* “abandoned their moon program. We took the wind right out of their sails.” Critics said that not all of the effects of the space race were good: it “spurred U.S. determination to improve the quality of schools and students, but whether that succeeded is debatable.” Kennedy “never saw the flight of anything to which he gave the initial impetus”; President Johnson, “who did more for the Apollo manned program than any president, suffered through the fatal Apollo fire”; President Nixon “basked in all of the Apollo triumphs only to answer for Watergate.” One educator said “Sputnik is one reason Johnny can’t read today. He’s more interested in Pac-Man, which you might call an outgrowth of Sputnik.” If Sputnik led to Pac-Man, the Washington Post said, it also “helped to produce the high technology of the computer revolution. . .Today’s state-of-the-art computer processes 5 million operations a second.” W Post, Oct 4/82, A-l)
NASA launched STS-4, fourth test flight of space shuttle Columbia, from KSC at 11 a.m. carrying Ken Mattingly as commander and Henry Hartsfield as pilot. This was the first time that the Shuttle had lifted off on schedule, but the chase planes televising separation did not show the opening of parachutes on the two reusable solid-fuel booster rockets, and there was no sign on the ocean surface of any of the six main chutes or either of the boosters, which cost $24 million each. Boosters from earlier launches were towed to KSC for refit. After disassembly and cleaning, the first six motor-igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned to Thiokol’s Utah plant for rebuilding at $7 million each; this procedure had saved NASA $36 million per flight for the first three flights. The launch was imperiled the night before by a one-hour hailstorm with pellets “the size of golf balls” denting about 400 of the black protective tiles on the Shuttle’s undersides. Workmen on hastily erected scaffolds had applied a hardener to strengthen the tiles. Enough water soaked the tiles to make the crew need to bake the underside of the Shuttle in the sunlight for 10 hours to dry it out, so that low temperatures on the night side of the Earth would not freeze and further damage the tiles. Mattingly and Hartsfield had begun to power up the 2,000-pound cargo put in the payload bay by the Air Force as well as four experiments managed by MSFC, including the first use of the Shuttle by a commercial firm. Press reports called it “an open secret” that the U.S. Air Force instruments included an extremely sensitive infrared telescope, an ultraviolet telescope, and a new space sextant designed to navigate spy satellites without ground command. Hartsfield, on his spaceflight, suffered nausea but was later able to eat dinner. Instead of televising a view of the payload bay as other crews had done, or using the camera on the end of the 60-foot robot arm to show the Earth as they saw it from space, the crew merely described the view, expressing surprise at the amount of detail discernible. The seven-day mission would “wring out the wrinkles” in the Shuttle not dealt with on the first three flights. NASA said that it would name a board to review “in excruciating detail” how the boosters could sink in 3,500 feet of water although the drogue parachutes were found floating 150 miles downrange. (NASA Release 82-87; MSFC Release 82-56; NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [prelaunch] June 18/82; W Post, June 28/82, A-l; June 29/82, A-2; Dtln Gd, June 28/82; Marshall Star, June 30/82, 1) During June: NASA announced that Dr. Walter C. Williams, chief engineer since July 1975, would retire in July. Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, would succeed him. Williams began his career with NACA, NASA’s predecessor, in August 1940 and worked during the war to improve U.S. fighter planes. He was founding director of the organization that became NASA’s Dryden facility. He went to Langley Field, Va., in September 1959 as associate director of the new NASA space task group created to carry out Project Mercury and later was director of operations for the project. He then became associate director of NASA’s manned spacecraft center in Houston that later was JSC. He went to NASA Headquarters in January 1963, leaving in April 1964 to work for Aerospace Corporation’s vehicle systems. He became NASA’s first chief engineer in 1975. (NASA anno, June 1/82; NASA Release 82-86) —NASA announced the appointment of George F. Page as deputy director of KSC effective July 5. He had directed Shuttle operations there since 1979 and was launch director for the first three launches of Columbia. From 1964 to 1975 he directed KSC operations planning for 19 Gemini and 25 Apollo spacecraft launches, ending with the lunar landings and the successful ApolloSoyuz project. He directed unmanned launch operations from 1975 to 1979, with more than 54 major launches from both KSC and the Western Test Range (WTR) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA anno June 21/82; NASA Release 82-102)
FBIS reported that the People’s Republic of China successfully launched “another scientific experiment satellite.” This was the People’s Republic’s 12th satellite (the first was launched in 1970) and was timed for the opening of the national congress of the PRC Communist Party. Later reports said that the satellite had “landed with precision at the predetermined recovery site” on September 14 at 2:00 p.m. Beijing time. (FBIS, Xinhua in English/Dom Svc in Chinese, Sept 9/82, Sept 14/82; Pravda in Russian, Sept 10/82; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 14/82) ESA began investigating the failure. First reports said that the problem was in third-stage turbopump parts in the casing or the lubrication system. The first and second stages operated correctly, as did the separations and jettison of the fairing. The third stage ignited and ran for 275 seconds when rotation speed dropped, reaching zero at 325 seconds. The drop in thrust and engine cut-out led to a downward trajectory. (WPost, Sept 10/82, A-l; ESA Info 27, 29, 30)
Crowds estimated at half a million watched Columbia’s fourth return to Earth, the first to use a concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. Among about 30,000 guests invited by NASA to the occasion were President and Mrs. Reagan. His comment at the touchdown was “Happy Fourth of July, and you know this has got to beat firecrackers.” The fourth flight, STS-4, was classified as the last of four test flights but carried more than 22,000 pounds of cargo, including a secret military payload. Although security considerations kept it from being photographed for viewers, the 50-foot mechanical arm designed to move objects in and out of the cargo bay and capture objects in space had been in use on this flight to move an 800-pound contamination monitor around the cargo bay. The runway, about 300 feet wide and 15,000 feet long, was about the size of the one at KSC made for routine Shuttle use after the seventh flight. The fifth (and first operational) flight scheduled for November would carry two commercial communications satellites, one for Canada and one for Satellite Business Systems; each .customer would pay NASA $21 million if the spacecraft reached orbit safely. Shuttle Program Manager Glynn S. Lunney said that NASA would do well to achieve one launch per month by the late 1980s and, ultimately, 24 to 30 per year. (NASA MOR M-989-82-04, July 19/82; NY Times, July 5/82, A-l, 8; WPost, July 4/82, A-l, A-ll; July 5/82, A-l; July 6/82, A-9)
NASA launched Intelsat 5E F-5 at 7:08 p.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,962-kilometer apogee, 165.7-kilometer perigee, and 24.4° inclination. This craft would carry for the first time a maritime communications package for ship and shore use by INMARSAT. ’An apogee kick motor fired October 1 would start it to geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 82-136; NASA MOR M-491-203-82-05 [prelaunch] Sept 22/82, [postlaunch] Oct 26/82) During September: NASA Headquarters announced the reorganization of its Office of Space Transportation Systems and Office of Space Transportation Operations into a new Office of Space Flight. L. Michael Weeks was named acting deputy associate administrator, with assistant associate administrators for policy, space transportation, and institutions. The new arrangement would stress integrated Shuttle operations planning and direction; STS orientation to customers; a manageable span of control for the associate administrator; maximum delegation of authority to subordinate officials and field organizations; and minimum disruption to existing lines of communication with centers and outside NASA. (SP anno, Sept 1/82) —John J. Quann was appointed deputy director of GSFC, effective September 8. He had been director of GSFC’s mission and data operations directorate since October 1980 and had worked at Goddard since 1963. (NASA anno Sept 1/82; NASA Release 82-131) —NASA named Dr. Frank B. McDonald, chief of GSFC’s laboratory for high-energy physics since 1970, as NASA chief scientist, effective September 20.	In this position he would be the principal adviser to the administrator and other senior officials on scientific aspects of NASA activities. Beginning at GSFC in 1959, McDonald had been project scientist on nine NASA satellite programs and principal investigator for many space experiments. He previously taught physics at the Iowa State University of Science and Technology. (NASA anno, Sept 9/82; NASA Release 82-133) —NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, not slated for flight, was still working for the U.S. space program, helping DFRF engineers to predict and avert structural trouble spots resulting from wear and tear. All preShuttle spacecraft had been one-shot items, so that space fatigue was a new problem. As each Shuttle was meant to fly up to 100 missions, NASA needed a reliable way to foresee difficulties before they developed into problems and to detect potential weakness without damaging the structure. A method called modal analysis measuring structural response to shaker acceleration could track changes from baseline data. Piecemeal testing of parts would not give results valid for the entire structure: Enterprise, built to the same dimensions as the four actual orbiters, was “uniquely qualified for the job,” researchers said. (NASA Release 82-139; DFRF Release 82-13) —MSFC said that Lockheed’s contractor facility had successfully extended and retracted an experimental solar-array wing as tall as a 10-story building, scheduled for flight on the Space Shuttle in 1984. Unlike rigid metal structures used on current long-life spacecraft, the accordion-like array consisting of lightweight flexible plastic contained contact solar cells welded directly to the array like a printed circuit. The wing, measuring 105 feet by 13.5 feet, could fold into a package less than four inches thick and expand in orbit to its full length on a coilable extension mast. It could provide 66 watts per kilogram compared to 20 watts in present systems. (MSFC Release 82-84)
NASA reported a happy ending to a search-and-rescue mission that began in July with the loss of a pilot somewhere in northern British Columbia. The Canadian government conducted an unsuccessful search that cost $2 million before it ended. The father of the missing pilot started to search with a pilot and another passenger and failed to return on September 9. They had crashed in a valley 3,500 feet deep where the Rockies hid their rescue beacon from passing planes. The Canadian rescue center had no data on their location. Canada had just joined in the SARSAT (search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking) program using Cospas 1, a Soviet satellite launched June 30, and asked for any data it might gather. Early September 10 the satellite 600 miles up detected an emergency locator-transmitter in the area; a search aircraft found the crash and called for a rescue helicopter. All three persons had been injured but had survived. Canadian authorities praised the timely rescue of the victims at minimal cost. (NASA Dly Actv Apt, Sept 16/82; W Post, Sept 30/82, A-3)
Space Shuttle Columbia began a year-long vacation as the second operational Shuttle, Challenger, began final engine tests at KSC in preparation for a three-day mission in January 1983 with a four-man crew. After its landing at Edwards Air Force Base, Columbia was scheduled to return to KSC for “six dozen minor modifications” after completing its first commercial venture, STS-5. The modifications would prepare it for the December 1983 launch of Spacelab, built for NASA by ESA. NASA spokesman said that the first five flights had proved that the Shuttle could launch satellites into space with “remarkable accuracy”; demonstrated that four men could do high-pressure jobs in a cabin the size of a pickup camper; and showed that the Shuttle, like an airplane, worked better the more it was used. (USA Today, Nov 17/82, 3A) —MSFC said that it had sent NASA’s first inertial upper stage (IUS-1) to Cape Canaveral to ready it for launch in Challenger’s payload bay in January 1983. The first of six to be built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command, IUS-1 was an unmanned system for pushing payloads to high altitudes unreachable by the Shuttle in its 150-mile orbit. The two-stage vehicle, 17 feet long and about 9 feet in diameter, weighed more than 16 tons, had more than 64,000 pounds of thrust, and could carry up to 5,000 pounds of payload to geostationary orbit 22,300 miles up. At KSC, the IUS would be mated to a tracking and data-relay satellite (TDRS), first of four planned for launch to replace present ground stations and improve command and telemetry functions for the growing number of operational satellites. NASA hoped to have the four-craft system in operation late in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-103)
NASA said that it was relocating the Applications Technology Satellite (ATS) ATS 1 from its station at 149 °W to a new position about 50 farther west, at 162 °E. Maintaining orbit position in its present location required maximum use of its thrusters; moving to the new station would put ATS 1 into a more stable position and substantially reduce the stationkeeping power requirement. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had considered several options to conserve on-board fuel supplies, which had been estimated adequate until mid-1982 .The new location should prolong stationkeeping through 1983 and reduce the need for center contract from biweekly to quarterly. (NASA Release 82-4)
WFC announced the launch of a Nike Orion sounding rocket at 11:40 a.m. to measure magnetosphere instabilities induced by very low-frequency (VLF) waves produced in the troposphere. Its measurements would coincide with a satellite overpass to detect particle precipitation triggered by VLF waves from a high-intensity transmitter. (WFC Release 82-3)
NASA named Dr. Peter J. Denning head of a new Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS) to begin at ARC in June 1983. Denning, chairman of computer sciences at Purdue, would direct research in computer science and engineering with potential for use in NASA programs. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Association (USRA), RIACS would be an academic center for applications of the computer to solve scientific and engineering problems. {NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 3/82) On December 10 the crew returned to Earth at 10:03 p.m. Moscow time in the preset area 190 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan “not far from” the space center at Baykonur. Beijing’s Xinhua press service said that a special lighthouse equipped with a strong beam was installed at the site to guide helicopters with ground crews to assist the cosmonauts. Difficulties with the landing meant that journalists for the first time were not at the site. Berezovoy later reported that “Judging from previous crews, who hardly felt the shock of landing, this landing was quite severe: and was followed by a few more rolls, apparently because we were on a small incline, and we ended up on our side with one on top of the other—Valentin [Lebedev] was on the (?up-per) couch and I was on the lower. . . .We spent about 20 minutes in the descent module while an offroad vehicle was made ready but then spent 5 hours in this vehicle because of poor conditions. It was not bad, it was warm. We changed our clothes for clean and dry ones, replacing spacesuits with flight suits.” (Interview recorded for Moscow DomSvc in Russian, December 13) Later press reports said that the cosmonauts had “a harrowing reentry” in a craft rolling across a steppe swept by a blizzard and fog. Although initial USSR reports implied all had gone well, the New York Times said that the crew had “anxious moments” when unexpected bad weather landed them in darkness, near-zero temperatures, and blowing snow. One helicopter “force-landed” without injury, and another had to turn back. (NY Times, Dec 14/82, C-2; WPost, Dec 12/82, A-31)] Tass carried reports December 12 of the first meeting with the cosmonauts. Their doctors said that “the cosmonauts feel fine which is somewhat at variance with the real state of their organisms.” Good appetites indicated “energetic adaptation to terrestrial conditions. In 24 hours the cosmonauts gained about a kilogram in weight each. They particularly liked a bath with the air temperature of up to 70 Berezovoy said afterward “If we could have such a pleasure at the Salyut station I would have worked for more time in orbit.” On December 16 Ivan Skiba, chief physician of the space training center, said that the cosmonauts had been “put on a regime approximating their usual lifestyle.” He said that the doctors were “naturally worried over the decree to which the additional 26 days spent by [Berezovoy and Lebedev] in outer space over the 185-day space mission of [Popov and Ryumin] will affect the human organism. These 26 days constituted the “unknown path” both for the cosmonauts and for us physicians. Now we can say with certainty that the [additional] time in space.. .has not affected the cosmonauts’ organisms. Their cardiovascular activity, blood composition, and other characteristics are returning to preflight figures.” Skiba recalled that Boris Yegorov, “a representative of the medical profession,” was among the first cosmonauts and hoped he would not be the last medical man to fly in space. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov told a magazine December 17 Berezovoy and Lebedev had “made an important step in increasing the endurance of weightlessness.. .essential for activity in large orbital stations, space plants and factories, and interplanetary missions.” When the two returned from the 211-day mission, they “were sunken physically and had become thinner and paler... [wanted] regular human communication with friends. They eat with a good appetite.. .swim every day.. .to have some weightlessness in water and make their life easier. They still find it a bit difficult to be seated as the muscles that make the position comfortable are out of their elementary function.” U.S. space officials were watching the cosmonauts’ adaptation to gravity after 30 weeks of weightlessness. A television broadcast three days after their return showed them moving unaided to the edge of a whirlpool where they were assisted down a ladder. A commentator noted they were “like infants” and would have to relearn how to walk. The Soviet Union had announced plans for a station orbiting for a year and permanently manned, its crews remaining in space indefinitely to reduce ferrying costs. Soviet experts, like former cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, had talked of manned missions to destinations such as Titan, a satellite of Saturn. (Longest U.S. flight so far was the 84-day mission flown by Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue on Skylab in 1973 and 1974.) The Washington Times said that Soviet planners were “seriously divided about what to do next.” Valery Ryumin, who spent 175 and then 185 days on Salyut 6 and was now a senior program chief at the space center, talked of grave risks to crew health on long-term missions and said that “four months is about the optimal period.” Ignoring reports that Berezovoy and Lebedev were in fine health, Ryumin said that it would take “through medical tests on earth” to show how they had fared. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 9-17/82; Beijing Xinhua in English, Dec 11/82; NY Times, Dec 11/82, 12; Dec 14/82, C-2; W Post, Dec 11/82, A-23; Dec 12/82, A-31; W Times, Dec 15/82, 8A)
MSFC said that it had selected Martin Marietta Aerospace to negotiate a $l-million contract for a tethered-satellite system concept. A tethered-satellite system would go into orbit on the Space Shuttle in the late 1980s, suspended downward from the cargo bay on a 60-mile-long tether to troll the atmosphere for days as a time to. gather magnetospheric, atmospheric, and gravitational data. It could also be deployed upward to study electrodynamic and other phenomena. The area to be studied was too high for airplanes, too low for satellites to, cover for long, and reachable only for brief periods by instrument-laden rockets. Under a letter of agreement signed in 1981, NASA would join with Italy in developing and launching the system, building the deployment system and managing systems integration and mission operations, while Italy built the satellite itself. (NASA Release 82-169; MSFC Release 82-102)
NASA launched Intelsat 5-F4 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) from Cape Canaveral at 7:23 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,953-kilometer apogee, 165. 8-kilometer perigee, and 24° inclination. INTELSAT would fire an apogee motor to put the communications satellite into a near-geosynchronous orbit for testing before moving it over the Indian Ocean to provide communications between Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East. This fourth of the Intelsat 5 series built by Ford Aerospace had a capacity of 12,000 voice circuits plus two television channels. INTELSAT’s global system consisted of a space segment (10 satellites in synchronous orbit) and a ground segment (295 communications antennas at 242 ground stations in 129 countries and territories). The combined system provided more than 800 links between ground stations, with about 8,500 international voice circuits in full-time use, plus telegraph, telex, and television. (NASA MOR-491-203-82-04 [prelaunch] Feb 25/82, [postlaunch] Mar 25/82; INTELSAT Release 82-4-1)
NASA launched RCA-E (RCA-Satcom 5) from ESMC at 9:28 p.m. on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit. It would be stationed on the equator at 143 °W over the Pacific to serve the continental United States, Alaska, and Hawaii. First of a series of second-generation domestic communications satellites made by RCA Astro-Electronics, it arrived at ESMC “slightly overweight” and carried no third-stage telemetry. Confirmation of third-stage burn and spacecraft separation was delayed until it passed over the tracking station in New Jersey to confirm that it was working satisfactorily. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Oct 29/82; NASA Release 82-155; NASA MOR M-492-206-82-06 [prelaunch] Oct 26/82)
India declared its first commercial satellite, INSAT 1, “dead” because its fuel supply had run out and it failed to respond to ground commands 150 days after an April 10 launch. Built by Ford Aerospace to Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) specifications and launched from Cape Canaveral, INSAT was the first operational spacecraft equipped for telecommunications, direct-broadcast television, and weather. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi’s government had planned to use INSAT to broadcast the Asian Games scheduled for New Delhi. ISRO was reported “caught off guard” by the amount of fuel it had used to correct early malfunctions. Soon after reaching orbit, INSAT’s C-band antenna jammed. Fuel was wasted trying to free it, as well as to deploy the malfunctioning solar sail designed to collect energy from the Sun’s rays. Failure of the sail would have reduced INSAT’s life from 7 to 2 1/2 years. Fuel-supply checks might have been inaccurate. Because INSAT was built to ISRO specifications, blame would probably fall on Satish Dhawan, head of India’s space program, who had argued for a multifunction satellite to bring radio and television to thousands of remote villages and give India international telecommunications links. He considered mass communications the best hope for progress in a country with a 36% literacy rate. India’s press hinted that the system had tried for too many functions. A second India communications satellite had been planned for shuttle launch next July as a backup for INSAT, and the government would have to decide how to proceed. Leasing two transponders on INTELSAT’s Indian Ocean satellite as a cost of $16 million per year to partly cover the loss of INSAT would not offer India the prestige of using its own satellite during the games. {W Post, Sept 8/82, A-21; Nature, Sept 23/82, 293)
The Shuttle imaging radar (SIR) flown on STS-2 in November 1981 had revealed previously unknown river channels, geologic structures, and possible Stone Age occupation sites in the eastern Sahara desert. JPL’s Dr. Charles Flachi, principal investigator for SIR, reported that the radar signal could penetrate the virtually featureless desert surface to show subsurface features nearly as broad as the Nile Valley and up to 50-million years old. Drainage networks detected by radar and confirmed by ground studies would explain the location of present oases in the desert. This new tool could serve in the search for ground water in such arid regions. Dr. Alexander Goetz of JPL said that the multispectral infrared radiometer flown on the same Shuttle mission had made the first detection from orbit of clay and carbonite-bearing minerals, an important step in the use of remote sensing for geological mapping. The device used an area in Egypt of known mineral content as a baseline for analysis; its narrow spectral resolution made it able to map mineral content in the area, using specific substances as a guide for exploration and development, previously possible only through laboratory sampling techniques. Dr. Henry C. Reiche, Jr., of LaRC was the principal investigator for the MAPS (measurement of atmospheric pollution from satellites) experiment flown on STS-2, which proved accurate when compared to ground studies. A gas-filter radiometer, part of the first scientific Shuttle payload, measured carbon monoxide ratios in the lower, upper, and middle troposphere, data to be used in 1984 for seasonal variation studies. Besides the desert features revealed by the Shuttle radar, Flachi reported readings over densely forested areas such as the U.S. Appalachians, the mountains covered by rain forests in western Guyana and Venezuela, and other remote locations not covered by ground survey. Geologic features shown in the radar images would help identify causes of change: erosion, fault lines, or previously unknown fractures of the Earth’s crust. The devices recorded their findings because the Shuttle lacked communications capacity. (NASA Releases 82-174, 82-175, 82-176, 82-177; W Post, Nov 26/82, A-l)
Space Services Inc. (SSI) of America launched the first U.S. privately funded rocket from a small concrete launch pad at a cattle ranch on Matagorda Island, 45 miles northeast of Corpus Christi on the south coast of Texas, at 11:15 a.m. Washington time. Conestoga I rose to 196 miles altitude, traveling 326 miles downrange before dropping into the Gulf of Mexico. The solid-fuel rocket, with a motor purchased from NASA for $365,000, was not designed for recovery. The booster successfully. separated from the upper stage of the rocket; a shroud covering a mock payload that weighed 1,097 pounds, including 40 gallons of water, ejected at peak altitude as a visual marker. After years of planning and one explosive failure in 1981, SSI’s launch PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FilMm would offer relatively inexpensive space transportation for firms wanting to put up private satellites without government help. SSI chairman David Hannah, a Houston real-estate man, said that the launch of Conestoga I was a “giant step forward” for his two-year-old company; the plan was to send up an orbital test flight within two years and start operating on a commercial basis shortly thereafter. Former astronaut Deke Slayton, who joined SSI after retirement from NASA and was in charge of the launch team, said that everything worked perfectly. Besides buying the booster from NASA, SSI also had help from subcontractors with considerable government experience and a variety of ex-NASA personnel. It was negotiating for a permanent launch site in Hawaii but was also looking into a lease of the Atlas Centaur launch site in Florida for the sort of launches that could send heavier spacecraft, such as communications satellites, into orbit. As SSI officials toasted the successful launch with champagne, former director of KSC Lee Scherer, now an SSI consultant, remarked “You can’t do this at a government launch site.” He said that a high-level administration statement that SSI was “in the national interest” would put the firm in competition for space business. (W Post, Sept 10/82, A-l; NY Times, Sept 10/82, A-l)
NASA announced that ARC and LaRC were cooperating in the acquisition of data on the giant stratospheric cloud produced by the eruption of El Chichon volcano in March and April, now covering much of the Earth’s northern hemisphere, to define the cloud’s effect on global weather patterns. The centers were using satellites, U-2 aircraft, and lidar (light-intensification detection and ranging) for the study. The lidar equipment, mounted in a Lockheed Electra aircraft, would shoot laser pulses into the atmosphere and monitor reflections, “painting” the spatial and vertical extent of cloud layers above the aircraft. Lidar measurements in mid-July confirmed earlier findings of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) that the volcano had put up to 50 times (500 times in some areas) the normal amount of aerosols into the upper atmosphere; that the material layers had spread to different latitudes, depending on altitude; and that sunlight reaching Earth’s surface could be reduced several percent. The cloud, a mixture of dust and sulfuric acid, would offer “a once-in-a-lifetime chance” to form an information base for prediction of dispersion, changes in temperature, and dynamic and photochemical changes, according to Dr. M. Patrick McCormick, head of LaRC’s aerosol research branch. Dr. Brian Toon, atmospheric physicist at ARC, said that the most likely effect of the cloud would be a gradual reduction in northern hemisphere temperature over the next two years. (NASA Release 82-115; ARC Release 82-31; LaRC Release 82-57)
NASA launched Westar 4, first of a series of second-generation 24-transponder domestic commercial communications satellites built by Space Communications Company for Western Union, from ESMC on a Delta into a suborbital trajectory. An apogee kick motor would put it into orbit at 99 °W, 19,300 nautical miles over the equator to relay voice, data, video, and facsimile communications to an area covering the United States from Hawaii to the Virgin Islands. Westar 4, with a design life of 10 years would join three other Western Union communications satellites: Westar 1 and Westar 2, launched in 1974, and Westar 3 launched in 1979. It was twice their si2:e and had four times their capacity. (NASA Release 82-17; NASA MOR 0-492-203-82-06 [prelaunch] Feb 25/82, [postlaunch] May 13/82)
NASA reported the failure at 9 a.m. of a high-speed tape recorder on Nimbus 5 collecting Antarctic and Arctic radiometer data for the U.S. Navy. The loss of the last recorder on Nimbus 5 meant that future operations would have to be in real time, subject to the communications satellites view of the Alaska ground station. NASA had agreed to provide Nimbus 5 data through FY83, and the Navy had reimbursed NASA as a source of data for polar sea-ice calculations. NASA would review real-time operation with the Navy. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 30/82)
Dr. Stephen P. Synnott of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced evidence for the existence of four (possibly as many as six, new satellites of Saturn in data from Voyager 2’s Saturn encounter. This brought the number of known Saturnian satellites in between 21 and 23; the two “possible” satellites had only one observation each, and their orbits were not yet confirmed. In 1979, Synnott, a member of the Voyager navigation team, had found two new satellites of Jupiter in images studied after the Voyager encounters. Some of the new “moons” seemed to be influenced by the gravity of larger moons as well as by Saturn itself: while orbiting between the planet and its larger moons, they would move faster than the large ones because of the strong pull of Saturn’s gravity. But, while closing from behind on the larger moons, the gravity of those bodies would pull them into orbit outside the larger moons, where Saturn’s pull was weaker, and they would slow and drop back into inner orbit. Scientists called this type of track “horseshoe orbits.” (JPL Release Feb 1/82; W Post, Feb 3/82, A-6)
The U.S. Air Force launched two military communications satellites from Cape Canaveral on its Space Division’s first Titan 34D and inertial upper stage (IUS). The first Defense Satellite Communications System III (DSCS) satellites went into orbit with parameters of 35,779/35,901-kilometer apogee, 35,641/35,839-kilometer perigee, 1440-minute period, and 2.5° inclination. The Air Force Systems Command said that the launch was the culmination of five years of development effort on an experience base of 47 previous Titan III launches from the Cape. The DSCS system had handled national security communications since the late 1960s, maturing from simple short-lived satellites to flexible systems with six times the capacity and more than three times the on-orbit life. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 19/82, 1) During October: Leroy R. Grumman, 87, founder of the Grumman aerospace firm and designer of carrier-based airplanes with stubby teardrop-shaped fuselages used by the U.S. Navy in World War II, died October 4 in Manhasset, N.Y., after a long illness. He had started his business with a few other persons in 1929 as a repair shop for amphibious aircraft built by the Loening brothers’ company; by the end of the war, Grumman employed 20,000,	and it was still Long Island’s largest employer. The company built more planes in a single month than any other U.S. firm (664, in March 1945) and made 98% of the Navy’s bombers. In 1966, when Grumman resigned as chairman of the board, the firm was building the lunar module that carried Apollo crews to the Moon. His awards included the Guggenheim Medal for Aeronautics and the Presidential Medal of Merit. (W Post, Oct 5/82, C-7; NY Times, Oct 5/82, D-25)
Press reports said that weather satellite Goes West, monitoring the Pacific Ocean and the western United States, had stopped functioning November 25, leaving more than 60° of Earth’s surface (an area responsible for most of the winter storms on the Pacific coast) with a “blind eye.” Efforts to revive it were unsuccessful; officials said that the problem was in the Goes radiometer. Launched in 1980, the satellite was designed for three-year operation; a replacement was to be launched in 1983. If further efforts failed, the National Weather Service planned to reactivate one of several older satellites that had been retired but were still in place. W Post, Nov 28/82, A-8)
NASA signed an $11.6 million contract with a 22-member Arab group of nations and organizations to launch a communications satellite from the Shuttle in 1984. Administrator James M. Beggs signed the agreement for NASA; Dr. Ali Al-Mashat, director general, signed for the Arab satellite group. Arabsat, a consortium, included both Libya and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO); some uproar ensued on Capitol Hill until senators were persuaded that the deal did not imply U.S. recognition of the PLO. The United States also had no diplomatic relations with Libya and had a policy of selling no military goods to its government. A State Department spokesman said that Arabsat members would “get no more than they already had through the existing INTELSAT satellite communications system.” The deal envisioned no transfer of technology, as the satellite would never be handled by its Arabsat owners. Saudi Arabia, which would be the center of operations, would control television programming for Arabsat use. NASA Associate Administrator James A. Abrahamson said that the Shuttle was a commercial service and that its launches “should not be considered a political activity.” (NASA Release 82-173; W Post, Nov 23/82, A-2)
Three astronomers at the University of Hawaii, using NASA’s infrared telescope facility on Mauna Kea and data from Voyager 2, announced the first measurement of the sizes of four of the five known moons of Uranus. Voyager 2 was heading for Uranus after a successful flyby of Saturn 10 months ago, and the new calculations would be useful in planning the scientific studies to be done after arrival. Uranus was so far from Earth, about 3 billion kilometers (2 billion miles), that it was visible only through telescopes. Sizes of the moons were figured from their infrared (heat) radiation. NASA had built the Mauna Kea telescope, most sensitive in the world for measuring faint infrared sources, to provide support for spacecraft exploring the planets; Dr. David Morrison of the University of Hawaii team, also a member of the Voyager project, said that the Moon data were exactly the sort of support NASA had in mind. The moons of Uranus, smaller than Earth’s, were all as large as any of Saturn’s except Titan, the giant moon that was the only planetary satellite found to have an atmosphere. Oberon, largest of the Uranus moons, had a diameter of about 1,690 kilometers (1,100 miles). Besides measuring the Uranus moons, the astronomers reported that Triton, largest moon of Neptune, and the planet Pluto were both too small and too cold for any heat radiation to be detected; the weakness of the sources led them to decide that Triton must be smaller than Earth’s Moon. Triton and Pluto, “based on our current knowledge,” might be very similar; past speculation suggested that Pluto might have been a escaped moon of Neptune. (NASA Release 82-104)
Astronomers from JPL and the University of Hawaii on October 19 reported detection on two solar-system bodies—Pluto and Neptune’s largest satellite Triton—of frozen methane, a substance present on Earth as a product of living organisms ,and petroleum. Although the surfaces, mostly water ice, of Pluto and Triton differed from those of other bodies orbiting the Sun, the methane did not seem to come from biological activity. (NASA Release 82-157; JPL anno Oct 20/82)
NASA said that Cospas/SARSAT, an international search-and-rescue project of the United States, the Soviet Union, Canada, and France, had located four accident sites and saved seven lives in its first month of operation. The Soviet Union’s Cospas satellite, launched June 30, had located two downed planes in Canada during September, another in September in New Mexico, and a capsized catamaran off the coast of New England in October less than 24 hours after receiving the first signal. As part of the program the United States planned to launch in February 1983 a weather satellite, NOAA-F, carrying a search-and-rescue capability. GSFC managed SARSAT activities for NASA. (NASA Release 82-152)
