The Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched on January 25, 1983, as a joint project of the United States, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, depleted its supply of helium at 1:30 a.m. GMT. The superfluid helium refrigerant cooled the telescope, which would cease operations in about a week, mission officials said. Throughout the mission, the telescope’s focal plane was cooled to a temperature of about 2.5° above absolute zero (—■455 °F), making the instrument the coldest manmade object ever flown in Earth orbit. The telescope surveyed more than 95 % of the sky, pinpointing the locations and intensities of more than 200,000 infrared objects. During its 300 days of observations, IRAS carried out the first complete survey of the infrared sky and made many discoveries, including the detection of a ring of solid material around the star Vega and seven comets and bands of dust around the Sun between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. More than 200 billion bits of data came from IRAS, and results announced to date represented only a hurried look at a very small proportion of this data. It was evident, however, that IRAS would have a major impact on many areas of astronomy and that astronomers would be making new discoveries from its data for years to come. On November 9, NASA announced two IRAS findings: a new object in the solar system—possibly an asteroid or a dead comet—that passed closer to the Sun than any planet or known asteroid and three giant rings of dust that circled part of the solar system. The unknown object, temporarily designated minor planet 1983TB, appeared to be less than 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) in diameter and about 30 million kilometers (19 million miles) from Earth. 1983TB passed within 15 million kilometers (9 million miles) of the Sun, closer than any planet or known asteroid and 10 times closer than Earth. And its orbit almost PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED BlTFMTtOWMTT WAKK 445 exactly matched that of the Geminid stream of meteoroids, which were visible as a shower of meteors (shooting stars) in December 1982. Astronomers were planning additional observations with photometers and spectrometers in an effort to clear up the mystery of the identify of 1983TB. The three dust rings were 100 million miles wide and were circling the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter 200 to 300 million miles from the Sun. The dust bands appeared to defy the laws of physics by encircling the asteroid belt in three extremely stable and symmetrical rings. Particles making up the dust bands “this small can only survive in stable orbits for a few ten-thousands of years before they are pulled apart by the sun,” said Dr. Frank Low of the University of Arizona. “There must be something that replenishes the rings because three stable bands that large cannot exist any other way.” In addition, NASA announced that same day that astronomers studying IRAS data at the University of Groningen, the Netherlands, had discovered three giant dust shells that were asymmetrically placed around the star Betelgeuse. It was already known that the red supergiant star lost material, but IRAS data showed evidence of the presence of dust shells that extended more than four light years from the star. At that distance, the material must have left the star 100,000 years earlier. The IRAS observations thus allowed astronomers to study the earliest stages in the episode of mass loss. (NASA Release 83-162, 83-171, 83-172, 83-181; W Post, Nov 10/83, A-l)
The Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) landed at 3:47 p.m. PST at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., after 10 days in space and 167 orbits—the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The landing followed a delay necessitating 22 more orbits than planned when Columbia’s computers failed 3 hours and 49 minutes prior to the planned reentry bum. Six hours after the two computers went off line, Columbia also lost one of its three inertial measurement units that provided orbiter orientation information. The orbiter carried five IBM general purpose computers and three inertial measurement units. Today’s reentry was flown with one of each inoperative. A reentry could be flown with only a single computer and single measurement unit. Mission pilots John W. Young and Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., said at the time that they believed that the triggering of an upward firing 870-pound nose reaction control jet, which caused an unusually strong impact to the orbiter, was the likely cause of the computer failures. However, telemetry analysis showed that the thruster activity was coincidental to the computer malfunction. Instead, NASA came to the conclusion that it was a transient hardware internal problem. About 40 minutes after the problems occurred, the crew restored the second computer to operation. On December 5, President Reagan and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in Athens at the time, held a conference call with the five U.S. crew members and one German payload specialist on Columbia. The U.S. Information Agency (USIA) used five satellites and thousands of miles of land lines around the world to bounce the signals among Athens. Washington, and JSC to provide live television coverage of the call to seven European cities and the Cable News Network (CNN). Aside from the computer problems, the ninth Space Shuttle mission was almost flawless and was distinguished by some significant scientific discoveries. One discovery involved the workings of the inner ear, disproving a 77-year-old hypothesis that had won the 1914 Nobel Prize in medicine for Swedish professor, Robert Barany. Barany had said that nystagmus, a flickering of a person’s eyes when cold air is blown into one of his ears and hot air into the other, was caused by convection, the motion of fluids under uneven heating. But in space, the lack of gravity meant that convection did not occur. Nevertheless, the astronauts aboard Columbia showed the characteristic eye movements. The six-man crew completed work on all but one of the 70 scheduled experiments; only a microwave sensing device misfired. Scientists from 14 countries designed the experiments, and the experiments did not end with touchdown. The four scientists were in quarantine, where they would be required to remain motionless so that scientists could observe how their bodies acclimated to gravity. (ESA Release, Dec 9/83; WH annon, Dec 5/83; W Times, Dec 6/83, 3A; WPost, Dec 6/83, A-3, Dec 8/83, A-3, Dec 9/83, A-l; NY Times, Dec 9/83, A-l; P Inq, Dec/83, A-l; AvWk, Dec 12/83, 23)
Associated Press (AP) said that ESA launched Ariane 6 at 7:59 a.m. EDT from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites: the first ESA telecommunications craft, the British Aerospace-designed Ecs 1, and a smaller West German satellite to retransmit amateur radio broadcasts. This sixth attempt to get the three-stage Ariane off the ground was considered a “crucial boost” to Europe’s space program as a way to break th superpower monopoly on space. Ariane faced competition from the U.S. Space Shuttle and from private companies planning to buy conventional Thor, Atlas, and Titan vehicles from the U.S. government. ESA was counting on enough business for everyone, but admitted that Ariane would have had trouble getting any if this sixth launch had failed. (ESA Info 21; WPost (AP), June 17/83, A-2) Mission control stated that the group of five was “the largest human payload in the history of the space age.” The Soviet Union had maintained crews of five on its Salyut space station but had never carried that number on a single launch. First deployment of a payload was at 5:02 p.m. EDT when the crew launched from the cargo bay a seven-ton communications satellite, Anik C2, for Telesat (Canada’s governmental telecommunications organization). At 9:36 a.m. EDT the next day the crew launched a $40 million Palapa B communications satellites for the government of Indonesia. Two previous Palapas launched by the United States were providing communications to Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Palapa B, twice the size of the earlier communications satellite could increase television and telephone traffic in the area by 10% to 15% a year. The 147 million Indonesians living on islands extending more than 3,200 miles east to west had only 560,000 telephones: Palapa B could provide service for as many as a million new telephones in the next 10 years. After the second communications satellite was launched, the four rookie astronauts (Ride, Fabian, Hauck, and Thagard) appeared on the television screen assembled in the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white letters reading “TFNG: We Deliver.” TFNG stood for “thirty-five new guys,” the astronaut class, recruited in 1978, to which all four belonged. Crippen stayed out of camera range, but mission control said “That’s all right, Crip. We can tell you’re a steely-eyed veteran from here.” On June 19 mission control said that the families of the four fathers aboard Challenger had gathered “to wish you a happy Father’s Day.” The four male astronauts had a total of 10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and Fabian, 2 each. Major activities for the next three days would be the release of the mechanical arm and rehearsal for deployment and retrieval of the West German pallet. Ride and Fabian would drop the 15-foot, 5,000-pound package off the Shuttle and try to pick it up again. (This would be a first for an exercise that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June 22 the team released and retrieved the package five times, as television cameras on Shuttle and package sent spectacular shots of the procedure with a backdrop of Earth and black space. When the exercise concluded and the arm and the payload were back in the cargo bay, Crippen reminded mission control that some crews had announced “We deliver” (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when they launched two communications satellites from the shuttle last November): “Well, for flight 7, we pick up and deliver.” The USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova, first woman to make a flight in space 20 years ago, wired congratulations to Sally Ride. The telegram expressed pleasure “to know that a third representative of this planet’s women, now from the United States of America, is in outer space today.” Last year the Soviet Union sent a second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into space. Among more than 20 experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay and mid-deck was the colony of 150 carpenter ants sent into space by high-school students from Camden, N.J., to record their reactions to weightlessness. The ants were considered good space subjects, being hardy and naturally social creatures. Marginal weather at KSC raised a question whether Challenger would land near its launch point, as planned. Landing on the Florida runway was a way to reduce time in preparing Challenger for its next flight. STS-7 cbuld be extended, or landing could be shifted to Edwards Air Force Base in California; a shift to California would mean an eight-day delay in bringing Challenger back to KSC for a mid-August mission, adding pressure to the timetable for launching Spacelab between the end of September and mid-October. The next chance for a Florida runway landing would be early in 1985; the two intervening missions would be a night launch and landing and the heavyweight touchdown of the Shuttle carrying Spacelab. Also of concern was the effect of rainstorms on the Shuttle tile covering: planes carrying strips of the insulation had been flown through rainstorms with a uniform result of “significant erosion of the tile surfaces.” Mission control offered three landing times, 6:53 a.m. and 8:29 a.m. EDT at KSC and 9:56 a.m. EDT at Edwards Air Force Base. The crew appeared on television “stowing the cabin” in preparation for landing. A sign “The Doctor Is In” was held up as Thagard showed viewers the experiments he was conducting to find clues for the cause of space sickness. STS-7 had been the first shuttle mission to have no space-sick astronauts. The Challenger landed at Edwards Air Force Base June 24 at 9:57 EDT after a steady downpour began at KSC. In a congratulatory telephone call to the astronauts, President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling of the mechanical arm and said “You were there because you were the best person for the job.” Ride said that the flight was “the most fun I’ll ever have in my life.” When the astronauts attended a brief homecoming ceremony at Johnson Space Center June 24, Ride refused to accept a bouquet of flowers from a NASA official; she had said before the mission that she wanted to be treated no differently from her four male crewmates. Wives of the male astronauts each received a red rose; Ride’s husband, astronaut Dr. Steven Hawley, did not. (NASA MOR E-420-07-83-04 [prelaunch] June 9; NASA MOR M-989-83-07 [prelaunch] June 13/83; NY Times, June 20/83, A-l; June 23/83, A-l; June 25/83, 16; June 26/83, 4-8; WPost, June 17/83, A-2; June 20/83, A-l; June 21/83, A-6; June 22/83, A-3; June 23/83, A-l; June 24/83, A-3, C-4; June 25/83, A-l; June 26/83, A-2)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
NASA launched RCA-G, third in a series of high-traffic capacity communications satellites, for RCA Americom from ESMC on a Delta at 6:52 p.m. EDT into a transfer orbit with 35,758-kilometer apogee, 176-kilometer perigee, 104-minute period, and 24° inclination, preparatory to assuming station over the equator at 72 °W. RCA-G would join four other communications satellites in orbit (RCA-C through RCA-F) to provide a five-satellite RCA network providing coverage to all 50 states. More than 4,000 ground stations had direct access to these communications satellites, which all carried 28 completely solid-state C-band amplifiers in a configuration that gave 24 operating channels for television, voice, and high-speed data transmission. (NASA MOR M-492-206-83-08 [prelaunch] Sept 8/83, [postlaunch] July 26/84)
Japan launched its first “practical communications satellite, Cs2A, at 5:37 p.m. local time from its Tanegashima space center on a three-stage rocket toward a stationary orbit at 36,000 kilometers over New Guinea. It would be Japan’s sixth in stationary orbit, although it would be the first used for practical purposes. Cs2A carried eight transponders with communications capacity equal to 4,000	telephone circuits, to improve links between the mainland and outlying islands in the Pacific south of Tokyo. It would be used by government agencies and public transportation rather than by the public sector for research to develop new media such as television communications links, electronic mail, high-speed datafax, and color television. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 4/83)
NASA transferred operation and management of its Landsat system to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) during ceremonies at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). Beginning in 1972 with the launch of Landsat 1 (Erts 1, the Earth-resources technology satellite), the Landsat program was a research and development effort to determine the usefulness of satellite multispectral data from synoptic views of the Earth’s surface for agricultural and urban planning, geologic exploration, land management, and snowmelt and flood-runoff analysis. Over the following 10 years NASA had operated four Landsats, including Landsat 4, launched in July 1982, and a ground system at GSFC. Landsat 1 and Landsat 2 were no longer operating; Landsat 3 would be retired later in 1983 because of degradation related to age. In 1979 the Reagan administration told NASA to transfer operation to NOAA so that the latter agency could work toward eventual commercialization of the system. NASA had relinquished operation of Landsat 4 (except for the thematic mapper, which NASA would continue to use), the control center at GSFC, and the multispectral-scanner data-processing facility, also at GSFC, and would hand over control of the thematic mapper early in 1985. NOAA would also take over the Landsat 4 backup spacecraft (the Landsat D now in final checkout by General Electric) that would replace Landsat 4, probably in mid-1985. NOAA would reimburse NASA for the use of buildings and utilities. (NASA Release 83-7) JPL would go ahead with efforts to reestablish contact, which would be unsuccessful if the lander had multiple problems. No telemetry dala were available to diagnose the situation. The 64-meter Deep Space Tracking Network antenna, near Canberra, had bombarded the lander on Mars with 80-to 100-kilowatt signals, said George Gianopulos, Viking team leader at JPL. Gianopulos said that commands from JPL through Australia could be up to 40° off the receiving line into the leader’s antenna dish and still be picked up. Getting into the lander to reset the switch “is going to be a neat trick,” he added. Launched August 20, 1975, and designed for a 90-day mission, Viking 1 had shown “incredible stamina” in the harsh environment of Mars. Radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) could provide power for years, but in 1982 its four nickel-cadmium batteries began to show their age. Viking could be instructed to charge or discharge batteries to keep them functioning longer. A command sent November 19 to repeat this exercise apparently got into the antenna-pointing subroutine and switched the crucial communications antenna to point away from Earth. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 16/83; JSC Roundup, Jan 28/83, 1)
The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum said that it would build an adjunct facility at Dulles International Airport to house an expanding collection of aircraft, including the Shuttle Enterprise. Estimated to cost $40 million, the facility would replace the restoration site now at Silver Hill, Md., but would not be completed for another 7 to 15 years. Possibilities for Dulles included a group of four buildings to accommodate a Boeing 707, a Boeing B17 bomber, Boeing 727, a Boeing 747, and others; the design and funding were not yet settled. The collection had outgrown the Mall area, said Walter Boyne, director of the museum: “We are going to get the space shuttle and the Concorde,” which it would be physically impossible to move to the Mall area. “They are so complex, you can’t simply take a wing off and move them.” The present museum now has 10 million visitors a year, and Boyne said that people would be as interested in the Shuttle 100 years from now as they were in the Wright Brothers’ plane today. (W Post, Oct 13/83, D-1) A three-inch layer of the carbon-epoxy material was intended to protect the metal nozzles from flaming exhaust by charring, to dissipate heat; about half the layer would normally burn away during the two-minute firing of the booster. On the last mission, one nozzle’s lining came within 0.2 inches of burning away completely. Damage to a metal nozzle could send the Shuttle off course; had the flame burned through part of the engine in flight, “it could have caused a catastrophe,” said the Washington Post. A test firing October 11 at Thiokol’s Utah plant, where the rockets were built, showed that the liner had begun to “delaminate,” which would make the Shuttle aerodynamically unstable after two minutes of flight. If NASA decided to replace one of Columbia’s motors, it would have to move the entire vehicle off the pad. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, head of the Shuttle program, said that chances of staying on schedule for a Spacelab launch between October 28 and November 5 were “diminishing rapidly”; however, he would not set a launch date “with this type of uncertainty.” The next possible launch date after November 5 would be November 27: astronomy experiments to be carried on Spacelab had to orbited while the moon was dark. [Students at Camden, N.J., high schools said that the carpenter ants flown on Challenger in June had died from lack of moisture before leaving Earth.] The New York Times said that NASA might have to delay the next Shuttle mission for one to four months, possibly to next February 6, because of concern about reliability of the nozzles in the Shuttle boosters. Positions of stellar targets would again be favorable for Spacelab observations by next February. ESA and scientists from the United States and Europe were asked to suggest rescheduling that would have the least impact on their experiments. A later report said that engineers who examined one of the engines recovered from the Atlantic after the mission in August found that the three-inch coating inside the rocket nozzle had burned down to 0.2 inches. Astronaut Daniel C. Brandenstein, pilot of that flight, told CBS News that the lowest part of the engine would have burned through if the engines had fired 2.7	seconds more, which would have “spelled curtains for the crew.” A NASA official said that was conjecture, though the agency admitted that a burn-through might have occurred after 20 more seconds. NASA decided October 14 to postpone the first flight of Spacelab for “at least a month” but would announce a new launch date. Gen. Abrahamson said October 16 that the probable date would be late next February, but the decision would be made jointly by NASA and ESA. He said that NASA engineers still did not know what caused the near-failure of the engine on the eighth shuttle flight in August. Two test firings in the last 10 days had produced confusing results: one engine lining had almost burned through, the other less than halfway, as it was meant to do. NASA had changed the manufacturing process not long ago, he noted, and the change might have trapped gases in the lining instead of baking them out. With Columbia waiting for Spacelab, the next Shuttle flight would take place in January as planned. Challenger would deploy two communications satellites, and astronaut Bruce McCandless would demonstrate in space a self-propelled manned maneuvering unit that could go 500 to 600 feet from the Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 13/83, A-15; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 15/83, A-20; Oct 17/83, A-3; NY Times, Oct 13/83, A-16)
Senior NASA managers, headed by Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, associate administrator for space flight, had met with contractors and “cleared the way” for returning the tracking and data-relay satellite to KSC’s launch pad in preparation for the first launch of Challenger, the agency said. Results of the second flight-readiness firing led to a decision not to conduct a third firing before launching Challenger early in March. The #1 engine had been removed for exchange with the flight spare. The spare would have the high-pressure pump from the #1 engine installed before the change took place. (NASA Release 83-16)
NASA launched Intelsat 5-F at 6:26 p.m. EDT from ESMC on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit. This was the 100th launch for LeRC. The 4,400-pound Ford Aerospace-built communications satellite carried 12,000 voice and two color television channels and was the first to have a maritime communications link for ship-to-shore communications. (NASA Release 83-77; LeRC Release 83-25; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, May 20/83; D/SD, May 17/83, 95)	" NASA declared the May 19 launch of Intelsat 5-F successful, as the Atlas Centaur had put the satellite into the desired transfer orbit. After an apogee kick motor fired May 22 put it in near-geosynchronous orbit for initial positioning and preliminary tests, the Intelsat would be moved on station over the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA MOR M-491-203-86-06 [postlaunch] June 13/83)
The European Space Operations Center (ESOC), at the request of the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT), completed a switching operation on board ESA’s operational Maritime European Communications Satellite Marecs-A that increased the satellite’s capacity from 30 simultaneous voice telephone channels to 46. ESOC completed the transfer in less than 10 minutes; thus, avoiding the need to transfer communications to the spare satellite and back again. The satellite provided the total of the Atlantic Ocean region shore-to-ship and ship-to-shore satellite communications. Marecs-A was providing to INMARSAT its full capacity, one in excess of the contractual requirement of 40 voice telephone channels. The increased capacity seemed to bode well for Marecs-A to fulfill its design lifetime of seven years. (ESA Release, Nov 28/83)
For the first time in the U.S. space program, one satellite used signals from another satellite to navigate. The Air Force System Command said that Landsat D (Landsat 4), a NASA remote-sensing craft built by General Electric, was getting signals from the U.S. Air Force Space Division’s NavStar global-positioning system (GPS) satellite to compute position, velocity, and time. Landsat 4, first satellite to carry a GPS receiver, could record its precise position as it acquired Earth-imaging data. The receiver also eliminated transmission of navigation signals between space and Earth; direct signal reception ensured efficient and economic spacecraft operation. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 4/83, 5)
Efforts to push the $100-million TDRS communications satellite into its proper orbit were suspended when NASA engineers found that two of its maneuvering rockets were damaged and would not work. Firing the 16 small thrusters on the satellite was the obvious way to correct the orbit, but Ron Browning, TDRS project manager, said that engineers from NASA and TRW Inc., manufacturer of TDRS, would take four to six weeks to figure how to operate it with “less than a fully optimal control system.” {W Post, Apr 14/83, A-3)
India, for the third time since 1980, launched a satellite into orbit from its own soil. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi watched liftoff of the 17-ton four-stage rocket carrying the 91-lb Rohini satellite from Sriharikota island off India’s east coast. The launch, part of a series aimed at perfecting the launch vehicle, would be followed in the next 10 years by higher investment in the national space research program, Gandhi said. (If Post, Apr 18/83, A-17; FBIS, Apr 20/83; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 25/83)
NASA announced a deal with Orbital Systems Corporation, a private company, to develop and market a $20-million propulsion system for launching satellites from the Space Shuttle. (NY Times, April 19/83, D-1)
LeRC said that Dr. Henry G. Kosmahl, an electron physicist employed there, had developed an amplifying system that could double the number of channels on a communications satellite. The system, called a dynamic velocity taper, was a “relatively minor technical modification” of an existing device. Most nations had been seeking additional output from communications satellites for voice, picture, and data transmission. However, communications satellites could be spaced around the globe no closer than 20 part; otherwise, the signals from one would interfere with those adjoining. The number of possible communications satellites in orbit was therefore limited, and all available slots would be full by the year 2000. Kosmahl’s idea would make each communications satellite able to .handle more traffic without affecting quality of the signals or increasing the power supply. He had applied for a patent on the device, which would be owned by NASA but available to industry. (LeRC Release 83-62)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
NASA launched Telestar 3A for the American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (AT&T) from the Eastern Space and Missile Range at 6:49 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37,516-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, 23° inclination, and 664-minute period, preparatory to moving it to geosynchronous station at 96 °W over the Pacific just west of the Galapagos. Telestar 3A was the first of a new series of three domestic communications satellites offering AT&T long-lines customers television, phone, and data service over the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico; it had 24 transponders and 6 spares, each able to relay a color-television signal at 60 million bits per second or up to 3,900 two-way phone calls. (Telestar 1 launched 21 years ago for the first transatlantic television relay could offer only 600 one-way voice channels or one television channel.) Launch of Telestar 3A was declared successful December 16. (NASA Release 83-110; NASA MOR M-492-216-83-01 [postlaunch] Dec 16/83; Spacewam SPX-358, Aug 30/83, 2) During July: NASA appointed Dr. Milton A. Silveira, assistant to the deputy administrator, to succeed Dr. Stanley I. Weiss as chief engineer. Weiss, who came to NASA in 1980 as associate administrator for space transportation operations at Headquarters, was leaving to become vice president for engineering at Lockheed Corporation, where he had worked from 1957 to 1978. Silveira began at Langley with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1951 and worked in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. He was deputy project manager at JSC for the shuttle orbiter program before coming to Headquarters in 1981. (Anno, July 1/83) NASA also appointed John W. Boyd associate administrator for management at Headquarters effective September 4. He had begun at ARC in 1947 and served there until appointed deputy director of DFRC in 1979, returning to ARC in 1980 as associate director. (Anno, July 1/83)
An Office of Technology Assessment study released today said that the Soviet Union was nearing construction of a permanent space base that would serve as an eventual springboard for Soviet settlements on Mars and the Moon. “The Soviet space station program is the cornerstone of an official policy which looks not only toward a permanent Soviet human presence in low-Earth orbit but also toward permanent Soviet settlement of their people on the Moon and Mars,” the report said. “The Soviets take quite seriously the possibility that large numbers of their citizens will one day live in space.” The report pointed out that the United States was still debating NASA’s request for as much as S200 million in FY85 to begin development of a U.S. space station. However, the Soviets had committed to a permanent space base. The report pointed out that, while the United States “seems to have gained a substantial lead over the Soviet Union” in space science and communications, the picture in human spaceflight was “less clear.” The report noted that Soviets had flown six models of the Salyut space station in the last 12 years; their cosmonauts had flown more than three times as many hours in space as U.S. astronauts and had accumulated extensive experience “in flight operation, experimentation, and earth observation on trips that last for months.” However, U.S. space experts had long criticized the Soviets for sticking with what they believed was essentially outdated technology in the Salyut. It could not fly back to Earth, deploy other satellites, or carry as many people as the Space Shuttle. But the report pointed out that “Salyut may be the penultimate step leading to a permanent, large-scale presence in space.” As evidence that the Salyut represented only a stepping stone to larger ventures in space, the report said that there is “unclassified photographic evidence” that the Soviets were developing a small space plane and a larger “heavy-lift” shuttle that would carry “more massive payloads into low-earth orbit” than the U.S. Space Shuttle could lift. (WPost, Dec 22/83, A-l; Salyut, Soviet Steps Toward Permanent Human Presence in Space, A Technical Memorandum, OTA, Washington, D.C., Dec 83)
Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite. The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%. The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time. The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.” The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts. STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down. The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor. Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42) Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.” India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
NASA reported a number of differences between Shuttle orbiters Columbia and Challenger, most of them stemming from Columbia’s being a vessel for research and development, whereas Challenger came equipped as an operational craft. Control and display panels on Columbia had sensors configured for data collection and processing in the flight-test phase; those on Challenger had fewer of these arid more support equipment, such as a Ku-band antenna system for tracking future data-relay satellites. On the first four flights, Columbia had an ejection-seat system for the commander and pilot in case of accident in the launch or landing phase of flight-testing. Challenger had no ejection system; the space used for it on Columbia would serve on Challenger to seat the mission specialists. On its first flight in February, Challenger would seat all four of the flight crew on the orbiter’s flight deck; it would be able to seat three more crew members in the mid-deck on later flights. Challenger would weigh abot 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms) less than Columbia and could carry more payload and additional crew on operational flights. The orbiters differed in thermal-protection systems: heat-shielding tiles on Columbia were being replaced with densified tiles to eliminate porosity that made the original tiles vulnerable to loosening. All of Challenger’s tiles had been densified. Challenger also had an advanced thermal-protection blanket, a silica material sandwiched between an upper and lower quilt and bonded directly to the orbiter skin. Its identification marking also differed from Columbia’s, being located so the name would be visible during on-orbit operations. {NASA Actv, Jan 83, 4)
A team of engineers from NASA and industry celebrated at GSFC their success, after 58 days of maneuvers, in putting the tracking and data-relay satellite into geosynchronous orbit. Using tiny one-pound thrusters with nozzles about the size of a thimble, the team boosted the 5,000-pound TDRS more than 8,600 miles further into space, a feat never before attempted. The TDRS was launched from the Shuttle Challenger during its first mission April 4; after a successful deployment from the Shuttle, some difficulty in the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket threw TDRS into a tumble from which ground control rescued it, stabilizing it far short of the altitude needed for geosynchronous orbit. A joint board representing NASA and the U.S. Air Force said later that the problem was loss of oil pressure in an engine seal, probably caused by excess engine heat. The board had viewed photographs taken by U.S. Air Force camera over New Mexico and had conducted “extensive tests.” Because of the importance of TDRS operation to space communications, NASA and the Air Force had rescheduled two shuttle missions that were to use the IUS. (NASA PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED IMTEflTi0WM.1T mm Releases 83-104, 83-114, 83-116; MSFC Releases 83-49, 83-50; W Post, July 13/83, A-l; July 28/83, A-4) —NASA announced that Charles D. Walker, an engineer at McDonnell Douglas, would be the First payload specialist representing a project designed for commercial purposes. He would fly on the 12th Shuttle mission set for March 1984, operating a materials-processing device developed by McDonnell-Douglas to separate large amounts of biological materials in space for new pharmaceutical uses. As chief engineer responsible for spaceflight tests and evaluation, Walker had worked with project support at KSC and JSC, training NASA astronauts who operated the device for electrophoresis research on earlier Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 83-105)
Japan launched a second operational communications satellite, Cs-2B (code-named Sakura 2B), at 8:20 p.m. GMT from Tanegashima Island toward a stationary orbit above northwestern New Guinea. This seventh satellite launched by Japan was only the second “for practical purposes”; the first was Sakura 2A launched in March as communications link between Japan’s mainland and outlying Pacific islands. Each communications satellite had capacity equal to 4,000 phone circuits, and the two were designed for use in a major emergency like an earthquake. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Aug 6/83)
Launched January 25, IRAS had already discovered up to 20 distant galaxies too small to see previously. Dr. James Houck of Cornell University, one of 18 astronomers on the three-nation IRAS science team, said at JPL that only 20 small galaxies outside the Milky Way were measured before IRAS went into orbit. “In 12 hours of operation with this satellite, we doubled that number.” In a single minute, the 22.4-inch IRAS telescope found out more about the Large Magellanic Cloud, galaxy closest to the Milky Way, than ever discovered by Earth telescopes. The IRAS telescope, cooled by liquid helium to 2.5° above absolute zero to offset any stray heat that might confuse its imaging, was so sensitive that it could detect an object with temperatures far below that of freezing on Earth. Optical telescopes, by contrast, could see only objects with temperatures hot enough to make them shine (above 10,000 °F). The telescope was built in the United States, the spacecraft in the Netherlands; Great Britain was tracking it. The biggest surprise, said Houck, was that the $80 million satellite was “working better than we had hoped,” seeing cooler objects in greater detail than astronomers thought possible. Over its 12-month lifetime, IRAS could survey 95% of the sky in the infrared, never attempted from the ground. Infrared lightwaves were longer than those in the visible spectrum but shorter than radiowaves. The projected lifetime would probably be extended by 50% because of the slow rate of helium use so far. (W Post, Mar 12/83, A-10)
NASA said that TDRS-1 had achieved geosynchronous orbit at 67°W at 12:31 p.m. EDT. By 7:41 p.m. EDT, the communications satellite was stabilized in a normal Earth-oriented mode, with momentum wheels and Earth sensors controlling it for the first time. The White Sands ground station was activating the payload. The press said that NASA’s $100 million rescue mission had put TDRS into proper stationary orbit on the equator over Brazil, two months after the 5,000-pound communications satellite went off course when a second-stage thruster misfired after launch from the Challenger in April. The 39th firing of thruster jets moved TDRS into an orbit parallel to Earth’s rotation and at the same speed, keeping it in the same position above Earth. Saving the satellite meant that Spacelab, due to fly in September on STS-9, could proceed as planned. Also, the Landsat now in orbit could send its images to Earth through TDRS, and all future Shuttle flights could keep in touch with Earth 85% of the time instead of the present 20%. An adjacent story in the Washington Post said that the House had approved and sent to President Reagan for signature a compromise bill authorizing NASA to spend $7.3 billion in FY84, slightly more than the president’s request, but approval was expected. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 1/83; W Post, June 30/83, A-3)
NASA launched at 11:00 a.m. EST the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) from KSC. Columbia carried the largest space crew ever, which consisted of John Young, commander; Brewster Shaw, pilot; Dr. Robert Parker and Dr. Owen Garriott, mission specialists; and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold, payload specialists. The crew would operate in two shifts to permit 24-hour operation of experiments. The mission was originally scheduled to get under way September 30 but was delayed to October 28 to give engineers additional time to check out a communications satellite needed to relay data to Earth from Spacelab, carried on Columbia. The flight was postponed again when an examination of the booster rockets used for the Space Shuttle mission in August revealed serious erosion of the insulation lining one of the rocket nozzles. The rocket was replaced. Columbia carried Spacelab, designed and built by ESA, which marked Europe’s first major entry into a manned space program. Other firsts associated with the flight was that it carried the heaviest payload on a Shuttle, the 33,584-pound Spacelab and pallet, and that it would include more experiments and spacecraft maneuvers than did any previous flight. Immediately after liftoff, Columbia rolled over and turned northward to put itself into an orbital path that would range from as far north as Scotland and Leningrad to as far south as Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America in order to take pictures of Europe. The orbit would also take Columbia over Moscow and many militarily sensitive areas of the Soviet Union, the first time a U.S. manned spacecraft had flown over the Soviet Union in daylight. No pictures or other sensing would be taken of the ground while Columbia passed over the Soviet Union. The $l-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long laboratory was sealed and pressurized so that the scientists/astronauts could work in shirtsleeves as they carried out more than 70 experiments on 38 sets of equipment. Operating Spacelab were Merbold and Lichtenberg, a new breed of astronaut—payload specialists—who were not career astronauts but scientists trained to operate the science instruments on the mission. Wired with sensors, the scientists were guinea pigs in a number of experiments designed to explore how the body adapted to space and how it performed in the absence of gravity. Blood samples were taken three times so that scientists could study how the ratio of red to white blood cells changed once the body was weightless. Several experiments were conducted to measure eye movements; in another experiment, Garriott was given mild electric shocks to see how the muscles in his body responded to a sudden jolt that was the bodily equivalent of a sudden movement in weightlessness (doctors believed that one of the causes of space sickness might be abrupt movements that disoriented the inner ear). In another experiment, the crew in shifts pushed two balls identical in shape and size, although of different weights, to determine how quickly humans would distinguish weight from size in weightlessness. Other Spacelab studies were concerned with the growth in space of sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes. Exotic metal mixes were melted, and crystals were grown in three Spacelab furnaces. There were experiments intended to determine the practicality of orbiting factories to produce products not possible in the gravity of Earth. During the flight, two antennas failed on the TDRS-1 that was used to relay data from Spacelab to Earth. The failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold had to share the voice link to Mission Control Center in Houston with the four astronauts in Columbia’s cockpit, and it meant that the two scientists got their instructions from the ground via a teleprinter aboard Spacelab. Columbia landed December 8 at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. (NASA MOR M-977-09-83-01 [prelaunch], Oct 83; NASA Releases 83-163, 83-176; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Nov 29/83; W Post, Nov 22/83, A-8, Nov 28/83, A-l, Nov 29/83, A-l, Nov 30/83, A-l; USA Today, Nov 29/83, 1A; W Times, Nov 22/83, C—1; B Sun, Nov 29/83, A-l)
NASA launched RCA-F at 5:39 p.m. EDT from the Eastern Sipace and Missile Center (ESMC) on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 36,266-kilometer apogee, 169-kilometer perigee, 634.2-minute period, and 24° inclination, before reaching geosynchronous orbit at 139 °W where for 10 years it would provide commercial and official voice, digital, and video communications between Alaska and the continental United States. Called Satcom 1R in orbit, the 3-axis stabilized craft weighed nearly 600 kilograms (1,320 pounds) and carried 24 solid-state transponders. It would replace the first of RCA’s domestic communications satellites, RCA Satcom 1 launched December 12, 1975, which had served for seven years. Satcom 1R joined five previous RCA communications satellites to provide television, voice, and high-speed data transmission to all 50 states and Puerto Rico. More than 4,000 Earth stations had direct access to these spacecraft. (NASA MOR M-492-206-83-07 [prelaunch] Mar 31/83; NASA Release 83-44; SPX-354; NASA wkly SSR, Apr 14/83)
NASA said that it would have to revise the schedule for Challenger’s first launch because delays had pushed the date past the vernal equinox and would put the Shuttle’s communications satellite payload in Earth’s shadow for an undesirably long time. Liftoff would be reset for 1:30 p.m. EST, regardless of the date, shortening the launch window from 4 hours to 18 minutes, because of the need for daylight conditions at an emergencylanding runway in Dakar, Senegal. Spring would start March 20 at 11:39 p.m. EST. With the sun directly over the equator, the time in darkness between transferring the communications satellite from the Shuttle’s low Earth orbit to stationary orbit at 22,300 miles altitude would have resulted in too much heat loss. All five Columbia missions were launched in the morning, the earlier the better according to NASA, so that the crews had more daylight to work in. (NY Times, Mar 6/83, 38) PRECEDISMG PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED WTfNTinNAI tV RtANti' relay satellite (TDRS) to be carried on that flight. A storm February 28 with winds from 60 to 70 mph had carried “sand, salt, silica particles, and paint chips” into the room at the launch pad where the payload was kept and onto the satellite. NASA said earlier that the TDRS was not seriously damaged by “particulate matter” found on it; however, the contaminants were undergoing laboratory tests, and the sensitive Earth-scanner and tracking instruments were being closely examined. Launch would again be delayed, probably to April 7. Spokesman James Kukowski said that NASA could fly the 2'/2-ton satellite as is; try to clean it inside the Challenger cargo bay (where it was installed February 25); remove and clean it at the launch pad; return it to a KSC payload assembly building; or send it back to TRW’s plant in California. Delays were costing up to $3 million a day in overtime. (NY Times, Mar 8/83, C-8; Mar 11/83, A-14; Mar 19/83, 14; W Post, Mar 9/83, A-17; Mar 11/83, A-18; Mar 19/83, A-10)
NASA announced crew selections for STS-11 and STS-12, both to be commanded by veterans of earlier shuttle missions. The crew for STS-11 in January 1984, led by Vance D. Brand, who commanded STS-5 in November 1982, would include pilot Robert L. Gibson and mission specialists Bruce McCandless II, Robert L. Stewart, and Dr. Ronald E. McNair. STS-11 would be the fifth flight of Challenger, and its seven-day mission would launch an Indonesian communications satellite. The crew for STS-12, led by Henry W. Hartsfield, who commanded STS-4 in June 1982, would include pilot Michael L. Coats and mission specialists Dr. Judith A. Resnik, Dr. Steven A. Hawley, and Richard M. Mullane. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) said that a sixth crewman might be added later under a new NASA policy permitting major customers to send a payload specialist along. To be launched in March 1984, STS-12 would be the first flight of a new orbiter, Discovery; its 5-day mission would include deployment of the third tracking and data-relay satellite. (NASA Release 83-15; MSFC Release 83-6)
GSFC said that signals radioed to the NOAA-E environment satellite had stabilized it, apparently solving the attitude-control problems it had developed after launch March 28 from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A team of experts from government and industry drew up instructions for the corrections that resulted in complete recovery, according to Gerald W. Longanecker, project manager. The satellite carried six environmental-monitoring devices and one search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking (SARSAT) experiment, the latter for use in locating and rescuing victims of plane crashes and ships in distress. Launched on a U.S. Air Force Atlas E, NOAA-E went into near-perfect orbit but was found to be in the wrong attitude after reaching a 450-nautical-mile altitude; it was in a spin every 17 minutes instead of pointing its sensors and antennas toward Earth. The correcting signals stopped the tumble and allowed the control system to acquire Earth lock. (NASA Release 83-61) Tass later said that “deviations from the planned rendezvous program” canceled plans to dock with the orbital station, and the crew made a soft landing near the city of Arkalyk April 22 at 5:29 p.m. Moscow time. Radio Moscow had said this would be the first time a piloted craft docked with such a huge space complex. Although North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) radar showed the Soyuz and Salyut in close orbits, the Kettering satellite-monitoring group in England said that the mission did not proceed as expected and that communications between the cosmonauts and ground control were “very terse.” This was the first failure of a Soyuz-T, a type in use for three years. (FBIS, Tass in English, Apr 20/83, Apr 22/83; Beijing Xinhua in English, Apr 22/83; WPost, Apr 19/83, A-20; Apr 22/83, A-l; Apr 23/83, A-l)
NASA launched NOAA-E for NOAA from the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) on an Atlas vehicle at 7:52 a.m. EST into an orbit with 829-kilometer apogee, 806-kilometer perigee, 101.2-minute period, and 98.8° inclination. Called NOAA 8 in orbit, it carried search and rescue (SAR) equipment to locate signals from emergency beacons on planes and ships. An hour later, when the satellite came over Vandenberg Air Force Base for the first time, malfunction of a control device was rotating the spacecraft “like the propeller on a plane,” said a NASA spokesman. As it solar panels could not fix on the Sun, the spacecraft was losing the power needed to make corrections and was put into a safety mode to prevent further discharge of battery power. A similar problem occured in 1978 with TIROS-N and was corrected in two weeks. (NASA MOR E-615-83-04 [prelaunch] Mar 23/83; NY Times, Mar 29/83, A-14; W Times, Mar 29/83, 3; A/D, Mar 30/83, 171; P Inq, Mar 30/83, 10; Spacewam SPX-354, Apr 26/83)
The Soviet Union launched from Baykonur two interplanetary spacecraft, Venera 15 on June 2 on Venera 16 on June 7. The spacecrafts first went into “an intermediate orbit of an artificial earth satellite”; then, an onboard engine sent them toward Venus, where they were scheduled to arrive in October. Venera 15 had no descent module, indicating that “a landing is not being planned” and that the spacecraft would conduct atmospheric and surface research from orbit. Tass said that Venera 16, “by its design and mission,” was “analogous to” Venera 15. Tass also mentioned the lapse of more than 20 years since the Soviet Union began its interplanetary program with the launch in February 1961 of Venera 1, which reached a heliocentric orbit. First probe to land on Venus was Venera 3, in March 1966; Venera 4 landed gradually and sent data on the planet’s atmosphere for 93 minutes. Venera 13 and Venera 14 soft-landed in March .1982 and returned photographs of the landing site. (FBIS, MoscDomTvSvc in Russian, Tass in English, June 2&7/83)
Three new companies entering the “race to commercialize space” would launch Space America, a venture to provide remote-sensing satellite data services by 1986, the Washington Post reported. The companies were two in Washington, D.C.—American Science & Technology and AEROS Data Corporation—and Space Services Inc. (SSI) of Houston, which developed the first U.S. privately funded and operated launch vehicle. SSI would be managing partner. All three companies were less than three years old, privately owned, and “actively seeking capital,” according to Donald “Deke” Slayton, former astronaut and president of SSI. The group hoped to put into polar orbit a privately owned satellite built by Honeywell Inc. and Ball Aerospace Systems with sensors to collect data on Earth resources such as agriculture, mineral deposits, and water. (W Post, Sept 8/83, D-1)
NASA launched Galaxy 1, first of a series of three wholly owned Hughes communications satellites, at 7:08 p.m. EDT from ESMC on a Delta into a transfer orbit before stationing it at 135 °W to serve the cable television industry. Hughes had sold its 24 operating transponders on a noncommon-carrier basis to ensure purchasers a stable source of programming. NASA would launch the other Galaxies in September 1983 and June 1984. (NASA MOR M-492-215-83-01 [prelaunch] June 27/83; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 29/83)
NASA launched the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) at 6:17 p.m. PST from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Delta into polar orbit with 883.6-kilometer apogee, 856.6-kilometer perigee, 100.1-inclination, and 102.4-minute period. A joint endeavor of NASA, Netherlands Aerospace Agency, and U.K. Science and Engineering Research Council, IRAS, was a 2,360-pound spacecraft carrying a 22-inch Cassegrain telescope cryogenically cooled by a helium tank to measure infrared radiation in four bands between 8 and 119 microns. At low temperature the detectors would have the sensitivity needed for an all-sky survey of the “heat signatures” of stars. The $80 million mission might find up to a million infrared sources not previously detected, filling “a significant gap in the electromagnetic spectrum between visible light and radio waves.. .about which we have no or very little information,” according to Dr. Dale Compton, telescope manager at Ames Research Center (ARC). IRAS was designed to cover about 95% of the sky over the next sixth months and produce the first comprehensive catalog of infrared objects. The United States built the telescope and the rocket and was managing operations through the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The Netherlands built the spacecraft and three other scientific instruments. The United Kingdom would handle the tracking and collect the data. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 3/83; NASA wkly SSR, Jan 27/83; Spacewarn SPX-352; NY Times, Jan 27/83, A-7)
NASA launched HiLat (U.S. Air Force satellite P83-1) from WSMC on a Scout at 11:37 a.m. EDT into an orbit with 834-kilometer apogee, 765-kilometer perigee, 100.9-minute period, and 82° inclination. The 248-pound HiLat would obtain data on propagation effects on plasma distortion on radar and other communications and baseline data for interpreting the distortions. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 29/83; NASA MOR M-490-604-83-01 [prelaunch] June 22/83)
The Nimbus 5 Earth-observation satellite would end operations as of April 1, said Dr. S.G. Tilford of NASA’s environmental observation division. Launched in 1972, Nimbus 5 would probably reenter after the year 2000. Its last on;bOard tape recorder stopped in November 1982. The U.S. Navy, the only user of its data, would get this information from Nimbus 7. (NASA Release 83-40)
NASA said that IRAS had completed its primary mission objective at 12:30 p.m. EDT by conducting an all-sky survey and giving an opportunity for double confirmation of sources. Survey data had a few “holes” because of Sun-Earth-Moon observation constraints and an anomaly that occurred early in June. NASA had begun another survey to fill in the gaps and confirm earlier observations; end-of-life would come early in January. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept. 1/83) 17-minute hold because of thunderstorms passing through. “Tropical disturbance” Barry had moved ashore August 26 about 40 miles south of the Cape and could have turned into a hurricane, but it bypassed the launch-pad area. This third flight of Shuttle Challenger was commanded by Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly, who was copilot of the second Shuttle mission two years ago; pilot for STS-8 was Navy Cdr. Daniel C. Brandenstein. Mission specialists were Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner; civilian physician William E. Thornton, oldest American in space; and U.S. Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford II, first black American in space. This was also the first night Shuttle launch. NASA was testing its ability to launch at night from KSC, where weather was often more favorable than in the daytime. The DOD wanted a demonstration of night launch in case of needing the Shuttle for a military-mission on short notice. And Challenger was carrying into orbit a $43 million India satellite to forecast weather and relay radio, television, and phone calls that required a night launch for proper location, NASA’s first manned night launch had been December 7, 1972, when Apollo 17 lifted off at KSC on its way to the Moon; that launch had been visible to people in the Great Smoky Mountains more than 500 miles away. NASA also planned to land STS-8 at night, another first, for the same reasons it launched at night. Landing would be at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave desert of California instead of KSC, because of the longer runway and the greater probability of good weather there in midsummer. This would be the first time the public would not be allowed at the landing; NASA did not want “hundreds or even thousands of moving automobiles with headlights” to confuse Shuttle pilots descending out of total darkness toward the concrete runway. About three hours after reaching orbit, the crew began communicating with mission control through the properly relocated $100 million TDRS launched from STS-6 in April, instead of using ground stations out of reach during most of their orbit. The first major task of the STS-8 mission would be deployment of INSAT-B, and the crew spent most of August 30 checking the performance of the 50-foot mechanical arm in the Shuttle’s cargo bay that had entitled “a slightly arthritic reaction” in its elbow. The arm would grapple and move a heavy dummy-spacecraft package later in the mission in rehearsal for future release or retrieval of satellites. INSAT-B was launched over the Indian Ocean August 31 at 7:49 GMT and successfully put into transfer orbit, according to the Indian Space Research Organization, which said that all on-board systems were working well and that the solar panel was partly deployed. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Aug 30/83; FBIS, Delhi DomSvc in English, Aug 31/83; NY Times, Aug 3/83, A-10; Aug 31/83, A-l; WPost, Aug 25/83, A-8; Aug 26/83, A-10; Aug 30/83, A-l; Aug 31/83, A-8; USA Today, Aug 30/83, 1A, 3A; W Times, Aug 30/83, 12A; Aug 30/83, 1A; Intervia, Aug 83, 817) During August: NASA said that it would cease in September to operate Nimbus 6, launched June 12, 1975, for tracking balloons floating around the Earth to gather data on winds in the tropical and mid-latitudes. This system was the forerunner in one-way platform-to-satellite data collection that had provided worldwide ocean temperatures from buoys, tracked animal migration on land and sea, and kept in contact with numerous adventures, such as the crew of the Eagle I balloon rescued after it crashed in the Atlantic and a Japanese who crossed the North Pole by dogsled from Canada. Nimbus 6 had lost attitude-control capability in October 1982 when two momentum wheels failed with an accompanying severe power reduction. It would remain in polar orbit at 600 miles altitude, reentering the atmosphere some time after the year 2500, NASA said. (NASA Release 83-126)
President Reagan approved a joint resolution designating 1983 the “Bicentennial of Air and Space Flight.” His proclamation recalled the first manned flight in history, in a hot-air balloon that traveled 5 Vi miles after its launch on Novemeber 21, 1783, over Paris, France. He said that the commemoration would be “an opportunity to increase public awareness of our na-tioh’s achievements in aviation and space flight and to rededicate ourselves to the spirit of excellence which has brought us so far so fast.” (Text, Jan 3/83) The Soviet Union confirmed loss of its control over Cosmos 1402, launched to observe U.S. naval operations from an orbit of 64.9° inclination that covered most of North America and all of China, Africa, South America, and Australia, as well as part of the Soviet Union. The danger lay not in the possibility of an explosion but in the radioactivity of the nuclear fuel core if the craft should come down in a densely populated area. The foreign press had warned that Cosmos 1402 had “separated into individual fragments on a command from earth.” The nuclear power unit aboard it was a matter of concern to all other nations; the United States had “expressed its concern to Moscow” that the object and its TOO pounds of uranium would crash on" the Earth like the other. (FBIS, Xinhua in English, Jan 7/83; Pravda in Russian, Jan 8/83; Tass in English, Jan 15/83) Normally, said the United Press, when an ocean-surveillance satellite such as 1402 exhausted its 4-to-7-month life expectancy it would be raised and “parked” at a high orbit altitude “for centuries.” The Tass news agency said January 7 that Cosmos 1402 had been “divided into separate fragments by commands from earth in order to isolate the active part of the reactor, which ensured its Complete combustion in the atmosphere strata.” Department of Defense (DOD) sources said January 10 that one piece had burned up in the atmosphere, but two larger sections were still descending—those holding the reactor, biggest and heaviest part of the 6,000-pound satellite. At the current rate of descent, the parts could enter the atmosphere in the week beginning January 23, sources said. Tass reported January 24 that “the main part of the satellite structure” had reentered over the Indian Ocean at 1:10 a.m. Moscow time: the fuel core was NTKMHU m preceding page blank not filmed forecast to enter between February 3 and 8 [see Feb. 7]. (NY Times, Jan 6/83, A-l; Jan 22/83, 9; Jan 31/83, A-25; WPost, Jan 7/83, A-21; Jan 8/83, A-ll; Jan 11/83, A-9; Jan 20/83, A-2; Jan 24/83, A-l; Tass in English, Jan 7/83, Jan 24/83)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
