Observations by the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) revealed what appeared to be a variable gas cloud surrounding the star Beta Pictoris. This was the first evidence of gas around the star as well as the large dust particles previously observed from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) and ground-based telescopes, the JSC Roundup reported. Many astronomers considered Beta Pictoris, in the constellation Pictor in the southern hemisphere, a leading candidate for another planetary system. Dr. Yoji Kondo, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) IUE project scientist, and Dr. F.C. Bruhweiler of Catholic University jointly made the observations in December and said the coexisting dust and gas clouds were consistent with scientific theories of planetary system formation. "Many stars like Beta Pictoris show evidence of being surrounded by clouds of gas at ultraviolet wavelengths," said Kondo. "If such data imply that these stars also are surrounded by a protoplanetary gaseous cloud with a disk of dust particles, then many nearby stars may have evolving planetary systems. That's exciting," he concluded, "because these stars would offer a unique opportunity to see the way a solar system might appear in formation." Theories of planet formation had generally predicted that planets evolved from large stellar clouds of dust and gas that gradually condensed into orbiting planetary bodies, a theory strengthened by the IUE observations. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 3)
The expected January 23 flight of the orbiter Discovery would be the first of 15 Space Shuttle flights devoted wholly to military purposes, Science reported, increasing the visibility of the military role in the program. Discovery would carry a reconnaissance satellite designed to intercept a wide variety of electronic communications, radar signals, and telemetry from intercontinental ballistic missile tests. After several orbits, the Space Shuttle would discharge the satellite from its payload bay and a booster rocket would push it to an altitude of about 35,000 km, where it would "park" over the USSR. NASA estimated about 30% of Space Shuttle flights over the next 10 years would be military missions, although NASA's civilian budget had paid almost all basic costs of the Space Shuttle and associated launch and servicing equipment (estimated at more than $15 billion). In addition, military needs had dictated that the Space Shuttle have unusually large wings, rugged thermal protection, an unusually large payload bay, and unusually powerful engines; however, the Pentagon had borne none of these added costs. Although some NASA expenditures were for items serving both military and civilian functions, such as improved engines for both the orbiter and a rocket booster and onboard experiments in flight aerodynamics, plasma physics, astronomy, biology, chemistry, and radiation, NASA paid for all these projects without any Department of Defense assistance. (Science, Jan 18/85, 276)
Li Xue, vice minister of the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) astronautics industry, indicated in London recently that the PRC wanted to compete with the U.S. and West European countries for rocket launches of other countries' satellites, FBIS, Shanghai City Service in Mandarin reported. He said the PRC had not decided to launch charges or how to market the service, but it was ready to talk to western countries needing launch services. (FBIS, Shanghai City Service in Mandarin, Feb 17/85)
NASA announced it had scheduled the Spacelab 3 mission, a European-developed and NASA-operated space laboratory, for launch on STS 51 —B no earlier than April 29, 1985. Spacelab 3 was a microgravity mission with 15 investigations in five scientific disciplines: materials science, life sciences, fluid mechanics, atmospheric science, and astronomy. Two of the investigations—one in materials science, mercury iodide crystal growth [France], and one in astronomy, very wide field camera [France]—had flown aboard Spacelab 1. Scientists in the U.S. sponsored 12 of the investigations, and an ionization measurements investigation was from India. Important new hardware developments in materials science, fluid dynamics, and life sciences would be on the flight, and researchers had designed the experimental hardware for multiple flight use. NASA had selected two payload specialists with expertise in crystal growth and fluid mechanics for the flight. The Spacelab 3 configuration consisted of a long tunnel, a long module, and a mission peculiar equipment support structure (MPESS). The module PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	373 and tunnel would provide a pressurized shirtsleeve environment within which the crew could operate. The MPESS also supported experiments that did not require a habitable crew environment. Common payload support equipment used on Spacelab 3 was the scientific airlock that could extend from the module into space for experiments requiring exposure to the space environment and flight crew hands-on activities. There were three experiments on materials science: the fluid experiment system (FES), the vapor crystal growth system (VCGS), and the French materials science experiment. In fluid mechanics, the crew would perform fundamental experiments in the drop dynamics module (DDM) to test theoretical predictions of drop behavor in a near-zero gravity environment. The geophysical fluid flow cell (GFFC) experiment would study fluid motion in a microgravity environment. The six investigations in life sciences included four in the Ames Research Center's (ARC) life sciences payload system to verify a new facility for housing and studying animals in the space environment, observing the animals' reactions to that environment, and evaluating operations and procedures relative to in-flight animal care; the urine monitoring investigation to monitor crew water intake and to prepare urine samples for postflight analysis; and the autogenic feedback training experiment to test a technique to control space adaptation syndrome. The four investigations in atmospheric science and astronomy were the ionization states of solar and galactic cosmic ray heavy nuclei that would use a new detector system to determine the composition and intensity of ions emitted toward the earth from the sun and other galactic sources; the French astronomy investigation to make an ultraviolet survey of the celestial sphere in a study of large-scale phenomena such as clouds within our galaxy; the auroral observations experiment to observe and record the visual characteristics of pulsating and flickering auroras; and atmospheric trace molecules spectroscopy to examine on a global scale the composition and variability of the upper atmosphere. In addition to the Spacelab 3 experiments, NASA had scheduled two GetAway Specials for the flight—a Northern Utah University satellite (NUSAT) and a global low-orbit message relay satellite (GLOMR). NASA would enclose each in a canister mounted in the orbiter payload bay for deployment near the end of the mission following completion of Spacelab operations. (NASA MOR E-977-51-B-02 [prelaunch] April 17/85)
During Space Shuttle mission 51-1 astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher spent seven hours and eight minutes, a new record for a spacewalk, in the first stage of repair of the Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. During the walk, they retrieved the 15,000-lb. satellite, fastened Discovery's mechanical arm onto it, disarmed its Minuteman rocket motor, and exposed its electronic connections. Later Fisher said he could see no evidence of what caused the satellite to go dead after astronauts deployed it in April. "There is no evidence of debris on anything that would cause a problem. It's clean as a whistle," He said. Van Hoften and Fisher were outside the Space Shuttle from about 8:00 a.m. to shortly after 3:00 p.m. EDT, breaking by one minute the spacewalk record set April 1984 by van Hoften and George Nelson when they repaired the scientific satellite Solar Max. Although the astronauts accomplished more than half of what was needed in the salvage mission, they were planning a four-hour spacewalk on September 1 to finish the job. They would put a "space blanket" over the engine bell that served as the Minuteman motor's rocket nozzle to trap more of the sun's heat to warm it, because Leasat-3 had been in the cold of space so long that its rocket motor was too cold to fire correctly. Then the astronauts would install a vertical bar along the 20-foot length of the satellite to serve as a handle for van Hoften to spin the satellite and push it away from Discovery into space. It would then be seven days before the satellite acquired enough power to thaw its liquid-fuel tanks and almost two months before the solid-fuel rocket motor was warm enough for ground controllers to command it to ignite. (W Post, Sept 1/85, A5)
New observations supported the prediction that Saturn's satellite Hyperion was tumbling wildly rather than rotating with a regular predictable period, Science reported. In 1983 Jack Wisdom, who was currently at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his colleagues predicted that the combination of Hyperion's odd potato shape and the stretching of its orbit by the gravitational tugs of the larger satellite Titan would prevent Hyperion from rotating regularly. Instead of keeping one face toward Saturn, as the moon faced earth, Hyperion would rotate chaotically, tumbling one way then another, slowing down and speeding up, in a fashion impossible to predict in any detail from its preceding behavior. Since then, Peter Thomas of Cornell University and his colleagues reported analyses of the brightness of Hyperion in Voyager images that indicated a regular 13-day period of rotation during the 61 days of Voyager-2's encounter with Saturn. Jack Wisdom and Stanton Peale of the University of California, Santa Barbara, countered that determining a period from 14 brightness observations scattered over several supposed rotations could not determine whether the rotation was chaotic or not. They found many periods by similarly sampling a numerically generated chaotic light curve. The University of Texas's Richard Binzel, Jacklyn Green, and Chet Opal reported at a recent meeting of astronomers that the light curve of Hyperion they observed in April was "highly inconsistent with a 13.1-day rotation period." On April 16 and 17, Hyperion's magnitude was at a maximum for the 14-day observing period; it faded by 1 magnitude by April 21 and was no brighter 13 days after the first observations. It should have become 1 magnitude or 2.5 times brighter if it had a 13-day period. Although the observations did not prove chaotic rotation, the group said, "they provide strong evidence in favor of the hypothesis." To say much more about Hyperion's rotation, astronomers would have to observe Hyperion nightly for many weeks, something that those assigning telescope time had been reluctant to permit. (Science, Nov 29/85, 1027)
Kenneth Adelman, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, told a U.S. House foreign affairs subcommittee that the U.S. should not change its military plans, such as delaying a test of its new antisatellite weapon, to assist in negotiating an arms control agreement, the Washington Post reported. Adelman argued that testing "would not impair" negotiations and "can constitute an incentive to the Soviet Union to reach agreements on a wide range of issues." Although the Air Force had set September 13 as its first test of the antisatellite weapon against a target in space, congressional sources said the Reagan Administration might step up its test plan because of the negotiations or the November summit meeting. As of mid-July, the Air Force had no plans to test the weapon in September, because it had returned both the weapon and its instrumented target to their manufacturer for repairs expected to take through October. Thus when House-Senate conferees met in July to iron out differences on the 1987 defense spending bill, the Pentagon agreed to a provision that limited the Air Force to three tests against a target in space through the end of FY 86. "They said they would not have a test before the new fiscal year began in October," one conferee recalled. Pentagon sources said Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and President Reagan agreed in early August to test the weapon against an old U.S. satellite "to show resolve." Critics of the weapon, including four members of Congress, had filed suit in U.S. District Court in Washington seeking to block the test, arguing that Reagan had not met a congressional requirement that he certify he was negotiating "in good faith" to get an agreement with the Soviets limiting such weapons. Oral arguments in the case were set for September 12. Rep. George Brown Jr. (D-Calif.), one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit, told the subcommittee the presidential certification was "less than candid" and "circumvented the intent and will of the Congress." Brown also criticized the weapon, which was two years behind schedule, saying that the Pentagon talked about "how vital to the national security the system is, right up to the day they cancel it." (W Post, Sept 12/85, A26)
Francis Scobee would command orbiter Atlantis flight 51—L in November to deploy the third NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and relaunch one of the communications satellites retrieved during flight 51-A; Michael Smith would pilot; Judith Resnick, Ellison Onizuka, and Ronald McNair would serve as mission specialists. Michael Coats would command the orbiter Columbia flight 61-C in December carrying Western Union's Westar 7 and RCA's Satcom KU-2 satellites for launch, 3M Corp.'s Material Sciences Laboratory 3, and the EASE/ACCESS space manufacturing experiment. The pilot would be John Blaha; mission specialists, Anna Fisher, Norman Thagard, and Robert Springer. NASA also assigned Vance Brand, commander, and S. David Griggs, pilot, for flight 61-D/Spacelab 4 in January 1986, and Jon McBride, commander, and Richard Richards, pilot, for flight 61-E/Astro 1 in March 1986. (NASA Release 85-14)
19 a.m. today a three-stage, Taurus-Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket that left several colored clouds high over the mid-eastern U.S. coastline. The objective of the experiment was to provide baseline data on expected yields, vapor expansion velocities, and other parameters for the chemical release canisters for the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES), scheduled for launch in July 1987 from the Space Shuttle. The 157-lb. payload ejected balls of greenish-white titanium-boron-barium and barium-cupric-oxide at an altitude of 230 statute miles, one as the rocket ascended and one as the payload descended. The barium clouds rapidly expanded, while ejecting barium ions along the earth's magnetic field to form a visible streak more than 62 miles long. Another red titaniumboronlithium cloud released at 325 miles expanded to a diameter of several hundred kilometers in less than a minute. Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Range Control Center received reports of cloud sightings from as far north as Waterville, Maine, as far south as Wilmington, North Carolina, and as far west as South Bend, Indiana. (NASA Release 85-148; GSFC Release 85-39) Upper Atmospheric Research
NASA announced that Sultan Salman Abdelazize Al-Saud, an Arabsat payload specialist scheduled to fly on the 51-G 7-day Space Shuttle mission in June, would conduct 70mm photography over Saudi Arabia, 35mm photography of a fluids experiment, and would participate in the French posture experiment. Al-Saud's flight was part of a reimbursable agreement with the Arab Satellite Communications Organization covering the launch of the Arabsat 1B communications satellite. Al-Saud would use the 70mm camera to take pictures on daylight orbital passes over Saudi Arabia and the 35mm camera to document such phenomena as surface tension effects on mixed fluids in the absence of gravity. His other activities would include photography of the new moon in a lunar crescent observation and assisting the French payload specialist as a test subject in the French experiment. At a May 28 news conference at Johnson Space Center, Al-Saud said his flight was bound to improve diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the Islamic world, the Washington Post reported. "You will have 800 million Moslems and 155 million Arabs glued to their TV sets watching an American spaceship carrying an Arab into space," he commented. NASA selected Al-Saud, nephew of Saudi's King Fahd, from hundreds of Saudi applicants. He had logged more than 1,000 hours in jet aircraft. Other crew for the mission were Daniel Brandenstein, commander; John Creighton, pilot; Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel, mission specialists; and Patrick Baudry, French payload specialist. Backup payload specialist for Arabsat was Abdulmohsen Hamad Al-Bassam. (NASA Release 85-69; WPbst, May 29/85, A12)
The USSR today launched a secret rocket from its Tyuratam launch site that may have been an antisatellite weapons test or the first launch of a new Soviet rocket that used liquid hydrogen fuel instead of kerosene, the Washington Post reported. The rocket later broke into three pieces, the largest of which was three feet long, the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) said. One piece fell out of orbit June 24 and burned up in the atmosphere; the two other pieces came down June 28. The objects were in an orbit 121 miles high at the lowest point and 215 miles at the highest. The orbit was inclined at 64.4°, a course only slightly off the one the Soviets use to test new rockets and satellites, because it passed directly over a highly instrumented corridor in the Soviet Union. U.S. intelligence sources said they were baffled by the small size of the three pieces. One source suggested the launch may have been a test of a new Soviet rocket that used liquid hydrogen fuel that resulted in the launch vehicle exploding with most of the debris falling to earth out of radar contact. Another source speculated it might have been a test of a new antisatellite weapon that failed or was deliberately blown up. The June 21 mystery launch followed that same day the launches of Cosmos 1663 and Progress 24. The Soviets launched Cosmos 1664 June 26, resuming their numbered Cosmos series after skipping the June 21 "noname" launch. NORAD gave the secret launch the designation 1985-53-A. (The "53" stood for the 53rd object put into space that year; "A" meant NORAD classified it as a payload, not a rocket launcher. NORAD gave the suffix "B" to launch vehicles that went into orbit.) (IV Post, July 5/85, A2) Space Program
NASA announced that an eight-member review team at Goddard Space Flight Center concluded that the failure of the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) to deploy from its canister during the April 1985 Space Shuttle 51-B mission was due to the failure of two switches designed to activate bolt cutters on the canister. On June 7 the team would issue a final report along with recommendations for a solution to the problem. The Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) along with GLOMR would be the first satellites successfully deployed from canisters aboard the Space Shuttle. The door of the GLOMR canister opened, indicating normal battery operation, but the bolt cutters would not activate. After a second deployment attempt, NASA decided to return GLOMR to earth for evaluation. (NASA Release 8585)
Arnold Engineering Development Center completed the fourth and final qualification test firing of the Payload Assist Module-D (PAM-D) II rocket motor, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The PAM-D II featured increased propellant capacity (7200 lb.) over its predecessor, the PAM-D (4400 lb.), and could boost both military and commercial communications satellites into geosynchronous orbit about 22,300 miles above earth. A Space Shuttle would deliver the motor and its payload into space at an altitude of 160 to 180 miles, where the PAM-D II satellite package, spinning at 30 to 85 rpm, would spring-eject from the orbiter's open bay doors. At a safe distance from the orbiter, the PAM-D II, which served as a perigee kick motor, would ignite and propel its payload more than 22,000 miles higher. PAM-D II would then separate from the payload, which was positioned by its own apogee motors activited by signals from earth. AEDC test-fired the motor in one of its high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated pressure altitude of approximately 100,000 feet while spinning it about its thrust axis at 70 rpm. Test objectives were to determine ballistic performance and to take plume (exhaust) radiation measurements, which were important in determining if the exhaust radiation would damage the motor case or satellite. With the fourth test completed, the Air Force considered the motor ready for production and flight. Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division was the rocket's manufacturer. NASA had tentatively scheduled PAM-D ll's first flight for November 1985 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger to place the RCA SATCOM satellite into orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, July 12/85, 7)
The Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger made a three-mile, six hour journey from the launch pad back to a hanger as a result of mission cancellation due to problems with the intended payload, a tracking and data relay satellite, the NY Times reported. NASA would replace Challenger on the launch pad with the orbiter Discovery on about March 15 and would combine elements of the scrubbed mission with some from Discovery's flight originally scheduled for March 22. Officials had selected Discovery for the mission because they decided it could be modified more easily and quickly than Challenger. (NYT, Mar 6/85, B10)
In assessing the status of the Syncom IV-3 (Leasat 3) satellite that was drifting in low-earth orbit after its apogee kick motor failed to push it into proper orbit [see Apr. 18], aerospace engineers said astronauts might be able to salvage the satellite, the Washington Times reported. Payload specialists originally believed it would be too dangerous to return the satellite to earth on the Space Shuttle because of the nearly six tons of highly volatile rocket fuel it carried. Jerome Hammack, a spacecraft safety operations expert, said deactivating the satellite's electronic systems would significantly reduce the chance of stray sparks igniting the fuel, most of which would turn to gas upon descent. To ensure that there was no power going to any of the electrical circuits, a spacewalking astronaut would have to cut power circuits running to the satellite's batteries and solar power cells. However, NASA would mount a rescue attempt only if Hughes Communications Inc., Leasat 3's manufacturer, and Hughes' insurance underwriters agreed to a salvage contract. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
The Australian minister of defense, Mr. Beazley, confirmed that Australia would help test a new U.S. satellite system called "Teal Ruby" that was associated with the space defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), FBIS, Melbourne Overseas Service in English reported. Mr. Beazley stressed, however, that Australia's involvement was not directly related to SDI and would end the following year. He said the U.S. would use Australian defense vessels and aircraft to test the satellite system using infrared rays and that the project had some benefits for Australia over the long term because of that country's surveillance problems. He pointed out that infrared sensing was a good way to maintain surveillance of countries with electronic warfare systems. However, the Australian Democrats's spokesman, Senator Mason, condemned the decision, saying the research was an essential part of the SDI system and that the Australian government was guilty of hyprocrisy in agreeing to participate in the testing. (FBIS, Melbourne Overseas Service in English, May 10/85)
NASA Administrator James Beggs and U.R. Rao, chairman of the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), signed a launch services agreement covering the reimbursable launch of INSAT 1C around mid-1986 from the Space Shuttle, the Marshall Star reported. A multipurpose satellite, INSAT 1C would provide communications and meteorological services to India. In addition, the two agreed that an ISRO scientist/engineer would serve as a payload specialist during that Space Shuttle mission and discussed other possible NASA/ISRO cooperative activities in space applications and space science. (Marshall Star, Jan 23/85, 4)
The Mutual Broadcasting System announced plans to use its excess satellite space to deliver messages at rates low enough to compete with the postal service, the Washington Post reported. The company estimated that telecommunications business from the new Mutual Satellite Services division would generate 50% of its revenue by 1990. Mutual's principal business was the Mutual Radio Network, which owned receiving dishes at more than 700 locations nationwide. Mutual planned starting in mid-1985 to send audio and data transmissions over a little-used portion of the FM radio spectrum to specially tuned radios in clients' offices. Cassette tape recorders attached to the radios would receive voice communications and send them to high-speed printers. Called MultiComm, the system would allow any organization to create its own private network for sending encrypted audio, data, printed material, or computer software to a number of locations simultaneously. Senders could relay a 300- to 450-word message to 500 receivers for 25 to 30 cents per recipient, compared to a first-class letter at 22 cents. Other electronic mail systems use a wire hookup between the company providing the satellite link and the preceding page blank not filmed PACT. % Ih ...INTENTION ALLY BLAKE message recipient; Mutual would provide the first system in which the signal was transmitted by radio. (W Post, Jan 25/85, D2) During January. A six-man Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) team at the South Pole on December 14, 1984, had taken turns talking to colleagues in Greenbelt, Maryland, using one of two unprecedented satellite communications links the group had installed over the previous month, the Goddard News reported. "The conversation was amazingly audible," said Tony Com-beriate, a GSFC communications expert and member of the South Pole satellite data-link project team. "The folks at Goddard sounded like they were just a few feet away." Although voice communications capabilities from the South Pole using Ham radio had existed for some time, the systems were weather dependent and usually very noisy. The GSFC group used the 17-year-old Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-3) to establish the two-way voice link. The key breakthrough was installation of the scientific data link, which enabled daily transmittal of information from the Pole, across Antarctica, and to the U.S. Before system installation, scientific data from the pole was stored during the region's winter months and shipped out by aircraft from November through February. The new system permitted transmission of high-quality scientific data by using three existing polar orbiting satellites (a 4th was scheduled soon). Each satellite passed the pole about 14 times daily and relayed data to McMurdo Sound, which retransmitted it to a geosynchronous satellite, which in turn transmitted it to the U.S. Since the Pole signals were too far below the horizon to be acquired by normal communications satellites, the relay route was necessary. Researchers had previously considered a communications link from the South Pole, but decided it was too costly and impractical, perhaps taking several years and costing an estimated $35 million. The GSFC approach had cost about $250,000 and taken nine months, because it used existing satellites, excess equipment, and had support from several organizations. Scientists could receive daily transmission of reliable data on global weather patterns, the magnetospheric cusp, upper atmosphere, and glacio-logical and seismic studies to name a few. The link also could evolve into a data collection network for many of the unmanned observatories (ground-based satellites) scattered throughout Antarctica. (Goddard News, Jan 85, 6)
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
INTELSAT'S Assembly of Parties, representatives of INTELSAT member nations, rejected a proposal by 21 nations that all INTELSAT parties and signatories boycott interconnection discussions with private companies planning to launch international satellites and that the U.S. reconsider its favorable policy toward non-INTELSAT satellites, Aviation Week reported. INTELSAT signatories, telecommunications organizations that operated ground facilities and represented INTELSAT member nations in organization management, had resolved in April 1983 that diversion of international traffic would threaten INTELSAT'S viability. A resolution adopted by the assembly urged all signatories and parties to "take into account" the boycott and the signatories' economic-viability resolution and to express opinions on separate systems to the U.S. and at the upcoming INTELSAT assembly. U.S. officials had joined the consensus after objectionable language was deleted, but said naming a specific nation in the resolution could set a bad precedent. As one official noted, "The criticism of the U.S. we expected turned out to be expressions of concern by developing countries that competition could mean increased rates for them." PACTjlL __INT£NTtONAHt SUNK The assembly asked the Board of Governors to submit recommendations for separate-system coordination to the assembly as soon as possible, as the U.S.'s Federal Communication Commission was processing five applications for private satellite launches. (AvWk, Feb 11/85, 29)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press conference, reported that President Reagan had requested a NASA budget of just under $7.9 billion, reflecting the President's determination to continue America's space leadership and to achieve the goal of a permanently manned space station. The budget covered some unforeseen items not addressed by 1985 budgetplanning estimates, including the Congressionally mandated development of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), scheduled for launch in 1989, and acceleration of the advanced turboprop propulsion system for FY 87 flight testing. The budget contained four major appropriations requests: a total of $2.9 billion for R&D, which included funds for previously approved space science and applications programs, development of ACTS, initiation of the orbiting maneuvering vehicle program, and promotion of commercial use of space; $3.5 billion for space flight, control, and data communications to support Space Shuttle production, operations, and tracking and data acquisition (a decrease of $92 million from FY 85's budget plan); $149 million for facilities construction (down $1 million from FY 85); and $1.3 billion for research and program management. (NASA release Feb. 4/85; NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/ 85)
Reps. Les AuCoin (D-Ore.) and Norman Dicks (D-Wash.) sent a letter to Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger warning that "Congress would not excuse any attempt by the Department of Defense to circumvent" a congressional ban on antisatellite weapon testing, the Washington Post reported. The warning came after the Post reported that a DOD official discussed plans to continue development of a $4 billion U.S. antisatellite weapon despite a week-old law that banned tests against an object in space as long as the Soviets did not test such a system. The DOD official said a possibility under study was to fire a test weapon against "a point in space" rather than at two targets put into orbit December 12 [see U.S. Air Force/NASA and DOD, Dec. 12]. The Air Force "won't do anything in direct violation" of the congressional language attached to an omnibus spending bill signed into law by President Reagan, but "we will find a way to go ahead," the DOD official had said. Although the congressional action stopped testing, it did not halt the overall antisatellite program, for which Congress increased by $15 million a Pentagon request for $150 million in FY 86 to develop the system. The increase, a congressional aide said, was to show the Soviet Union that the U.S. program would be available for testing if Moscow broke its moratorium. The spending bill also had a special $5 million item for the Air Force "to carry out a research program to develop new and improved verification techniques to monitor compliance with any antisatellite weapon agreement that may be entered into by the U.S and the Soviet Union." Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said he hoped to bring arms-control supporters in the House together to discuss antisatellite weapons. The long-term goal of arms control, he said, was "to promote stability." In the antisatellite area, he added, that meant finding a way to make secure the superpowers' high-altitude satellites that monitored nuclear forces and provided early warning of an attack. (IV Post, Dec 28/85, A5, Dec 25/85, A1)
A controversy between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA [see Space Transportation System/Reve-nues, Feb. 25] appeared over when NOAA agreed to launch meteorological satellites (Metsats) into orbit in return for which NASA would give NOAA a discount for carrying the satellites into orbit aboard the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. A deal between NOAA and the Air Force that would have saved NOAA $90 million in launch costs never went through, in large part because NASA and NOAA began working behind the scenes to bury the hatchet, the Post said. The previous week NASA Administrator James Beggs sent Anthony Calio, NOAA administrator, a letter outlining a deal governing three Metsat launches starting in 1989. NASA agreed to share with NOAA the $80 million cost of modifying the Metsat for a Space Shuttle launch, to put a Metsat on a Space Shuttle within three months after NOAA asked for it, and to shave $6.5 million off the $105 million in feed NASA ordinarily would charge NOAA for the three launches. "We gave them a good price," Beggs said. "They're on the shuttle at what essentially is our cost for launching them." (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21)
NASA announced that students in classrooms throughout the continental U.S. would have an opportunity to observe various aspects of Space Shuttle mission 51—L and to listen, look, and learn from NASA's Teacher in Space, Christa McAuliffe, during her flight on Challenger. A few students would also be able to question McAuliffe about the mission. TV viewers with satellite dishes would be able to access the live lessons directly from the RCA satellite Satcom F-2R, Transponder 13. The Public Broadcasting Service, as a result of an agreement with NASA, would carry the live lessons via the satellite Westar IV, Transponder 12. PBS would offer the programs to member stations after requesting that they preempt regular instructional TV or classroom programming to carry the lessons live. McAuliffe would teach two lessons on the sixth day of the flight [see Space Transportation System/Civilian in Space Program, Oct. 2]; the first at approximately 11:00 a.m. EST, the second at about 1:00 p.m. EST. Classrooms with access to a satellite dish or cable network that carried NASA-Select would also be able to participate in a "Mission Watch," which covered aspects of the entire Space Shuttle flight from the day before launch through the conclusion of the mission. Barbara Morgan, backup for McAuliffe, would moderate the Mission Watch broadcast. (NASA Release 85-156)
NASA announced it was negotiating an agreement with Hughes Communications, Inc. (a wholly owned subsidiary of Hughes Aircraft Co.) to develop jointly plans for a Space Shuttle mission to attempt salvage of the Hughes Leasat 3 satellite then in orbit [see Space Transportation System/ Missions, Apr. 17], As a result of Hughes's negotiations with New York- and London-based underwriters insuring Leasat 3, Lloyd's and other European underwriters had agreed to proceed with the attempted salvage. Hughes was continuing negotiations with U.S. underwriters. Although the joint salvage effort would include activities never before attempted, it was based in large part on experience gained by NASA during its April 1984 repair of the Solar Maximum Mission satellite and its retrieval November 1984 of the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites. Pending an independent review of safety considerations by the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, the mission would occur during Space Shuttle flight 51 —L scheduled for no earlier than August 24. The salvage plan called for modification to the satellite by two of the Space Shuttle crew during rendezvous with it to permit ground command of the satellite. Ground command would then perform the activation sequence, normally performed by an automatic timer onboard the satellite. Modification made during the rendezvous would bypass all hardware likely to have caused the Leasat 3 failure. (Although Hughes had identified satellite activation components and circuits as the cause of the failure, the company had not determined, due to limited flight data, a specific cause of the failure.) In its dormant state, the satellite was experiencing temperatures well below the design and test limits of the liquid- and sold-fuel propellant systems, electronic units, batteries, and all other components. These factors, combined with the complexity of the modifications by the Space Shuttle crew, limited the chances of success. Hughes Communications, Inc. would contract with NASA for the costs, at that time under assessment, for preparation and execution of the mission. (NASA 85-77)
The information gathered by several Space Shuttle missions underscored the need for improved weather forecasting at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA along with the U.S. Air Force developed a plan to improve the quality of weather data available at KSC as well as the manner in which it was presented to the forecaster, Spaceport News reported. KSC officials recently held a ribbon cutting ceremony at the Range Control Center on Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to inaugurate the new Cape Canaveral Forecast Facility (CCFF), marking completion of a $3 million three-year effort by NASA, the Air Force, and contractor Pan Am World Services. The facility was the first important tool for improving the efficiency of the weather forecaster during launches and landings of the Space Shuttle. The facility housed a system called MIDDS, meteorological interactive data display system, which animated and overlaid data from various forecasting tools in color graphic displays. For example, a forecaster could begin with display of a current satellite picture; over that he could place a color enhanced radar display of shower activity. Next he might add a graphic presentation of indications from wind towers around KSC; and over that he could display locations of lightning potential as well as where lightning was striking cloud-to-ground. Motion added to the entire composite picture would illustrate trends in weather activity over a period of time. The system could overlay maps of upper wind data or barometric pressures collected from weather balloons or sounding rockets. The forecaster could also display figures from the data network of other weather stations around the country or the world. Although the console was at the Cape Canaveral facility, the new rotating antenna was at Patrick Air Force Base to compensate for the blind spot directly above the radar. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration radar located in Dayton Beach supplemented the Cape radar. A forecaster could call up a current graphic display of any official weather radar in the U.S. A lightning location and protection (LLP) system would show cloud-to-ground strikes up to 100 miles away, from which antennas were located ten miles north of the vehicle assembly building and at Melbourne Regional and Orlando International Airports. These antennas supplemented an existing network of 30 area field mills that detected lightning potential. NASA officials hoped within five years to have at the facility a clear air doppler radar, of which there were only six in the country. It would reduce the number of wind towers needed and improve forecasting efficiency. In the meantime, Space Shuttle weather officer Scott Funk said, "We haven't tapped the full potential of the new MIDDS system. Most weather forecasters have never seen anything like this. But there are still a number of potential capabilities the system has which we will add next year." (Spaceport News, Oct 11/ 85, 7)
A B-52 equipped with the Navstar global positioning system (GPS) flew a mission over the North Pole to prove the space-based radio navigation system's ability to navigate a polar mission, the Air Force System Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. The mission marked first time a preproduction Navstar GPS was used on a polar mission. The flight also tested the system's high-latitude navigation and compatibility with the aircraft's inertial navigation system (INS). Navstar GPS, when completed in the late 1980s, would use 18 GPS satellites in six orbital planes to give worldwide, three-dimensional position and velocity information to U.S. and allied land, sea, and airforces. To determine the position of an aircraft such as the 8-52, an onboard receiver would pick up signals from at least four satellites and measure the time it took each signal to travel from the satellite. The Navstar GPS on the B-52 aligned the inertial navigation system, giving the crew constant navigation during the 13-hour mission despite the GPS being available only three hours. The GPS and INS kept track of the aircraft's position at all times, even when crossing lines of longitude faster than the onboard screen could update them. Although testing of the Navstar GPS using the B-52 was almost complete, production integration was just beginning. The production phase of Navstar GPS required bringing the three segments—space, user, and control—to full operational capability. The Air Force expected two-dimensional capability in 1987, three-dimensional capability in 1988. (AFSC Newsreview, June 28/85,
President Reagan announced that March 31 through April 6, 1985, would be National Weather Satellite Week in a proclamation that said, "The United States' weather satellites have tracked the earth's weather since April 1, 1960, and have brought unique benefits to the American people and the world. "Weather satellites have proven exceptionally valuable in detecting, monitoring, and giving early warning of hurricanes, severe storms, flash floods, and other life-threatening natural hazards, on a local, national, and international basis. "The international weather satellite search-and-rescue program has saved over three hundred lives since 1982. The achievements of the scientific and aerospace communities in developing weather satellites have contributed significantly to the United States' leadership in satellite technology, international cooperation in space, and an integrated global weather forecasting system ..." The proclamation concluded that NASA "has been the world leader in the development of experimental and prototypical weather and environmental satellites. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has demonstrated outstanding leadership in the management of operational weather and environmental satellite systems and programs." (Admin, of Ronald Reagan, Proclamation 5314, Apr 5/85, 421)
Two groups of scientists, who were making observations at infrared and radio wavelengths, reported the strongest evidence so far of a supermassive black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy, the NY Times reported, strengthening the theory that very massive black holes existed in the cores of all galaxies. Astrophysicists had already deduced that black holes might be at the cores of some distant galaxies. Eight physicists and astronomers from the University of California, Berkeley, reported in the British journal Nature their infrared observations showing gas whipping around a core at 100,000 to 400,000 miles per hour. They concluded the gas was in the grip of a black hole four million times the mass of the sun. The group measured the velocities near the center of the core with sufficient precision to show that they decreased further out in a way to be expected if controlled by gravity from a single central object. They believed this ruled out a dense cluster of stars, proposed by some astronomers, because that gravity field would be more uniform. Radio astronomers using coordinated observations with antennas in West-ford, Massachusetts; Green Bank, West Virginia; Fort Davis, Texas; and Gold-stone, Hat Creek, and Owens Valley, California; and the 27 antennas of the very large array in New Mexico aimed the antennas at a radio source, a suspected black hole, almost directly in the center of the Milky Way called Sagittarius A (in the constellation Sagittarius). The results indicated that the source, despite its enormous mass and output of energy, was smaller than the orbit of Saturn. Donald Lyndon-Bell of Britain's Royal Greenswich Observatory and Martin Fees of Cambridge University had proposed 14 years before that there might be such an object there. Astronomers using improved radio and infrared techniques had mapped in more and more detail the Milky Way core, which was 30,000 light years from earth. They could not see the core with visible light because of dense clouds of dust and gases. (NVTJune 7/85, A15) June 22\ NASA announced that the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) observed for the first time the comet Giacobini-Zinner while the comet was approximately 87 million miles from earth on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. IUE would continue observations of the comet as it moved closer and ultimately became the target of the world's first intercept, on September 11, 1985, of a comet by a satellite, the International Cometary Explorer (/Cf) spacecraft. The June 22 IUE observations of Giacobini-Zinner produced ultraviolet spectrograms—graphic depictions of the intensity of light over a range of ultraviolet wavelengths—revealing emissions of two molecules, carbon monosulfide and another known as the hydroxyl radical. Preliminary evaluation indicated that the ultraviolet emissions from both molecules were somewhat brighter than expected at this stage of the comet's development. The IUE had taken the ultraviolet "pulse" of not only nearby solar system objects such as comets and planets, but also extragalactic objects such as quasars, providing research data to more than 1,000 astronomers around the world. Scientists, engineers, and technicians at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center designed and integrated the spacecraft, which was launched in 1978 as a cooperative venture of the British Science Research Council, the European Space Agency, and NASA. (NASA Release 85-103)
Hughes Communications Inc. said today it would negotiate an approximately $180 commitment with NASA for launch by the Space Shuttle of six communications satellites, including two for a new Japanese network, after receiving proposals from NASA and from Arianespace for its expendable Ariane launch vehicle, Aerospace Daily reported. Hughes indicated selection of the Space Shuttle was based solely on cost and was not related to the recent Ariane 3 failure [see European Space Agency, Sept. 12]. Space Shuttle flights scheduled for December 1987 and May 1988 would launch HS-393 Ku-band satellites that Hughes was building for the Japan Communications Satellite Co. (JCSat). Hughes reserved between 1988 and 1990 four slots for placement of HS-393s over the U.S. Hughes Communications owned 30% of JCSat, a joint venture licensed the previous June by Japan's Ministry of Post and Telecommunications to construct and operate a two-satellite system to serve Japan. The Japanese trading companies C. Itoh and Co. Ltd. and Mitsui and Co. Ltd. owned 40% and 30%, respectively, of the joint venture. (A/D, Sept 18/85, 1)
Sources inside and outside the Reagan Administration said the Department of Defense (DOD) was developing for constant surveillance of all objects in deep space a new generation of navigation, communications, and spy satellites, which would orbit 22,000 miles high and be aided by a nearly completed network of ground stations, the Washington Post reported. DOD would harden the new satellites against radiation and laser attacks and give them some small jet engines for maneuvering away from attack. DOD was also determining if the satellites could be armed to defend themselves. DOD was completing Spacetrack, a worldwide U.S. network of five spacewatching facilities, that would provide adequate time to take defensive actions if the USSR launched weapons at U.S. deep-space satellites. DOD's FY 86 budget reportedly would contain $20 million to complete a fully operational Spacetrack sensor system by 1988. The Soviets had had for 10 years a rudimentary weapon that could knock down low-level U.S. satellites. The Pentagon was beginning tests on its own antisatellite weapon, which would knock down low-level Soviet satellites as they passed over the U.S. (IV Post, Feb 18/85, A1)
Discovery and its five-man crew on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 landed at 9:16 EDT today at Edwards Air Force Base after a seven-day mission [see Aug. 27], the Washington Post reported. During the mission, the crew deployed AUSSAT-1 for the Australian government, ASC-1 for the American Satellite Corp., and Leasat 4 for Hughes Communications (reports indicated Leasat 4 had lost its UHF communications link). In addition, the crew successfully retrieved and repaired the Leasat 3 originally deployed on STS 51-D. Later Hughes issued a statement saying "Leasat 3 is under full control by Hughes' ground command, and telemetry data continued to confirm the good health of the satellite. The liquid propulsion systems are intact and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures appear to be rising gradually toward acceptable levels," the JSC Roundup reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said after the mission that "1 would have to characterize this mission as near to perfect as you can get. It was a perfect mission from the outset, one that shows America's space program at work." Moore added that he hoped there would be only two more Space Shuttle landings in California before pilots could resume landing in Florida. NASA switched to Edwards Air Force Base landings after brakes failed and a tire blew out in an April landing on Kennedy Space Center's concrete runway. (IV Post, Sept 4/85, A7; JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 1)
The National Academy of Sciences' Astronomy Survey Committee, the NASA Solar System Exploration Committee, and the NASA Committee on Solar and Space Physics made recommendations for future NASA space exploration and science programs, which Rep. Wyche Fowler, Jr. (D-Ga.) was asking the U.S. House to endorse in concurrent resolutions, Defense Daily reported. Advisory committee recommendations were often the basis for programs NASA sought to implement. The Astronomy Survey Committee recommended the following major new programs "in order of priority" for total funding of up to $950 million (in constant 1980 dollars) over the next ten years: (1) the advanced x-ray astrophysics facility (AXAF) to be authorized in FY 87, (2) a very-long baseline (VLB) array of radio telescopes, (3) a new technology telescope (NTT) of the 15-m class operating from the ground at optical and infrared wavelengths, and (4) a large deployable reflector (LDR) in space. The Solar System Exploration Committee recommended a program funded at a sustained annual level of $300 million per year (in FY 84 dollars). Its four initial core program recommendations were the Venus radar mapper (authorized in 1984), the Mars observer (authorized in FY 85), a comet rendezvous/ asteroid flyby to be authorized in FY 87 for a 1990-92 launch, and the Titan probe/Saturn orbiter to be authorized for a 1988-92 launch as a joint NASA/ European Space Agency mission. Other committee recommendations included the Mars aeronomy orbiter, the Venus atmospheric probe, the lunar geoscience orbiter, the Mars surface probe, the comet atomized sample return, the multiple mainbelt asteroid orbiter/flyby, the earth-approaching asteroid rendezvous, the Saturn flyby/ probe, the Uranus flyby/probe, the Neptune flyby/probe, and the Pluto flyby. The Committee on Solar and Space Physics recommended an average annual funding of $400 million (in FY 84 dollars) "which would be sufficient to achieve the highest objectives in solar and space physics between the year 1988 and the year 2000." Major missions recommended were the upper atmosphere research satellite (authorized in FY 85), solar optical telescope for launch in 1990, the international solar terrestrial physics program for launch between 1989 and 1993, a solar probe for launch in 1995, and a solar polar orbiter to be launched in 2000. The committee also endorsed a series of moderate Explorer-class missions of about one launch per year. (D/D, Oct 8/85, 197)
In a commencement address today at the George Washington University School of Public and International Affairs, Charles Wick, director of the U.S. Information Agency, said that the "very survival" of the U.S. may depend on the extent to which its citizens use and master the tools of mass communications, the NY Times reported. "Through the explosion of global satellite communications, a technological 'genie' has been unleashed which will change forever the way that governments communicate ideas and information abroad," he said. However, he noted that". . . not all countries believe in freedom of ideas. Not all accept the Western tradition that free expression is a basic human right. These opposing forces are attempting to persuade other countries, particularly those in the third world, that the state, not the people, must decide which ideas circulate in their magazines and newspapers and on the TV and radio stations . . . "Since the 1970s, the Soviet Union has introduced resolutions at Unesco, in the guise of a 'New World Information Order,' to impose this control of the mass media on all nations of the world . . . "Unless you and I do a better job of explaining to the world how the free flow of information can benefit mankind, other nations will not be persuaded to open their borders to the ideas and opinions of others. This could have damaging, even fatal consequences for a dangerous world, in which cooperation—and survival—depend so heavily on mutual understanding," Wick concluded. (NYT, May 7/85, B8)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
The satellite carried search and rescue (SARSAT) equipment that would resume operation as part of an international program begun in September 1983 to use satellites to save people in downed airplanes or on ships in distress. During the 11 months NOAA-8 malfunctioned, three USSR and one U.S. satellite were picking up distress signals and relaying them to ground stations. The reactivated NOAA-8 would assume weather data collection that NOAA-6 had been doing. NOAA-6 had no search and rescue equipment and its infrared radiometer for taking temperature measurements was not working. (NASA Release 85-81)
M. Peter McPherson, head of the Agency for International Development (AID), said a U.S.-financed and -built satellite weather-alert system may have given Bangladesh up to 24 hours notice of a devastating cyclone that killed approximately 10,000 people, the Washington Times reported. The advance notice may have saved "a substantial number of lives," along coastal areas of the Bay of Bengal, McPherson said. McPherson pointed out that the satellite system in Bangladesh, developed in phases since 1978 by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and AID warned of the storm. He said Bangladesh technicians had tracked the cyclone for four days and had the capability of predicting landfall and wind speed within 18 to 24 hr. (IV Times, May 29/85, 5A)
Weather satellite engineers from the Shanghai Institute of Satellite Engineering in the Peoples Republic of China planned to visit the U.S. to seek technological help to complete within the next few years assembly and launch of China's first polar orbit weather satellite, Aviation Week reported. The institute was building a primary and backup spacecraft for China's first weather satellite mission and had started preliminary design of a Chinese geosynchronous orbit weather spacecraft planned for launch in the early 1990s. The Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics was working on the imaging system the weather satellites would use to take cloud photos and collect other data comparable to that from the U.S. Tiros weather satellite series. Ground test data from the Chinese-designed tape recorder system and elements of the gyro system for the new polar orbit weather spacecraft, however, had not achieved a high enough reliability standard. The weather satellite manager planned to visit the U.S. in late 1985 or early 1986 to try to procure a U.S.-built tape recorder that could fly in the satellite in tandem with a Chinese-built recorder to improve reliability of the spacecraft. A U.S. space team visiting the satellite engineering institute said the satellite was relatively large, about 4 feet tall and 4.5 feet wide. With solar arrays deployed, total spacecraft span was about 30 feet. The spacecraft would weigh 1,500 lb. at launch and be in a 500-mile-high orbit at 99° orbital inclination. The Chinese State Bureau of Meteorology, Beijing, supplied performance specifications and funding for satellite. The Chinese weather spacecraft, like U.S. weather satellites, would transmit data continuously. Any nation with the receivers used for U.S. weather data could pick up the Chinese data as well. (AvWk, Aug 5/85, 79)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) announced it awarded Honeywell Inc., Avionics Division, a $14,900,000 contract for fabrication and delivery of three flight inertial measurement groups (IMG) for the Shuttle/Centaur guidance and navigation system, which maintained a fixed reference orientation for and measured acceleration of the Centaur. Work under the sole-source firm-fixed-price contract would begin in May 1985 at the contractor's plant in Clearwater, Florida. NASA was modifying the Centaur, which had launched domestic and military communications satellites and sent spacecraft to investigate planetary systems, to fit into the Space Shuttle. NASA would first use the Shuttle Centaur combination to launch the Galileo and then the Ulysses missions. (LeRC Release 85-40)
Roger Bonnet, director of the European Space Agency's (ESA) scientific programs, speaking today at the opening of a meeting with the USSR's "Intercosmos" Council for International Cooperation, Soviet Academy of Sciences, said, "We are keenly interested in extending cooperation with the Soviet Union in space exploration," FBIS, TASS in English reported. "The first results of our joint work and experiments have given us reasons for making the most optimistic forecasts and opened up new opportunities for studying and using space for peaceful purposes." The program for the three-day meeting included discussion of details of the Soviet "Vega" mission to study Venus and Halley's Comet and review of preparations for a similar West European program called "Giotto," which would use data from the Soviet probe. Attendees also heard reports on the Soviet "Phobos" project for the comprehensive study of Mars and its satellites and ESA's plans to develop an orbital radio telescope. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 15/85)
Jacques Louis Lions, president of the French National Center for Space Studies, announced today that Aerospatiale and the Dassault-Breguet Aviation Company under the center's auspices would work together over the next several years to build two models for the European space shuttle Hermes, FBIS Hong Kong AFP in English reported. The European Space Agency (ESA) would likely also sponsor the project, and the center would undertake negotiations with European partners who would develop the main Hermes subsystems. Aerospatiale would lead the project and assemble Hermes components in its Toulouse factories; Dassault would be in charge of aeronautical aspects. Hermes, about half the size of the U.S. Space Shuttle, would carry two to six astronauts and cargo up to 4.5 tons into low earth orbits. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Oct 19/85) During April: In response to a request from the Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Laboratory to acquire more information on how to predict ocean wave behavior, the Wallops Flight Facility's P-3 aircraft participated October 1984 in NASA's Seasat Imaging Radar B (SIR-B) experiment to monitor ocean waves while, 140 miles above it, the Space Shuttle Challenger produced images of the same waves with its radar. Scientists knew what caused waves to swell, but found it difficult to predict exactly how they would behave. Researchers hoped they might be able to predict through the use of satellite data the occurrence of dangerous waves before they caused serious damage to ships and coastal towns. Analysis of previous data from the SIR had indicated that a synthetic aperture radar could observe ocean waves from space, but the lack of information on the actual directional wave spectrum on the ocean at the time of the SIR observations made it difficult to obtain an accurate assessment of the radar's performance. During Challenger's eight-day flight, the P-3 underflew the spacecraft for five nights off the coast of Chile to obtain sea surface observations. Each night the aircraft flew along several hundred kilometers of the Space Shuttle's imaging radar taking sea-surface observations with its complement of remote sensing instruments. The P-3's airborne oceanographic lidar provided laser elevation profiles of the wave field and the radars (surface contour radar, radar ocean wave spectrometer, and advanced applications flight experiment altimeter) measured significant wave height and provided information on the directional wave spectrum. Because state of the sea varied over the series of flights from low seas to waves with 6-m height and 400-m wavelengths, the data sets collected should become classic and provide a basis for the quantitative evaluation of synthetic aperture radars in space. (Inside Wallops, Apr 85, 1)
The Arab League's Arabsat 1 telecommunications satellite, launched February 8 by an Ariane 3 from Kourou, French Guiana, experienced control problems during initial in-orbit checkout, but was reported stabilized with all systems functioning normally, Aviation Week reported. Anomalies in the spacecraft's gyro package caused the problems, detected March 16 by operators at Arabsat's Dihrab, Saudi Arabia, ground station when the satellite was at its final on-station location at 19° E longitude. Investigators were attempting to pinpoint the problem. An electrostatic discharge may have caused one of the gyro package anomalies. Although the gyros provided pitch, roll, and yaw information, "we never lost control of the satellite," said Michel Duigot, Aerospatiale's Space and Ballistic Systems Division communications satellite system manager. "There is redundancy in the satellite because we have two packages of three gyros each," he pointed out. The satellite experienced solar array deployment difficulties soon after launch, but the arrays eventually extended successfully. Program officials said the two problems were unrelated. The solar array deployment problems had resulted in minor modifications to the solar panels on the No. 2 Arabsat, originally scheduled for launch by NASA from KSC in May, but rescheduled for June. The 22-member Arab Satellite Communications Organization would use the Arabsat 1 for national and regional communications and TV broadcast requirements. The schedule called for an operational satellite by the end of April, and program officials believed this might still be possible. (AvWk, Mar 25.85, 22)
Comsat Corp. announced unaudited year-end results showing a $29 million decrease in income from continuing operations in 1984 compared to 1983 income, the Washington Post reported. Comsat reported consolidated 1984 operating revenue of about $442 million, with consolidated net income of about $51 million and income from continuing operations of about $45 million. The company attributed $13 million of the decline to a write-off associated with Satellite Television Corp., the direct satellite-to-home TV company, and to the write-down of inventory from Comsat's equipment manufacturing business. Comsat officials said they would release final figures and per share earnings later in the month (IVPost, Feb 1/85, F5) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED m**MLjmmrtAu.r Bum
Frederic J.P. d'Allest, chairman of Arianespace, told the U.S. Senate science, technology, and space subcommittee the previous week that his firm offered satellite insurance at lower than market rates to those using the Ariane rocket to launch their satellites, the Washington Times reported. The insurance covered only the booster phase of a satellite launch. Arianespace charged between 11 and 13% of the total value of the launch for insuring an Ariane launch from lift off to geostationary orbit, that portion of the flight under Arianespace's control. Satellite operators had to go to commercial insurance markets to obtain coverage for the rest of a satellite's operation. More than $600 million in losses from the failure of seven satellites in almost two years had resulted in a tightened insurance market that was seriously threatening commercial space projects. Satellite insurance firms had cut back on the amount they would commit to insure launches, while boosting premiums to more than 20% of the total insured value of the launch. The subcommittee before which d'Allest testified was investigating a possible federal role in easing the insurance problem. However, commercial underwriters warned the subcommittee that the federal government should stay out of the insurance business. "In my view," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "there is no role for government to play in this commercial market. Intervention can only disturb normal market processes." He noted the solution to the problem was improved reliability of satellite manufacturers and launch agencies. "Insurance . . . cannot compensate for unacceptable levels of reliability," he commented. (W Times, Nov 12/85, 70
American University professor Jeffrey Richelson, testifying at the espionage trial of former Navy intelligence analyst Samuel Morison, said publication in 1984 of three secret KH-11 spy satellite photos in Jane's Defense Weekly told the Soviets nothing important that they did not already know, the Washington Post reported. Morison, who worked at the Naval Intelligence Support center in Suitland, Maryland, had official approval for his part-time job as U.S. editor of Jane's Fighting Ships and in 1984 sent the weekly the three photos in hopes of securing a full-time job there. He was also indicted on charges of keeping in his apartment two classified documents about a May 1984 fire at a Soviet naval ammunition depot. In his testimony, Richelson said the Soviets already had the KH-11 manual, which they had bought from a CIA officer, as well as earlier published satellite photos to show them how the system worked. Government witnesses earlier testified that the photos sent to Jane's were potentially valuable to the Soviets in confirming the KH-11's sophisticated workings and in disclosing U.S. targeting interests. Similarly, a Navy intelligence expert testified that the details about the ammunition depot fires, also gleaned from satellite photos, were so precise that it would have been "very damaging" to the U.S. if the documents had been leaked. Richelson, however, said public sources had provided much detail about the KH-11 and other satellite programs, such as their flight paths over the Soviet Union, their altitude (75 to 155 miles), and the fact that a Titan 3D rocket launched them and another so-called Keyhole satellite, the KH-9. He said it was well known that the KH-11 sent its pictures back to Washington in a matter of seconds via another satellite and that it passed over targets quite frequently. Another defense witness, John Pike, associate director for space policy at the Federation of American Scientists, testified on what was publicly available about the KH-11, saying DOD would soon replace it with a longer-lasting KH-12. According to Pike, the KH-11 orbited the Soviet Union 11 times a day, had the capacity to take pictures continuously, and had a peripheral vision that could switch from extreme left to extreme right in an instant. The Washington Post six days later reported that Morison was found guilty of espionage and theft and could be sentenced to up to 10 years in prison and fined $10,000 on each of four counts. (W Post, Oct 12/85, A9, Oct 18/85, A1) Strategic Defense Initiative The UCS had also stated in its report that the neutral particle beam (to destroy Soviet missiles) would require orbiting a 40,000-ton accelerator, an impossible task. However, Jastrow noted the correct weight of the accelerator was 25 tons, quite reasonable for earth orbit, and the UCS had admitted the error. Also on the SDI program, Space World published the Council on Economic Priorities's (CEP) recommendations, in which CEP suggested the Department of Defense reduce emphasis on developing prototype systems until clarification of the technological uncertainties of deploying an effective overall space defense and Congress should significantly slow SDI's growth rate until demonstration of the plan's technical feasibility. (WSJ, Jan 17/85, 2-E; Space World, Jan 85, 3)
NASA announced it awarded a $145.8 million contract to General Electric Co.'s Valley Forge Space Center, Philadelphia for development of the upper atmosphere research satellite (UARS) observatory. Scheduled for October 1989 deployment from the Space Shuttle, the satellite would carry 10 scientific instruments into a 373-mile circular orbit. Valley Forge Center would design the observatory system, design and fabricate an instrument module compatible with the NASA standard multimission modular spacecraft (MMS), integrate the instrument module with the MMS and flight instruments, test the observatory system, integrate the observatory into the Space Shuttle, and support postlaunch flight operations. The UARS, with its remote sensing instruments providing essentially global coverage, would for the first time generate data for understanding the composition and dynamics of the upper atmosphere, important to solving many questions about the earth's weather and climate. For example, the observatory would provide previously unavailable data on the nature of natural and human effects on earth's ozone layer. GSFC would provide UARS project management for NASA's office of space science and applications. (NASA Release 85-32)
Sudden squalls almost on top of the launch pad early today forced postponement for at least a day of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the Washington Post reported. A series of unforecasted thunderstorms blew in from the mainland directly across the flight path, and dark thunderheads surrounded the launch pad for five miles in almost every direction. NASA aborted the launch five minutes before liftoff. NASA officials were concerned not only about the Space Shuttle climbing through rain and lightning but also about the crew's ability to see the KSC runway in case they had to make an emergency landing the early minutes of the flight. Rain could damage the orbiter's tiles, and lightning could harm its computers and guidance systems. NASA rescheduled Discovery's launch for between 7:57 and 8:11 a.m. EDT August 25. Among the factors necessitating that launch window were the position of the satellite planned for salvage and timing of deployment of three communications satellites. If an August 25 launch was impossible, there were launch opportunities the following three days. NASA had announced earlier that highlights of the eight-day mission included an attempt to repair and salvage the Leasat/Syncom IV-F3 satellite and deploy it for normal operation, and deployment of the ASC 7/PAM-D for the American Satellite Co., the AUSSAT //PAM-D satellite for the Australian government, and the Leasat IV-F4 satellite for the U.S. Navy. The physical vapor transport of organic solids (PVTOS) experiment sponsored by 3M Corp. would also fly on the mission. PVTOS was the second of some 70 experiments the 3M Corp. planned to conduct aboard the Space Shuttle over the next ten years. On the 51-1 mission, solid materials would vaporize into a gaseous state to form thick crystalline films on selected substrates of sublimable organics. Researchers at 3M would study crystals produced by PVTOS for their optical properties and other characteristics that might ultimately have important applications to 3M's businesses in electronics, imaging, and health care. The company's first experiment, flown in November 1984, dissolved materials that led to a solid crystalline product. (NASA Release 85-118; W Post, Aug 25/85, A3)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, testifying today before the U.S. House HUD and independent agencies appropriations subcommittee on NASA's FY 86 budget request, said that orbiter processing constraints at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) made it difficult for NASA to consider adding Space Shuttle flights to get the year's planned commercial launches back on schedule, Aerospace Daily reported. When asked by Chairman Edward Boland (D-Mass.) if reports were true that NASA was considering launching three commercial satellites on Deltas rather than the Space Shuttle to get the Space Shuttle's manifest back on schedule, Beggs responded that it was an option the agency "had to look at" but one that probably would not be exercised. He said NASA talked to several Space Shuttle customers about flying payloads on Deltas and some were interested. Another option NASA considered was adding another Space Shuttle flight to the manifest, but orbiter processing constraints posed problems. "We just can't push the orbiters through the processing facility quickly enough," he said, although NASA still "may be able to squeeze another launch" into the year's manifest. He pointed out the hardware for another flight was available and NASA proposed building a third orbiter processing facility high bay and Space Shuttle tile facility at KSC with FY 86 funds. (A/D, Apr 3/85, 1)
NASA launched Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today through the worst weather of the Space Shuttle program, the NY Times reported. After two postponements in three days because of bad weather and a computer failure, Discovery barely got off the ground before the darkening clouds moved over the launch pad and the rain descended in torrents. "We could see large holes in the system 50 or 100 miles across so we prayed for the breaks that would let us thread the needle when the time came," launch director Robert Sieck said later. "We had two things in our favor: There was no lightning in the cloud cover, and most of the rain was south of the launch pad, not right over it." Launch directors gambled that rain would not be falling on the pad at liftoff time, which was delayed three minutes to make sure the gamble was the right one. As heavy rain fell on the press site three miles to the west, Discovery roared away from the pad through a hole in the clouds and sped into the air 10 minutes before the pad was pelted with rain. Commanding the flight was Air Force Col. Joe Engle, who commanded the second Space Shuttle test flight in 1981 and on August 26 turned 53. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Covey was pilot; mission specialists were John Lounge, Dr. James van Hoften, and Dr. William Fisher. A malfunction encountered two hours into the flight forced the astronauts to deploy a day early one of the three satellites in the orbiter's cargo bay. During a cargo inspection by remotely controlled cameras, a shield that was to protect Australia's AUSSAT 1 from direct exposure to sunlight stuck in a partly open position. An astronaut then used the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm to nudge the sunshade completely open so they could release the spring-loaded satellite. Any delay of more than six hours could have resulted in radiation damage to the exposed satellite's electronics. Less than five hours after deploying the Australian satellite, Discovery's crew deployed ASC 1 for the American Satellite Co. The second deployment marked the first time a Space Shuttle crew deployed two satellites in one day. (NYT, Aug 28/85, D18)
Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) qualification tests had shown the Star 30C apogee kick motor, designed to place satellites in orbits around the earth and manufactured by Morton-Thiokol Inc., was ready for production, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sverdrup Technology Inc., operating contractor of AEDC's propulsion test facilities, had conducted qualification checks in one of AEDC's high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated altitude of about 100,000 feet. Test objectives were to demonstrate component structural integrity and to determine ballistic performance. Sverdrup temperature conditioned the motors and then test fired them while they spun about their axial centerline to simulate spin stabilization during firing in space. The Star 30C, designed to be carried by the Space Shuttle, was the propulsion system for the RCA C-STAR satellite. Once in space, it would ignite and carry the satellite to its designated orbit. (AFSC Newsreview,. Mar 29/85, 6)
NASA announced that, during mission 51 —L scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986, it would release from the Space Shuttle a free-flying payload called Spartan-Halley to observe Halley's Comet. Scientists believed that comet exploration was a search for the beginnings of earth, because comets were the most unaltered samples of the early solar system. Spartan-Halley was the only NASA satellite dedicated solely to observing Comet Halley. During these observations, January 24 through 31, the comet would be in its most active period as it headed towards its closest approach to the sun on February 9. The objective of the Spartan-Halley mission was to measure from earth orbit the ultraviolet spectrum of Comet Halley using twin spectrographs designed and built by the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics. Spartan-Halley's cameras and instruments would analyze the active comet, looking for hydrogen and oxygen atoms and carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur molecules. If the spacecraft detected these elements, it might indicate more complex compounds could be present in the ice and dust that made up the comet's nucleus. Goddard Space Flight Center developed Spartan-Halley, a modified Spartan-2 spacecraft, to be a research carrier. The spacecraft consisted of the spectrographic instrumentation, attitude control cameras (which also provided science photography), a microprocessor, associated electronics, a sunlight baffling system, and a service module. The January mission would be the first for the Spartan-2 type carrier, a completely reusable spacecraft to be reflown later on several other missions. Following completion of the January mission, the Space Shuttle's robot arm would retrieve Spartan-Halley and store it in the cargo bay. (NASA Release 85-161)
NASA announced that the United Kingdom's contribution to active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE), the UK Subsatellite [UKS), did not respond to commands when it had passed over Chilton on January 16 or since. Efforts to contact UKS by Chilton and the Deep Space Network (with 10 kw-uplink power) were unsuccessful. British officials said they would continue periodic efforts to contact the satellite, but were not optimistic. In five months of operation, the UKS had supported three chemical releases and had met 70% of the UK-project objectives. (NASA announcement, Feb 13/85) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED PA6^Jl£LjH1INTI0NAtlf BLANI UNITED STATES
NASA announced its National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), through its Earth Resources Laboratory, signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Anthropology Department of the University of Colorado at Boulder to use satellite imaging and remote sensing technology to probe the tropical Andean jungles for archaelogical remains in Peru's Rio Abiseo National Park. Of particular interest in the park were the ancient site of Gran Patajen, the subtropical cloud forest, and the park's diverse ecology. Using sophisticated instrumentation that would allow researchers to "see" through the dense vegetation to locate evidence of past settlements in the now uninhabited region, researchers would combine data from the Landsat earth resources satellite with information gathered by a specially equipped aircraft from NSTL. The researchers might also observe and map interesting geographical features and variations in vegetation. Thomas Lennon, co-director of the university's Rio Abiseo National Park Research Project, said of the undertaking, "NASA's assistance will enable us to take a good look at the 1,060-sq-mile park from above—immensely easier than trekking through the jungle on foot. When cultural resources are identified through image analysis, we'll be able to check it out on the ground. This approach allows us to make the best use of the limited researchers as well as the time we'll have in the field." The university, NASA, and a remote sensing team at Peru's National Agrarian University in Lima would work together to extract information from various sensing devices. An early outcome of the project should be accurate up-to-date maps of the uncharted parkland. The project was one of three archaeological research investigations supported by NASA's remote sensing program administered by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. In another project with the University of Colorado, NASA was examining volcanic destruction of cities and vegetation in Costa Rica. In the third project, NASA was supporting Richard Leakey of the Leaky Foundation who was searching for evidence of human evolution in Kenya, Africa. NASA's work on the projects resulted from its interest in expanding the scientific applications of space technology, in these cases to archaeology and anthropology, which could benefit from advancements in remote sensing technology. (NASA Release 85-73)
NASA announced that its first Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-1), after more than 18 years of service, failed to respond to commands to correct its eastward drift from geostationary position over the Gilbert Islands in the western Pacific. Robert Wales, ATS project operations director at Goddard Space Flight Center (GFSC), said that the ground control station in Hawaii could no longer keep ATS-1 at its present location and it would likely drift out of useful orbital position during the next six months. ATS-1, launched in December 1966 with an expected lifespan of three years, most recently had provided a voice and data communications capability to several information networks in the Pacific basin. The pan Pacific education and communications experiments by satellite (PEACESAT) program, the major user of ATS-1, would dissolve with the loss of the satellite. Program participants had transmitted educational, health, research, technology, and community services through ATS-1 to 23 autonomous terminals located in Hawaii, Cook Islands, the Mariana and Caroline Islands, Western and American Samoa, the Marshall Islands, Melanesia, New Zealand, and Australia. Some of ATS-1's notable achievements were the first transmission in 1967 of full-earth, cloud cover pictures from geosynchronous orbit; first transmission in 1967 of real-time TV pictures (Apollo 4 splashdown); two-way communication tests with commercial airliners to determine aircraft orientation effects on satellite communications, a cooperative venture with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the airlines in 1967 and 1968; link-up between U.S. and USSR scientists during an atmospheric, sea, and ice condition experiment in the Bering Sea in 1971; transmission of electrocardiographs from Hawaii to New Zealand and from Alaska to the University of Washington; and presentation of medical conferences over the PEACESAT network. The medical world had praised the Alaskan "doctor call" service provided by ATS-1 as the first innovative approach to rural medicine in the U.S. In the program, Public Health Service physicians could communicate daily through ATS-1 with trained health aides in the remote Alaskan bush country. Loss of ATS-1 would leave one other comparable satellite, ATS-3, launched in November 1967, in operation. Positioned in geosynchronous orbit over the Pacific Ocean south of Mexico, ATS-3 covered the U.S., most of the Atlantic Ocean, and a large part of the eastern Pacific including Hawaii. (NASA Release 85-45)
The Indian Department of Space announced today the selection of two Indian astronaut candidates, one of whom would fly aboard the Space Shuttle carrying India's INSAT-1C satellite, FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English reported. The candidates were N.C. Bhatt of the Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore, and P. Radhakrishmam of Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, Trivandrum. The chairman of India's Space Commission, Professor U. R. Rao, said the commission would select one of them to fly on the mission scheduled for July 1986. (FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English, Nov 8/85) "There has to be a difference between some senator or Arab prince and the qualified scientists who fly aboard the shuttle," said Ulf Merbold, crew interface coordinator for the D-1 mission. "We demand that the science astronaut concept be developed so that these proficient crew members can be designated for such a flight," said Hans-Ulrich Steimle, Spacelab D-1 mission manager at the German aerospace research establishment. "Instead, NASA now has become involved in running a travel office for visiting dignitaries, and this is counterproductive when you want to perform a serious science mission." German officials said they might raise the issue again when planning was finalized for a follow-on Spacelab D-2 mission targeted for 1988. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 24)
NASA successfully launched today an Aerobee liquid-fueled, sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, marking the end of that rocket series, which was the oldest continuous rocket-firing program. NASA's Sounding Rocket Division had launched 536 Aerobees with a 94% success rate. The Aerobee's reliability made it the workhorse vehicle for high-altitude studies. Commenting on the program, Maury Dubin, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) physicist, said "virtually everything that's been done in space research can be attributed to sounding-rocket technology. The Aerobee and other sounding-rocket research precipitated the rise of many disciplines, from astronomy to the upper atmosphere." The Aerobee program began in 1946 when Aerojet Engineering Corp. received a U.S. Navy contract to build the rockets, and the Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) had supplied technical direction; Dr. James Van Allen had been project director. The Aerobee name, the Bumblebees, derived from a combination of Aerojet and APL's series of Navy missiles. NASA had used Aerobees extensively during the Internatl. Geophysical Year (July 1957 to December 1958) to gather information on the atmosphere, cosmic radiation, auroras, and geomagnetism. The Aerobee rockets consisted of a series of five with each rocket carrying as many as six experiments that included equipment such as cameras, vacuum bottles, mirrors, grids, sensing devices, lenses, and other mechanical PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	„ units. Most rockets recorded data and simultaneously transmitted it via telemetry to ground stations. The final Aerobee payload tested a new spectrograph that would be flown on NASA's Astro mission to record extreme ultraviolet Dayglow emissions in earth's upper atmosphere. George Kraft, GSFC flight support section director, said that, although the demise of small liquid-fueled sounding rockets was imminent, "sounding rockets would continue to be an important element in NASA's support of the scientific community. They're virtually the only vehicles that can conduct studies in the 40 km (25 miles) to 200 km (125 miles) high zone of the atmosphere." Balloons could travel only about 50 km (31 miles) high and satellites were ineffective below 200 km (125 miles) high. GSFC's Wallops Flight Facility managed the NASA sounding-rocket program. (GSFC Release 85-6)
The Department of Defense (DOD) placed a satellite on the Space Shuttle Discovery [see STS/Military Applications, Jan. 24], which put it in a radically different orbit from many spy satellites, the NY Times reported. According to figures made public by the Air Force, DOD put the satellite in a highly elliptical orbit at a low angle above the equator; the majority of U.S. spy satellites were in roughly circular orbits that passed across polar regions so that satellites would spend as much time as possible over the USSR. The satellite's, whose United Nations designation was 1985-10B, highest altitude was 34,670 km (21,543 miles); its low point was 341 km (212 miles). This elliptical path was inclined 28.4° to the equator, and the satellite took 10 hours to complete one revolution. In addition to its elliptical orbits, the satellite could maneuver from its initial orbit into another, perhaps more usual, orbit. By international treaty, DOD was required to release to the United Nations a technical description of all its satellites' initial orbits. This recording process, which passed through the State Department and included filing the information with the Library of Congress, often took several months after an object was launched. The DOD released the data in early April to the State Department; the NY Times then requested and received the information. (NYT, Apr 26/85, A19)
NASA announced it had selected Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Western Development Laboratories, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) that would include three spacecraft (GOES-1, J, and K) and a two spacecraft option (GOES-L and M). The contract had a proposed cost of $221 million and would provide for a series of GOES satellite systems, each with a five-year design life, that would contribute to continuation of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) GOES program in the 1990 to 2000 era. NASA had scheduled a late 1989 launch for the first GOES satellite in this new series. The contract statement of work covered the satellite bus; imaging, sounding, and space-environment monitor instruments; and flight-support equipment and services to accomplish deployment of the spacecraft into geosynchronous orbit from the Space Shuttle. The contract also included operations ground equipment and support to ensure compatibility of the spacecraft systems with established ground systems operated by NOAA. NASA assigned Goddard Space Flight Center responsibility for project management. (NASA Release 85-80)
Aerospace Daily reported that NASA would submit to Congress that week the space station automation and robotics study, "Advancing Automation and Robotics Technology for the Space Station and for the U.S. Economy," which appropriations legislation enacted in 1984 had directed NASA to prepare by April 1. NASA Administrator James Beggs approved the report compiled by the advanced technology advisory committee and augmented by the work of an automation and robotics panel, SRI International, and aerospace contractors. The report consisted of two volumes, an executive overview, which outlined major findings and contained proposed goals for automation and robotics applications in relation to the initial space station, and a technical report, which outlined the potential of automation and robotics technologies and would serve a major focus of definition and preliminary design (Phase B) space station contractor efforts. Under an agreement with the Senate Appropriations Committee the previous April, NASA had funded and managed several studies in automation and robotics that had included industry case studies of advanced automation and robotics. From these the committee determined what should be incorporated in space station initial operational capability and what the design should be so that these elements could be incorporated at a later date. The firms and functional areas studied were: General Electric Co., space manufacturing concepts; TRW, satellite servicing; Hughes, subsystem and mission ground support; Boeing, man/machine interface; and Martin Marietta, automation technology for assembly of the facility. Although NASA believed a commitment to the efforts outlined in the committee report would increase space station efficiency and result in significant cost savings, a breakdown of actual costs would not be available until NASA contractors completed the overall plan for implementation of the automation and robotics systems in initial space station studies. The report did recommend that automation and robotics be a key element of the basis space station program and that the initial space station design take into account evolution and growth in robotics. Examples of proposed goals for automation and robotics applications for the initial space station included a mobile remote manipulator with collision avoidance capability and dexterous manipulator systems that could inspect and exchange orbital replaceable units. (A/D, Mar 21/85, 1)
Astronauts aboard the orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F released today a six-and-a-half-foot-long drum-shaped satellite, the Plasma Diagnostics Package, from the orbiter's payload bay, shot it with a looping beam from an electron gun, and then retrieved it with the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm, the NY Times reported. One purpose of the demonstration was to study the electrical effects the Space Shuttle had as it moved through the electrically charged gases of the ionosphere, effects which occasionally caused the Space Shuttle to emit a soft golden glow. Researchers considered solving that riddle important to the success of future mission, which would carry sensitive instruments that the aura might disturb. Another goal was to achieve a better understanding of the aurora, known in the northern hemisphere as the northern lights, which was a disturbance in the atmosphere that created bright lights in the night sky over polar regions. The astronauts reported seeing flashes of light as the beam followed natural magnetic lines to the satellite, the Washington Post reported; the newspaper said scientists on the ground called the demonstration "a fabulous success." (NYT, Aug 2/85, D14; W Post, Aug 2/85, A4)
NASA announced that it had completed with the Italian National Research Council's National Space Plan Office (PSN/CNR) selection of U.S. and Italian principal investigators for the cooperative tethered satellite system (TSS), which NASA had scheduled for a first flight in 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle. The system, using the Space Shuttle as a base of operation, would provide a unique reuseable facility remote from the orbiter for space science investigations in the upper atmosphere and in plasma-electrodynamic interactions. 101 The overall objectives of the TSS program were to demonstrate the successful operation of a tethered satellite, perform the initial electrodynamic science and plasma investigations, and develop a reusable facility capable of supporting a broad range of electrodynamic experiments in the ionosphere. On the first TSS mission, a NASA-supplied deployer mechanism would send the Italian-developed and -built satellite upward from the Space Shuttle orbiter to a distance of as much as 12 miles. The motion of the conducting tether across geomagnetic field lines would generate several thousand volts of energy to provide a broad range of electrical operating conditions. Researchers could also use the overall system to artifically generate and study field-aligned currents and associated plasma effects. On the second TSS mission, the satellite would be at the end of a nonconducting tether at 62 miles in the earth's atmosphere, an area previously explored only sporadically, mainly with sounding rocket payloads. The tethered satellite would permit investigation of the region on a global scale over several days. The TSS-3 mission would be a follow-up to the TSS-1 electrodynamics mission, with deployment from either the Space Shuttle or the proposed space station. A memorandum of understanding signed in 1984 by NASA and PSN/CNR established the TSS program. NASA's Marshall Space flight Center had responsibility for project implementation. NASA's office of space science and applications selected Peter Banks, Stanford University (Shuttle Tether Electrodynamic Tether System); Robert Estes, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation of Electromagnetic Emissions by the Tether); Gordon Gullahorn, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation and Measurement of Dynamic Noise in Tethered Observatory Satellite Systems); Konstantinos Papadopoulos, Science Applications, Inc. (Theory and Modeling of the Tether); and Nobie Stone, Marshall Space Flight Center (Research on Orbital Flight Plasma-Electrodynamics). PSN/CNR selected Silvio Bergemaschi, Instituto Meccanica, Padova University (A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of TSS Dynamics); Marino Dobrowolny, Instituto Fisica Spazio (Research on Electrodynamics Tether Effects); and Franco Mariana, University of Rome (Magnetic Field Experiment for the TSS Missions). (NASA Release 85-115)
In its postlaunch report dated July 23, 1986, NASA announced that it had launched on September 9, 1980, GOES-D (subsequently designated GOES-4) from KSC by a Delta 3914 launch vehicle. The GOES (Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite) satellites provided near-continuous high-quality day and night observations of earth and its environment, including cloud cover; weather; proton, electron, and solar X-ray fluxes; and magnetic fields. During placement of GOES-4 and its apogee boost motor (ABM) into transfer orbit, NASA observed lower than expected temperatures for the ABM and decided to fire the motor at second apogee in lieu of the nominal third apogee. Performance of the ABM was nominal and resulted in placement of the spacecraft in desired drift orbit. GOES-4 arrived September 20, 1980, on-station at the 98° west longitude checkout position. On February 26, 1981, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) moved GOES-4 to the GOES-west operational position at 135° west longitude, replacing the ailing GOES-3 spacecraft. NASA modified the ABM thermal design for follow-on spacecraft to avoid recurrence of the low temperature problem. On May 22, 1981, NASA launched GOES-E (subsequently designated GOES-5) from KSC on the Delta 3914. Spacecraft performance during transfer orbit maneuvers was nominal, and NASA fired the ABM on the third apogee of the transfer orbit. GOES-5 arrived on-station June 5, 1981, at the predetermined checkout position of 85° west longitude. On August 5, 1981, NOAA placed GOES-5 at 75° west longitude where it became the operational GOES-east satellite. An additional mission objective for both GOES-4 and 5 was demonstration and assessment of the temperature and moisture soundings from the VISSR Atmospheric Sounder (VAS); Goddard Space Flight Center initiated a VAS demonstration project to achieve this objective. In 1981 the VAS demonstration project conducted a ground truth field experiment that provided four days of simultaneous, high-density ground-based observations and satellite data. This data showed VAS to be a versatile and valuable instrument with potential applications beyond the severe local storm discipline. Some of these additional areas included hurricane and tropical cyclone research, cloud climatology, and diagnosis of moisture patterns and upper-air circulation. As a result of the VAS demonstration project, NOAA made provision for geosynchronous soundings a requirement for the next generation of GOES satellites. Under a 1973 basic agreement, NASA had the responsibility under NOAA reimbursable funding to design, engineer, procure, and launch polar and geosynchronous weather satellites to implement the U.S.'s operational meteorological satellite program. After on-orbit checkout, NASA handed over the spacecraft to NOAA for routine operations. (NASA MOR E-612-80-02 [postlaunch] July 23/85, E-612-81-03 [postlaunch] July 23/85)
The Rome Air Development Center planned to award three contracts for work in support of the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's (DARPA) proposal to develop a multiple satellite system (MSS) consisting of several hundred low-cost, low-orbiting communications satellites in several orbits, Defense Daily reported. The satellites, expected to cost about $1 million each, would comprise a highly survivable, high-bandwidth global communications system through the combination of high bandwidth packet switches and burst radios with low-cost proliferated, low-orbiting satellites. Each satellite would carry a low-cost burst radio capable of instantaneous data rates on the order of 100 Mbps, along with digital controllers to do the packet switching and a suitable antenna system capable of both omni-directional and directive beams. The contracts would be for study of burst radio development, low-cost antenna design, and low-cost satellite integration. (D/D, June 11/85, 229)
The Teal Ruby experimental space-based aircraft detection system, which had encountered technical problems, would fly on the Space Shuttle around March 1986, Defense Daily reported. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Director Dr. Robert Cooper said DARPA had run into expected problems with the Teal Ruby flight sensor caused by heat leaks in the cryogenic system. The leaks posed two problems: they prevented the temperature of the instrument from getting low enough to provide necessary high sensitivity and threatened the one-year nominal life of the system. Cooper said the DARPA had found all leaks except one. Teal Ruby was the first large-scale demonstration of a two-dimensional, staring mosaic infrared detector array and lightweight telescope optics. Its goal was to establish the technology base for future space-based infrared surveillance systems capable of detecting aircraft and other low threshold targets against the earth's clutter background; it would develop a comprehensive radiometric background database and space qualify the advanced technologies embodied in its design. Teal Ruby would be the primary payload of the Air Force space test program satellite P80-1. (D/D, Mar 29/85, 167)
The White House announced that it had sent Congress a new Space Shuttle pricing policy that entailed, starting October 1, 1988, auctioning the Space Shuttle's cargo bay to commercial and foreign customers at a minimum rate of $74 million for a full bay, the Washington Times reported. This meant that owners of three satellites could share a mission and pay NASA a little less than $25 million apiece or about $1 million more than they presently paid for Space Shuttle launches. However, if demand for shuttle space exceeded its availability, the auction system would drive prices upward. Europe's Arianespace SA charged $25 million for a launch. President Reagan, who earlier had suggested that space should be open to private enterprise and that the Space Shuttle might be turned over to industry, directed NASA under the new policy to establish auction procedures "to ensure maximum return to the government and equitable treatment for all potential launch customers." The President also told NASA to review annually Space Shuttle costs and the effectiveness of its pricing policies and report its findings and recommendations to the president's national security adviser and the director of the Office of Management and Budget. The new policy represented a victory for NASA and defeat for the Transportation Department and Secretary Elizabeth Hanford Dole, who had argued for a full-bay price no lower than $129 million in order to encourage private industry to get into the launch vehicle business on its own, the Washington Post reported. Two companies wanted to compete with NASA and Arianespace. General Dynamics signed a letter of intent with NASA to use the Atlas-Centaur rocket, and Transpace Carriers Inc. signed a similar letter to use the Delta rocket to launch satellites. Both companies said they could not compete with a Space Shuttle price of less than $40 million to send up a single satellite. The Transportation Department argued for a higher Space Shuttle launch price to improve private industry's bargaining power. But NASA said a higher charge would send customers to Arianespace, which had booked more than a third of the world's future commercial satellite launch traffic. (W Times, Aug 2/85, 10C; W Post, Aug 7/85, A3)
In order to improve communications among Indonesia's Eastern Island University's member campuses, which were spread over 1,600 miles of ocean, NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) recently supervised installation of a solar power system for a teleconferencing center and earth station in the village of Wawotobi. The earth station provided the communications link among Wawotobi, Djakarta, and an earth communications satellite system and helped make the member campuses' scarce professors, research findings, and library resources more widely available to the rapidly increasing number of students throughout the region. The teleconferencing center, a classroom large enough for 50 people, was equipped with a speaker system, microphones, a telecopier, an electronic blackboard, and a computer graphics display. The system was interactive and could connect with 11 main campus locations of the Eastern Island University Association and a conference room in the offices of the Director General of Higher Education in Djakarta. Purpose of the teleconferencing system was to demonstrate the use of satellite communication in developing countries, and the solar power system showed the feasibility and practicality of solar (photovoltaic) power systems for small earth stations in remote areas. Although diesel electric generators generally powered earth stations in the absence of conventional power lines, the high cost of diesel fuel and the high operation, security, and maintenance costs for diesel generators made use of a photovoltaic system attractive. The total photovoltaic array capacity to power the earth station at Wawotobi was 1.5 kilowatts, and LeRC expected the battery used in conjunction with the array to last about 10 years. The photovoltaic array had a life expectancy of more than 20 years. The existing satellite system provided national communications services by radio, telephone, and telegraph to the 5000 inhabited islands. Hughes Aircraft Co. was prime contractor for the photovoltaic power system, and their subcontractor in Indonesia was P. T. Elektrindo Nusantara. LeRC and Hughes would provide operations support for repair, maintenance, and spare parts through June 1986, when NASA would turn over complete responsibility for the system to PERUMTAL, the Indonesian national telecommunications authority. The project completed the renewable energy systems programs managed by LeRC for the Department of Energy and the U.S. Agency for International Development. Since 1976 LeRC had been responsible for the installation of 71 photovoltaic power systems in 27 countries and the United States. These systems provided power for entire villages for water pumps, grain grinders, lights, vaccine refrigerators, schools, highway signs, forest lookout towers, insect traps, rural dispensaries, and the Wawotobi teleconferencing center/ earth station. (NASA Release 85-176) PEOPLES REPUBLIC OF CHINA
NASA announced it selected April 29, 12:00 noon EDT, for launch of STS mission 51-B, the Spacelab 3 flight, and Dryden Flight Research Center/Edwards Air Force Base, California, as the primary end-of-mission landing site, with KSC as an alternate. Landing was set for May 6 at 12:03 EDT. NASA selected Dryden over KSC for the landing as a result of problems encountered during the STS 51-D mission when the orbiter Discovery's right-hand braking systems locked causing a tire to blow out. Landing conditions had included a crosswind—the first experience at KSC of such conditions—and a higher-than-usual sink rate. A landing at Dryden would provide a greater safety margin for Challenger's tires and brake systems due to the availability of the unrestricted lakebed and the smoother surface. The decision to land at Dryden for the next flight only would enable engineers to determine what corrective actions were appropriate before returning to the KSC runway for nominal end-of-mission landings. (NASA Release 85-63) During April: NASA announced it had scheduled for launch on April 12 from KSC the remanifested Space Shuttle 51-D mission with landing on KSC's Space Shuttle runway after the five-day 78-orbit flight. NASA originally scheduled mission 51-D for March 1 for deployment of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility, but cancelled the 51—E Challenger mission and revised the 51-D cargo to include LEASAT-3 and the Canadian communications satellite Anik C-1. Other payloads were the continuous-flow electrophoresis system and the American echocardiograph experiment [see Apr. 12], two middeck student experiments, and two Getaway Special canisters. (NASA Release 85—47)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center awarded a $32,346,000 follow-on contract to General Dynamics's Convair Division (GD/C) to erect, test, and launch (with accompanying launch facility modifications) Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles and to perform support testing and launching of Centaur upper stages from the Space Shuttle in 1986; GD/C would work at Kennedy Space Center. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, beginning January 1, 1985 and running through December 1986, was a continuation of work GD/C had performed under earlier contracts. The Centaur should increase the Space Shuttle's capability to carry heavier payloads from low-earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release 85-5) During March: In a report of 1984 accomplishments, Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) commander, USAF Col. Philip Conran, said that AEDC conducted more than 200 separate test and evaluation programs during FY 84 and demonstrated the importance of the center's full-spectrum test support to development and operational aerospace programs. In that year, propulsion systems testing dominated test and evaluation efforts, turbine engine testing being the busiest in the history of the center. Much of that had resulted from the new start for the F109 next-generation trainer engine and the fly-off competition between the F110 and F100 engines for the USAF's F-16 Fighting Falcon and the subsequent product verification of the F110. In rocket motor testing, AEDC conducted three altitude test firings of the inertial upper stage (IUS) in an effort that helped Space Division and Boeing Aerospace Co. successfully understand and fix the April 1983 upper stage inflight anomaly. After failure of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 commercial satellites to reach desired orbits, AEDC supported the conversion of defense and commercial satellite perigee and apogee booster motors from carbon-carbon to carbon phenolic rocket nozzles. AEDC considered completion of construction of the aeropropulsion systems test facility (ASTF) its outstanding achievement for 1984 and was proceeding with activation and acceptance testing to prepare the ASTF for operations in September 1985. In the flight dynamics area, AEDC completed in a specially modified vacuum chamber the initial ground testing phase of the antisatellite pathfinder sensor that required the use of a spin mount rig, which had been three years in development, and an optical alignment system that provided accuracies on an order of magnitude better than any other available system. AEDC also developed and successfully demonstrated a new test technique of spinning a nose cone to evaluate reentry erosion. One of the most productive programs at AEDC in 1984 was for the C-17 advanced cargo aircraft. AEDC provided more data in less time than usual and saved the sponsors about $1 million in wind-tunnel test time. The in-house technology program, which supported testing and evaluation missions, delivered needed test techniques for testing of advanced reentry-vehicle materials, engine icing, and rocket motors. For example, AEDC applied a flash X-ray technique and worked with the University of Tennessee Space Institute to enhance the image of three test firings of the inertial upper stage, resulting in successful completion of the anomaly investigation. (AEDC Test Highlights, Spring/85, 2)
Hughes Communications faced the possibility of a $10,000 per day fine, up to a total of $5 million, if the Leasat communications system was not fully operational by November 30, Aviation Week reported. The potential of a fine resulted from the failure of its Leasat 4 satellite following deployment from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, reducing significantly the likelihood of three Leasat satellites being operational by the November 30 deadline. Hughes could avoid the fee if the repaired Leasat 3 activated in late October; otherwise the firm had the option of launching a ground spare. Telemetry data from Leasat 3, repaired during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission, continued to confirm the satellite's functioning. The liquid propulsion system was intact, and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures were rising toward acceptable levels. However, the satellite could explode when its main rocket fired late in September, and Hughes officials gave it no more than a 50-50 chance of reaching geosynchronous orbit. Leasat 1 and 2, launched in August and November 1984, respectively, were operating according to specifications, and the Navy was leasing them. Hughes had to provide the U.S. Navy with four operational satellites by March 31, 1986, to meet the second contract deadline and could at that time again face fines for noncompliance. Company officials estimated December as the earliest date for a Leasat 5 launch. Albert Wheelon, Hughes Aircraft Co. senior vice president and president of Hughes's space and communications group, said the Leasat 4 loss and other recent spacecraft losses were having an impact on the industry. "My reading is that generally the whole insurance market for satellites has just gone belly-up," he commented. "I think it's going to have a major impact on startup companies. I think it's going to be a narrowing, both on the operator and the development side." He added that the status of spacecraft underwriters would have less of an impact on companies like Hughes, because it could provide self-insurance. (AvWk, Sept 23/85, 21)
NASA announced that astronomers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the Universities of Hawaii, Arizona, and Texas were observing Pluto and its only known satellite, Charon, as the two alternately moved in front of one another in a series of eclipses that occurred every 124 years or twice in each orbit of the sun. Each time Charon passed between Pluto and earth, a portion of Pluto's surface was blocked from view, resulting in a dimming of the combined light from both bodies. When Charon moved behind Pluto, their roles reversed. Measurements of the times, durations, and changes in brightness of the events would allow astronomers to calculate the masses, diameters, and densities of Pluto and Charon, permitting development of models of the two bodies' composition. Current estimates of Pluto's density had an uncertainty of 50%, not accurate enough to derive information on its composition. However, researchers thought Pluto's density was about that of water, making it the lowest-density planet known that had a solid surface. The new measurements indicated that the combined brightness of Pluto and Charon diminished by 4% during the eclipses, a dimming that lasted about two hours and was superimposed on a 30% brightness change that occurred over a 6.4-day period. The longer change in brightness happened because one hemisphere of Pluto was 30% brighter than the other. Very little was known about Pluto and even less about Charon, including when or even if the five-year-long series of eclipses would begin. In order not to miss any of the earliest events, the astronomers had established an observing network at McDonald Observatory in Texas, the University of Arizona observatories, Palomar Observatory in California, and Mauna Kea Observatory in Hawaii. Dr. Edward Tedesco of JPL had been the first to see and measure an eclipse of Pluto by Charon January 16 from Palomar; Richard Binzel observed another eclipse February 17 from the McDonald Observatory; and Dr. D. J. Tholen observed a third eclipse February 20 from the Mauna Kea Observatory. Pluto and Charon's great distance from earth and relatively small sizes made them the solar system's most difficult objects to observe. (NASA Release 85-36)
NASA announced it had launched on March 22 at 6:58 p.m. EST the Intelsat V-A (F-10) by the Atlas/Centaur 63 from Cape Canaveral. Eighth in a series of 10 Intelsat V-type international telecommunications satellites, the spacecraft would undergo several weeks of on-orbit testing before positioning in geosynchronous orbit. The AC-63, second of the new stretched version of the Atlas/Centaur for which Lewis Research Center had development and operation management responsibility, had an 80-in. extended first stage enabling it to hold more propellants. (NASA MOR M-491-203-85-08 [postlaunch] Apr 29/85; LeRC News, Apr 8/85, 2)
NASA announced that a Scout vehicle launched the Air Force AF-16 satellite [see U.S. Air Force/NASA and U.S. Air Force, Nov. 20] at 9:35 p.m. EST today from the Wallops Flight Facility. The Scout launch vehicle, S-207C, performed satisfactorily and placed the spacecraft into an orbit with the following parameters: 418 km, apogee; 170 km, perigee; and 37.05°, inclination. The U.S. Air Force, in a brief statement released that same day, announced that NASA launched aboard a single booster from Wallops Island two instrument test vehicles, or ITVs, into low orbit, the Chicago Tribune reported. "The satellites will be checked out and maintained in orbit for an unspecified time as part of the U.S. antisatellite program," the Air Force said. An Air Force official commented later that it was "safe to assume there will be another [antisatellite] test during the first quarter of 1986." (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [postlaunch], Jan 10/85; Chi Trib, Dec 14/85, A4) U.S. Science and Technology
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B celebrated Thanksgiving in space today, saying it was one of the best Thanksgivings they ever had, the Washington Times reported. It was the first U.S. manned spaceflight during that holiday since the third Skylab flight in 1973. The crew's main job for the day was deployment of the 4,144-lb. SATCOM KU-2 satellite owned and operated by RCA American Communications (RCA Americom). The uninsured $50 million satellite was the last of three KU-brand domestic communications satellites that operated in the 12 to 14 gigahertz range. It had 16 operational transponders and six spares, each transmitting 45 watts of power, more than the 12 to 30 watts used for C-Band transponders. The payload assist module (PAM) on the satellite was instrumented with radio frequency telemetry that would downlink data to ARIA (advanced range instrumentation aircraft) during burn of the solid-fuel rocket motor, a mission requirement for this first flight of a PAM-D2, the Kennedy Space Center Spaceport News explained. The uprated upper stage was identical to the PAM-D, except for size and weight. The spinup would be noticeably slower due to the larger mass and inertial components of the payload. NASA designed PAM-D2 to place up to 4,200 lb. in geosynchronous orbit, compared to the 2,800-lb. PAM-D version. The crew's dinner menu—chicken consomme, smoked turkey, cranberry sauce, green beans, corn, pasta, butter cookies, and lemonade—sounded traditional, but the turkey was preserved before launch by irradiation, sealed in foil, and had to be heated in a device similar to a toaster oven. Crew added warm water to the consomme, vegetables, and pasta to make them edible. (IV Times, Nov 29/85, 3A; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced the Wallops Flight Facility would celebrate its 40th anniversary on June 29. The events planned were in recognition of the scientific and technological achievements at Wallops, which had conducted rocketborne experiments since July 4, 1945, when researchers first launched a 17-foot Tiamat. Since that original flight, Wallops had launched approximately 13,000 rocket-propelled research vehicles and conducted thousands of aeronautical and aircraft tests to obtain information on aircraft and spacecraft flight characteristics and to increase knowledge of the upper atmosphere and the nearspace environment. This research led to major contributions to the U.S.'s aeronautical and space programs. The breakthroughs to supersonic flight by aircraft and to hypersonic flight by rocket systems were largely attributed to fundamental aerodynamic research conducted at Wallops by means of aerodynamic models propelled by multiple-stage rocket systems. Using sounding rockets Wallops personnel developed the technologies for measuring atmospheric structure and the space environment, such as temperature, pressure and density, micrometeorite densities, electric fields, energetic particles, and radiation levels. These measurements formed the basis for developing design criteria for scientific satellites and manned spacecraft. Wallops's researchers also pursued technology development for the manned space program, such as manned capsule-escape techniques and maximum dynamic pressure tests for the Mercury Program. Most recently Wallops was known as a center for the NASA suborbital program. Sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft conducted space science and aeronautical research missions. The island obtained its name from John Wallops, appointed deputy surveyor of Virginia in the 17th century by Col. Edmund Scarburgh. Wallops received a Crown Patent to the island in 1672. At present, the facility, in addition to the island, included the mainland area in back of the island and the main base (formerly the Chincoteague Naval Air Station) about seven miles northwest. In addition to an open house, the day's anniversary events would include an Air Force F—15 aerial demonstration and demonstrations in crash/fire/ rescue, space sciences, model rocketry, and radio controlled model airplanes. (GSFC Release 85-16) Office of Inspector General
Members of the U.S. House Science and Technology space science and applications subcommittee questioned Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, office of space flight, on the agency's decision not to request funding for a 5th orbiter in its FY 86 budget, Aerospace Daily reported. Moore restated the agency's position that a four-orbiter fleet was adequate to meet traffic demand for the next five years or so, pointing out a recent decline in commercial and military traffic. NASA had requested $2.1 billion for 14 FY 86 Space Shuttle flights; Moore said NASA planned 17 missions in FY 87, 19 in FY 88, and projected 24 per year after that. Subcommittee chairman Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who had indicated strong support for a fifth orbiter, questioned Moore on the likelihood of increased launch traffic demand, potential schedule impacts of an accident, and the possibility of stretching out orbiter fabrication over a seven-to-eight-year period. Moore responded that NASA's program included adequate funding for structural spares procurement and maintenance of a viable base for initiating orbiter production over the next several years, pointing out that any funds for orbiter construction over a seven-to-eight-year period would be an add-on to NASA's runout budget and could be in competition with other items. He had also remarked on increasingly pessimistic market projections, even considering upcoming yearly launches of 18 to 20 communications satellites. Earlier, NASA Administrator James Beggs, in response to questions on NASA's exploring possibilities of private-sector purchase of a 5th orbiter, had said that no Space Shuttle privitization proposals submitted to NASA would result in a cost savings to the government. (A/D, Feb 22/85, 1)
NASA announced that it would launch Intelsat V-A (F—10), first in a series of improved INTELSAT commercial communications satellites, by an Atlas-Centaur (AC-63) from KSC no earlier than March 19, 1985. The Intelsat V-A series had a capacity of 13,500 two-way voice circuits and two TV channels. Aerospace manufacturers around the world, under the direction of prime contractor Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., had contributed to the design, development, and manufacture of Intelsat V-A. These contractors and their responsibilities were: Aerospatiale (France)—designed the main member for the spacecraft's modular construction and supplied the main body structure thermal analysis and control; GEC-Marconi (United Kingdom)—produced the 11-GHz beacon transmitters used for earth station antenna tracking; Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (Federal Republic of Germany)—designed and produced the satellite control subsystem and the solar array; Mitsubishi Electric Corp. (Japan)—contributed the six-GHz and four-GHz earth coverage antennas and manufactured the power control electronics and the telemetry and command digital units; Selenia (Italy)—designed and built the six telemetry, command, and ranging antennas, two 11-GHz beacon antennas, and two 14/11-GHz spot-beam antennas and built the command receiver and telemetry transmitter that combined to form a ranging transponder for determination of spacecraft position in transfer orbit; and Thomson-CSF (France)—built the 10-w, 11-GHz traveling wave tubes. The Intelsat V-A spacecraft would weigh about 4,402 lb. at separation from the Centaur, including the solid-propellant apogee kick motor (AKM) for circularization in the geosynchronous orbit. The separated spacecraft weight of 4,389 would include 1,963 lb. of AKM expendables and nine lb. of transfer orbit propellants. NASA would use spin-stabilization during the transfer orbit coast to geosynchronous altitude. After burnout of the AKM, NASA would despin the spacecraft and deploy the antenna and solar array. In this configuration the spacecraft would be about 51 feet wide (measured across the solar panels) and 22 feet high. In orbital operation, the spacecraft would be three-axis stabilized with the body-fixed antenna pointing constantly at the earth and the solar array rotated to point at the sun. The INTELSAT global satellite system comprised two essential elements: the space segment, consisting of satellites owned by Intelsat, and the ground segment, consisting of earth stations owned by telecommunications entities in the countries in which they were located. The space segment had 16 satellites in synchronous orbit at an altitude of about 25,780 km (22,240 miles). There were 424 communications antennas at 334 earth station sites in 134 countries and territories in the ground segment. The combined system of satellites and ground stations provided more than 800 earth station-to-earth station communications pathways. (NASA MOR M—491-203-85-08 [prelaunch] Mar 18/85)
The European Space Agency (ESA) launched at 9:15 p.m. EST today from Kourou an Ariane rocket that successfully deployed two telecommunications satellites including a U.S.-built G-Star 1, the Washington Post reported. A breakdown in timing between the rocket and the ESA's various earth-based satellite tracking stations delayed launch 79 minutes. ESA officials described the launch as "another success" in the agency's competition with the U.S. Space Shuttle to capture the world market for satellite launches. The Ariane rocket was the 13th fired, including two aborted launches, since 1979. The previous launch February 9 also put two satellites into orbit. Officials said they had nearly 30 orders to launch commercial satellites, compared with about 60 orders for the Space Shuttle. The Ariane rocket deployed the G-Star 1 satellite, owned by the GTE Spacenet Corp., and the French Telecome-1B 20 minutes after liftoff at about 22,000	miles above the equator. (W Post, May 8/85, A26)
NASA announced new crew assignments for the STS 51-D mission set for late March-early April would be Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and S. David Griggs, mission specialists; and Charles Walker (McDonnell Douglas) and Sen. E. J. "Jake" Garn, payload specialists. NASA would assign the originally announced 51-D crew of commander Daniel Brandenstein, pilot John Creighton, and mission specialists Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel to a future mission. The Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and NASA had agreed to reassign payload specialist Patrick Baudry (France) from the 51-E mission to STS 51-G, as the earliest flight opportunity with adequate middeck experiment stowage capability for the French medical experiments. As a seven-day mission, 51-G would also offer more time for data collection. For fluid-transfer experiments designed to assist Hughes Aircraft in the refinement of their satellite design activities, NASA would assign a Hughes payload specialist to the 51-1 flight to substitute for the lost opportunity on 51-D. Hughes would announce later whether John Konrad or Gregory Jarvis would fly the mission scheduled for early August. Preservation of the year's flight and crew training schedules had necessitated the changes. Bobko's crew had to fly soon in order to preserve subsequent training schedules for the 51—J dedicated Department of Defense (DOD) mission, the first flight of the Atlantis orbiter. The reassignment was consistent with NASA's crew selection policy of separating crew from payload flight assignments except in the case of Spacelab and dedicated DOD missions, for which substantial crew/payload interaction was required. (NASA Release 85-34)
NASA announced that the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) selected the Space Shuttle to launch July 1988 and mid-1989 two communications satellites in INMARSAT'S second generation series. The spacecraft would enhance INMARSAT'S existing maritime satellite network and the communications services the organization provided to 43 member nations including the U.S. British Aerospace Corp. would build the spacecraft; Hughes Aircraft would supply the spacecraft communications payload. A McDonnell Douglas spin-stabilized upper stage, the PAM-D, would boost the spacecraft from low-earth orbit into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. An apogee kick motor, a smaller rocket motor on the spacecraft, would position the spacecraft in a circular 22,300-nautical-mile geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 85-111)
A conflict between industrial and developing countries over the use of space would likely be the dominant issue at the five-week World Administrative Radio Conference that would open August 9 in Geneva, the NY Times reported. The meeting was intended to negotiate a plan to avert traffic jams in the space used by orbiting communications satellites. The conflict existed as a result of the desire of industrial countries to gain an advantage from their technical lead with a flexible approach to assigning orbital slots and the desire of some developing countries to reserve orbital slots years before they might be used. Communications experts around the world said the increased use of low-cost satellites to expedite domestic, regional, and world communications was leading to a virtual traffic jam in the satellite belt, 22,300 miles above the equator. The radio frequencies that gave the clearest signals also were rapidly filling. The U.S. and INTELSAT used most of the orbit space and radio spectrum. Reagan Administration officials said they would offer a proposal that the U.S. refrain for 10 years from using parts of the radio spectrum opened to satellite use by a 1979 conference. By staying out of the expanded spectrum, U.S. officials said, the U.S. would reassure less-developed nations that there would be radio room for them when their satellite-launching plans matured. The U.S. plan would let a country ask for radio frequencies 15 years in advance against the current five years. The U.S. plan would also establish a requirement that countries with a satellite in operation made compensatory payments to countries forced to put satellites in less desirable orbits or forced to use less desirable radio frequencies. The most persuasive aspect of the U.S. proposal was the prospect that between 50 and 100 U.S. satellites were at some stage of planning, development, or scheduled for launch over the next three years. Less-developed countries, particularly those in the tropical zone, wanted rigid assignments of radio bands, including the lower frequencies then dominated by the developed nations, because the bad weather common in the tropics did not noticeably disturb those frequencies. (NYT, Aug 7/85, D1)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power said the USSR was continuing in 1984 deployment of new nuclear and conventional military weapons systems, including test firings of fifth-generation ICBMs, launchings of new classes of submarines, and installing new strategic bombers, the Washington Times reported. The book detailed several significant developments by the Soviet military, the article said, including continued test firings of the SS-24 and SS-25 intercontinental ballistic missiles, launch of two units of new Delta IV-class of strategic ballistic missile submarines to be fitted with the SS-NX-23 submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) then being flight tested, and completion of sea trials of a third 25,000-ton Typhoon-class strategic ballistic missile submarine to join the two Typhoon units already operational and fitted with 20 SS-N-20 SLBMs. The book also said the Soviets had developed a heavy-lift launch vehicle capable of putting 150-ton payloads into orbit as part of an "extremely high priority" military-related space program. The Soviet version of the U.S. Space Shuttle and manned Space Station would benefit from this heavy booster. Major emphasis in their space program was on long-duration manned missions for military research. The USSR continued research on ground- and space-based, antisatellite high-energy lasers. "The Soviets currently have the world's only deployed antisatellite weapons system that can attack satellites in near-earth orbit," the book said. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	385 L„lfllENTIQNAll.y 8LANK The Soviets also continued upgrading detection and tracking systems for ballistic missile defense and development of new early-warning and air-surveillance radars. Their work on a new, large phased-array radar at Krasnoyarsk violated the ABM treaty, the book stated, and "in addition, the Soviets are actively engaged in extensive research on advanced defenses against ballistic missiles." {W Times, Apr 1/85, 1A)
ESA announced it signed three contracts with Arianespace, two for future launches—ECS-4 scheduled for the second quarter of 1986 and Hipparcos scheduled for June 1988—and one for technical assistance for satellite launches on the first flight of Ariane 4. ECS—4 would replace ECS-3, lost as a result of the launch failure September 12 of Ariane V15. ECS-4 was in production at that time, and ESA accelerated its completion. Arianespace was providing the earliest possible launch slot in accordance with the relaunch conditions in the ECS-3 launch contract. Hipparcos would provide measurements of the positions, annual proper motions, and parallaxes of some 100,000 stars. From its position in geostationary orbit, the satellite systematically and repeatedly throughout its two-and-a-half-year lifetime would scan the whole sky, providing measurements that would serve as a reference system of unprecedented precision, important in studies of earth's motion, the solar system, and our galaxy, and forming a basis for future ground and space astrometry. Under the third contract, the first flight of Ariane 4, part of ESA's Ariane 4 development program, would be carried out under ESA's responsibility. The launch, scheduled to take place during the third quarter of 1986, was designed to demonstrate the operational capability of Europe's most powerful launcher. ESA was supplying part of the payload, Meteosat P2, a refurbished spacecraft from the preoperational series, designed to bridge a possible gap between Meteosat 2 and the first of the operational meteorological spacecraft, MOP-1, scheduled for launch in late 1987. Additional payload elements would be Amsat Phase lll-C, the second unit of the third generation of the amateur radio "Oscar" series, and a telecommunications satellite yet to be selected. (ESA release Dec 10/85) FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
Recently completed agreements between insurance underwriters and Hughes Communications Services acknowledged loss of the disabled Leasat-3 spacecraft but established a plan under which Hughes and the underwriters would share in communication lease revenues if a plan to repair the satellite during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission was successful, Aviation Week reported. Under the agreement with American and European underwriters who insured Leasat-3, Hughes would provide the funds, estimated at about $10 million, for the rescue attempt. If the rescue was successful, Hughes would regain the cost of the salvage mission through initial lease revenues. The agreements recognized a loss of $85 million for the spacecraft and launch costs. The loss resulted from the failure of the spacecraft on April 13 to activate during an automatic deployment sequence after the spacecraft was ejected from the Space Shuttle orbiter Discovery's cargo bay [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 17]. Hughes and NASA v/ere developing equipment and procedures to mount the rescue attempt, johnson Space Center had concluded a critical design review for rescue hardware such as a worksite, stowage assembly, and the capture, handling, grapple, and spinup bars that would be used to stabilize, restrain, and spin the satellite once modifications aimed at restoring ground control were made on orbit. The design review also covered components Hughes was building, such as the remote power unit, spun bypass unit, and a checkout box that would be used to test electronic components on orbit prior to the rescue attempt. Completion of the critical design review enabled NASA to obtain information on the electronic components Hughes was building and to build rescue equipment for the mission, conduct vacuum chamber testing, and begin training for the salvage mission. NASA had already conducted initial neutral buoyancy training in the weightless training environment facility and mass simulation tests in preparation for the mission. (AvWk, July 8/85, 24)
NASA announced that it signed a 21-month agreement with Scott Science and Technology, Inc. (SST) to provide technical expertise to SST in the development of a commercial liquid-fuel upper stage for boosting Space Shuttle-deployed satellites to geosynchrous orbit. SST, whose president was former astronaut David Scott, had worked for two years on developing the upper stage, called the Satellite Transfer Vehicle, which would be able to boost satellites ranging from 2,000 to 19,000 lb. On some missions, the stage would be recoverable. Engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center would monitor the stage's development and consult with SST staff on technical problems. SST would reimburse NASA for the use of any test facilities and the salaries and travel of JSC personnel working on the project. (NASA Release 85-143)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced it would hand over on February 5 MARECS B-2 to the International Maritime Satellite organization (INMARSAT) for commercial operation. The spacecraft, launched November 10 and operational since January 8, would complete INMARSAT'S first-generation satellite system, which would offer worldwide service covering three oceans: the Atlantic region with MARECS-A positioned at 26° W, the Indian Ocean with INTELSATMCS A at 63° E, and the Pacific Ocean with MARECS B-2 at 176.5° E. In preparation for future communications satellite services, ESA in cooperation with INMARSAT was conducting experiments with MARECS B-2 to design economically operated equipment compact enough for installation in small vehicles. (ESA release Feb 4/85)
NASA launched today from KSC Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-G with a crew of seven, including Saudi Prince Sultan Salman A1-Saud and Patrick Baudry from France, for the 18th Space Shuttle flight, the Washington Post reported. Earlier NASA had announced that mission 51-G would carry the automated directional solidification furnace (ADSF), Spartan 1, and the French echocardiograph (FEE) and posture (FPE) experiments. The objective of the ADSF was to provide a technology demonstration of the capability of the equipment to perform directional solidification of a magnetic composite material and to study the role of gravity-driven phenomena in such processing. The apparatus used for the directional solidification experiments was a specially designed furnace that melted a sample contained in a quartz tube one cm in diameter and 35 cm long. A furnace module (a heater with an integral quench block) moved along the four tubes in the experiment so that the manganese-bismuth alloy samples melted and solidified at a controlled rate. Electric resistance provided the heat; the quench block was liquid cooled. In that first flight, all four samples were the same alloy with only the solidification rate changed to allow a better understanding of that aspect of the process. Spartan 1 was the first of a continuing series of low-cost free flyers designed to extend sounding rocket experiment capabilities. The Spartan 1 objective was to map the X-ray emissions from the Perseus Cluster, the nuclear region of the Milky Way galaxy, and the Scorpius X-2 (SCO-X-2). NASA had flown the Spartan 1 instrument several times on sounding rockets; the resulting information led to the need to obtain greater viewing time of the selected targets, thus permitting more detailed studies with greater resolutions. The crew would deploy the Spartan 1 from the Space Shuttle and retrieve it using the Canadian-built remote manipulator system. After deployment, the Spartan 1 would perform scientific observations for up to 40 hours via an onboard microcomputer controller that commanded all pointing sequences and satellite control. There was no command or telemetry link; when observing sequences were complete, the satellite "safed" all systems and placed itself in a stable attitude for retrieval. The objectives of the FEE and FPE, a part of a cooperative program with France, was to obtain on-orbit data regarding the response of the cardiovascular and sensorimotor systems to weightlessness. French payload specialist Patrick Baudry would perform the experiments with participation from other crew members including the Arabsat payload specialist. The USSR's July 1982 Salyut mission had also flown the FEE system. By 4:30 p.m. June 17, Discovery's crew had successfully deployed a Mexican satellite, Morelos-1, the first of two identical satellites, which headed for a position 22,300 miles above the equator west of the Galapagos Islands. It would beam TV programs to the most remote regions of Mexico. (NASA Flight Operation Report M-980-51-G [prelaunch] June 5/85, NASA MOR E-420-51-G-16 [prelaunch] June 7/85, MOR E-420-51-G-17 [prelaunch] June 5/85, MOR E-420-51-G-18 [prelaunch] June 13/85, MOR-989-51-G [postflight] July 3/85; W Post, June 18/85, A3) During June: NASA announced that the Space Shuttle mission 51-G would carry three communications satellites, a deployable/retrievable Spartan 1 spacecraft, and six Get Away Special canisters. The orbiter Discovery would fly several mid-deck experiments including one for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) organization and a materials processing furnace. The Mexican spacecraft, Morelos-A, was a version of the Hughes HS 376 satellite, a number of which had already been deployed from the Space Shuttle. Morelos-A was the first of two domestic communications satellites that would provide advanced telecommunications to the more remote parts of Mexico. Arabsat-A, owned by the Arab Satellite Communications Organization and built by Aerospatiale, would provide telecommunications links between the member nations. A U.S. domestic communications satellite owned by American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), Telestar 3-D would provide telecommunications services to the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. All three spacecraft would first spring-eject from the orbiter's cargo bay, then on each a small attached payload assist module would ignite about 45 minutes after deployment to propel the satellites to transfer orbits out as far as 22,300	miles above earth. A second small rocket motor would then fire on each spacecraft to circularize the orbits, placing the spacecraft in geosynchronous orbits. Three of the six Get Away Special canisters contained West German payloads for study of materials processing in space and behavior of liquid propellants. A fourth canister contained a U.S. Air Force/U.S. Naval Research Laboratory investigation of the ultraviolet radiation environment in space. A fifth canister had a package of nine student experiments in biological and physical sciences. A Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) investigation of a developmental heat transfer system was in the sixth canister. A capillary pumped loop (CPL) experiment, it was the first flight of a CPL two-phase thermal control system. The advanced development and flight experiments section of the thermal engineering branch at GSFC developed the CPL (NASA Release 85-83)
The European launcher Ariane 3 launched two satellites, Brazil's Brasilsat 1 and the Arab Arabsat 1, FBIS AFP in Spanish reported. Frederick D'Allest, French Center for Space Studies director general, noted Ariane had taken off on schedule, down to the exact hour planned a year previously. Ariane's three sections functioned perfectly, and the 3rd one had reached satellite-ejection speed at an altitude of 210 km; three minutes later Arabsat 1 separated from the rocket, followed a half minute later by Brasilsat 1. The satellites would require several weeks to reach their geostationary orbits: Arabsat 1 over Zaire, Brasilsat 1 above central Brazil. (FBIS AFP in Spanish, Feb 9/85)
NASA announced that Voyager 2 began today its encounter with Uranus, which would continue through February 25, 1986. During the period, the spacecraft's 11 instruments would perform close-range studies of the planet, its five known satellites, and nine rings. Voyager 2 would also search for a planetary magnetic field, new satellites, and new rings. The spacecraft would make its closest approach to Uranus, flying 81,500 km above the cloud tops of the seventh planet, at 1:00 p.m. EST January 24, 1986.	Because Voyager 2 was the first spacecraft to reach the planet, the encounter would provide scientists with more information about Uranus and its satellites and rings than had been learned since William Herschel discovered the planet March 31, 1781. In addition to two cameras, a photopolarimeter, and a spacecraft radio, Voyager 2 carried an infrared interferometer/spectrometer and radiometer, an ultraviolet spectrometer, a cosmic-ray detector, a plasma instrument, a low-energy charged-particle detector, magnetometers, a planetary' radio astronomy receiver, and a plasma-wave instrument. Three radioisotope thermoelectric generators supplied the spacecraft's electric power, a system necessitated because solar cells could not receive sufficient solar energy at such a great distance from the sun. NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN) antenna complex at Canberra, Australia, would receive most key data obtained during the Uranus encounter and all of that during the closest approach. (NASA release Dec 85, NASA Voyager Bulletin, Dec 4/85) ATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH
The TOMS, or Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, aboard Nimbus-7 made measurements the previous week indicating that the gas cloud ejected from the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Columbia released twice as much sulfurous gas into the sky as the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens and five times as much as the 1982 eruption of Galung-gung in Indonesia, the NY Times reported. Dr. Arlin Krueger of the Goddard Space Flight Center said that within 14 hours of the November 13 eruption, the cloud spread over an area of 600,000 sq. km (230,000 sq. miles). NASA researchers designed TOMS to monitor changes in earth's protective ozone layer, and it scanned the stratosphere at a succession on ultraviolet wavelengths whose relative intensities provided an index of ozone abundance. But the TOMS readings could also identify sulfur dioxide. The sulfur cloud, 14 hours after the main eruption, spread chiefly to the east, covering most of Colombia and part of Venezuela. One arm of the cloud reached as far south as the equator in Colombia and as far north as Lake Maracaibo in Venezuela. Because TOMS was not used for day-to-day weather forecasting, it was not ordinarily subjected to a rapid-analysis process. As soon as the Colombian eruption occurred, however, Dr. Krueger and his colleagues began to study its readings. The sulfur dioxide, he said, "shows up very well." Although estimates of the cloud's volume were preliminary, Krueger said it appeared much smaller than that formed by the eruption in 1982 of El Chichon in southern Mexico. Visible and infrared data from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration satellites had traced El Chichon's dust, which formed a narrow plume, through one complete circuit of the globe from April 5 to April 15, 1982. Although Nevado del Ruiz's sulfur cloud was extensive, it did not appear sufficient, with its associated ash cloud, to have an effect on climate. Whereas El Chichon's sulfur cloud was traced around the world, researchers expected del Ruiz to dissipate within days without any severe environmental effects. (NYT, Nov 19/85, A14)
NASA launched at 12:02 p.m. EDT today from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger mission 51 —B carrying seven astronauts, Spacelab 3, 24 rats, and two squirrel monkeys for the most intensive science mission to date, the Washington Post reported. Launched 17 days after Discovery left the same launch pad, the Challenger flight bested the previous "turnaround" record of 34 days. Challenger carried the oldest crew ever to fly in space. Marine Col. Robert Overmyer, commander, was 49; Frederick Gregory, pilot, and Taylor Wang, payload specialist, were 44; Don Lind, mission specialist, was 54; Lodewijk van den Berg, payload specialist, was 53; William Thornton, mission specialist, was 55; and Norman Thagard, mission specialist, 41. The crew called the flight one by scientists for science. "This mission marks the first time that scientists who designed their own experiments will be executing those experiments in space," said Lind, who had been waiting 16 years for the flight. The five scientists would work in around-the-clock shifts on the 15 experiments inside the European-built Spacelab. Before liftoff NASA decided not to have the crew launch two Get-Away Special satellites, one a student experiment and the other a Pentago payload, because a nine-volt battery had failed on the last Space Shuttle flight. Ground tests showed that three other batteries from the same batch failed after 18 hours in vacuum. The satellites would return to the ground with the Space Shuttle. The crew successfully deployed a satellite intended to calibrate air traffic control radars on the ground, but encountered difficulties when trying to deploy a U.S. Navy satellite that would locate drifting weather buoys. The satellite would not move from the cargo bay despite repeated signals to trigger deployment. Later the crew discovered they had no fresh water from their galley faucet and had to bypass the faucet and reconnect themselves to their water supply using an all-purpose hose carried for such emergencies. Other problems ranged from an overheated hydraulic system power unit to a urine collection device that one crew member said sprayed water "all over the place." The monkeys and rats appeared to be doing well. Four of the rats had surgical implants in their hearts to record changes in heartbeat and blood flow. The others were testing cages and equipment for future animal experiments. The monkeys were on a shakedown flight to determine how they tolerated living in orbit. If they didn't get nervous or frightened in space, later flights would carry squirrel monkeys with surgical implants to test for space sickness and heart changes. (W Post, Apr 28/85, A18, Apr 29/85, A3, Apr 30/ 85, A7)
The U.S. Commerce Department announced it signed a contract with Earth Observation Satellite Co. (Eosat) to pay $250 million over the next five years for Eosat to construct two new Landsat satellites (Landsat 6 and 7); provide a ground system to operate and process data from the new spacecraft; and operate, process, and market data from Landsats 4, 5, 6, and 7, the Washington Post reported. Eosat, a joint venture of RCA Corp., which would build the new spacecraft, and Hughes Aircraft Co., which would provide satellite instrumentation including the thematic mappers, would operate the orbiting Landsat 4 and 5 for their anticipated lifetime at a cost to the government similar to the government's projected cost. The Commerce Department said the new satellites, Landsat 6 scheduled for launch in 1988 and Landsat 7 scheduled for launch when Landsat 6 neared the end of its approximately five-year lifetime, should provide sharper images and enhance the value of the system for agricultural uses. The U.S. government would launch the new satellites from the Space Shuttle at an estimated cost of $44.9 million and also pay for any Space Shuttle system modifications necessary for the launches. Although the contract called for Eosat to market and operate the four Landsats, it allowed the company to terminate date marketing for Landsat 4 and 5 if cumulative revenue was below 65% of the mutually agreed upon projected revenues for data sales for the two satellites and to terminate operations and data marketing for Landsat 6 and 7 if total cumulative revenue fell below 60% of projected revenue after launch of Landsat 6, Defense Daily reported. Landsats used cameras and other scanners to produce pictures in various wavelengths for many uses, including agriculture, mineral explorations, fishing, forestry, snow cover and surface water surveys, and land use and city planning. NASA developed the Landsat system and in 1983 transferred it to the Commerce Department. {W Post, Oct 1/85, B3; D/D, Oct 1/85, 153)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that the European X-ray Observatory Satellite, EXOSAT, had been in orbit over two years, during which time it had performed nearly 2,000 observations, returning data to an observatory based at the European Space Operations Centre, ESOC, in West Germany. The EXOSAT telescopes had provided among other findings detailed images of the remnants of dead stars, called supernova, which had consumed their nuclear fuel (hydrogen and helium) and ended their lives in a spectacular explosion. The images enabled astronomers to deduce the amount of energy in the original explosion and the physical conditions in space in the neighborhood of the explosion. Some astronomers speculated that a supernova might end as neutron stars or black holes, and EXOSAT was helping astronomers study a number ol these "exotic" objects in the Milky Way. Early in 1984 astronomers proposed using EXOSAT to search for very fast rotating neutron stars in X-ray binaries. In mid-July 1985, ESA announced that these observations had led to the discovery of a completely unexpected phenomenon, that of quasi-periodic oscillations that might indicate the presence of fast rotating neutron stars in very old X-ray binary systems. The discovery of the oscillations opened up an entirely new area of investigation in the study of neutron stars that, because of the stars' extreme gravitational conditions, could make it possible to test to their limits some of the fundamental laws of physics. (ESA release July 1/85; ESA release July 19/85)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Materials Science Laboratory would make its first spaceflight on Space Shuttle 61-C, scheduled for launch on December 18, the Marshall Sfarreported. Using a mission peculiar equipment support structure (MPESS) in the payload bay, the Materials Science Laboratory-2 (MSL-2) would provide accommodations for three experiments in materials processing—the MSFC-managed Electromagnetic Levitator (EML) and Automated Directional Solidification Furnace (ADSF) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory-Managed Three-Axis Acoustic Levitator (3AAL). The electromagnetic levitator experiment would allow scientists to study the effects of materials flow during solidification of a melted material in the microgravity environment. Six samples would be suspended in the electromagnetic field of a coil and melted by induction heating from the coil's electromagnetic field. The ADSF consisted of four furnace, or sample, units. The experiment would investigate the melting and solidification process of four different materials for later comparison to samples of the same materials processed on earth. In the 3AAL experiment, 12 liquid sampies would be suspended in sound pressure waves and rotated and oscillated in a low-gravity nitrogen atmosphere. Investigators would study the degree of sphericity attainable and small bubble migration similar to that having to do with the refining of glass. The standard switch panel in the orbiter aft flight deck would provide activation, deactivation, and status monitoring capability. (Marshall Star, Dec 18/85, 2) During December. NASA scheduled for launch on December 18 the Space Shuttle Columbia, making its first journey into space in two years, on mission 61-C, the 24th flight of the U.S. Space Transportation System. Robert Gibson would command the flight, his second trip into space. Charles Bolden, on his first spaceflight, would pilot; mission specialists would be Franklin Chang-Diaz, a physicist born in Costa Rica and the first American of Hispanic origin to fly in space, and Steven Hawley and George Nelson, both making their second spaceflight; and payload specialists would be Robert Cenker of RCA and U.S. Rep. Bill Nelson of Florida, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications and the second congressional observer to fly in space. During the mission, the crew would deploy RCA's Satcom KU-2 communications satellite, the second in a series of three, with its payload assist module D-2 (PAM D-2) upper stage. The crew on mission 61-C in November deployed Satcom KU-1. Also onboard Columbia in the payload bay would be the Materials Science Lab-2 (MSL-2) [see Space Transportation System/Scientific Research, Dec. 18], the first Hitchhiker (HHG-1) payload, the RCA Infrared-Imaging Experiment (IR—IE), and 12 Get Away Special (GAS) experiments in specialized canisters mounted to a GAS beam attached to the payload bay. Hitchhiker G-1, a more sophisticated version of the GAS concept, consisted of a baseplate on which small payloads were mounted directly or enclosed in canisters. The carrier for the first time provided small payloads with access to the orbiter's 1400-watt power supply and to ground communications. Hitchhiker G-1 experiments would study experimental capillary pumped loop heat transport systems (sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center-GSFC), provide film images of the environment around the Space Shuttle (Air Force Geophysics Laboratory), and study the effect of the Space Shuttle environment on coated mirrors (Perkin-Elmer Corp.). The GAS Bridge was a beam supporting 12 GAS canisters that were mounted across the orbiter's cargo bay. The beam consolidated the canisters into a single easy-to-load and unlead unit. Experiments in the GAS canisters would:
During his 13-year career at RCA, Cenker held a number of engineering positions in the Satcom program that included work on spacecraft design, integration and test scheduling, cost control, and launch site activity planning. During November NASA would launch the first RCA Satcom Ku-Band satellite, KU-2, on Space Shuttle mission 61-B. Three RCA Satcom Ku-Band satellites would complement the operating Satcom C-Band system in providing distribution of TV services to customers in metropolitan areas. (NASA Release 85-90)
The USSR had launched Meteor-2, a meteorological satellite that would obtain global pictures of cloud cover and the surface below in visible and infrared frequencies in both the recorded and direct transmission mode and would observe penetrating-radiation flow in near-earth space, FBIS Tass International Service in Russian reported. The satellite also carried an earth-orientation system, equipment to automatically align solar panels to the sun, a radiotelemetry system for satellite monitoring, and a radio complex for transmission of data to earth. All equipment was functioning normally, the service reported. (Tass Inti. Service in Russian, Feb 7/85)
NASA announced that its AST-3 communications satellite, located at 105° west longitude, was providing communications support through its control center at Malabar, Florida, to American Red Cross and Pan American World Health Organization rescue and relief efforts following Mexico City's earthquake. The voice communications link with the outside world was crucial, since the earthquake disrupted all other forms of communications in the city. George Manno, director of media relations for the Red Cross, said "the ATS-3 is providing us with the most critical communications link. Although ham radio operators have been doing a swell job, they are serving as our backup communications system, while we rely primarily on the ATS as our main communications vehicle." Immediately after the earthquake occurred, NASA implemented the ATS emergency preemption plan; within 24 hours ATS-3 was on the air, giving priority to satellite communications traffic for the emergency rescue operations. (NASA Release 85-133)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1985 activities, which included nine Space Shuttle flights and launches of three Atlas Centaurs, two Scouts, and an Aerobee vehicle, its last flight. In 1985 NASA introduced the last and lightest-weight Space Shuttle orbiter—Atlantis. McDonnell Douglas inaugurated its upper stage booster, the Payload Assist Module D-2. Fifty two individuals flew aboard Space Shuttles in 1985. Of this group 19 were scientists performing observations, experiments, or investigations; 27 were U.S. military officers, and six were payload specialists from foreign countries (Mexico, Saudi Arabia, France, the Netherlands, and two from West Germany). The 52 individuals' combined time in space was nearly 55 days or over 880 earth orbits, for a combined travel distance of nearly 22 million miles. Six Space Shuttle astronauts spent a total of more than a day in extravehicular activities during the year. Two Spacelab missions aboard the Space Shuttle and an encounter by the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) with Comet Giacobini-Zinner highlighted the year for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	167 ^^LLLLjWTENTlONAai 8LANK On April 19, 1985, a little more than a year after President Reagan directed NASA to develop within a decade a permanently manned space station, NASA awarded competitive contracts to eight industry teams for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements of the station. NASA signed a memorandum of understanding with Canada, the European Space Agency, and Japan for cooperation during the definition and preliminary design phase of the program. NASA's aeronautical research and technology efforts included continuing work on such programs as the NASA/Department of Defense X-29 X-wing research aircraft, the tilt rotor/JVX aircraft, the advanced X-29 aircraft featuring a forward-swept wing, and the mission adaptive wing that could change its curvature. In the area of space technology, Langley Research Center completed development, assembly, and testing of a 15-meter hoop column deployable structure and antenna system. Other advances in space technology included significant modification to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to measure dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for design and testing for the space station space reactor power program, and completion of space construction experiments outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA's advances in space tracking and data systems included transition from ground network station support for low earth-orbiting spacecraft to use of the first Tracking and Data Relay Satellite in geosynchronous orbit. NASA had scheduled TDRS-2 and 3 for launch in January and July 1986, respectively. In February NASA completed consolidation of the Deep Space Network (DSN) and later an upgrade of the network that would enable the DSN to receive significantly more images from Voyager as it encountered Uranus in January 1986. NASA's Office of Commercial Programs funded and opened the first five of a planned series of centers for commercial development of space, which NASA expected would become self-supporting through research collaboration by industry, academia, and government agencies. (NASA Release 85177)
NASA postponed for 24 hours the first classified Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch the afternoon of January 23, as freezing temperatures threatened to cause severe icing on the external fuel tank, the Washington Post reported. Officials said ice chunks could drop off, damaging the Space Shuttle, and also that NASA staff was conducting inspection of fuel and water pipes to determine if they had frozen shut. The Department of Defense (DOD) had classified nearly all aspects of the mission. The crew consisting of Navy Capt. Thomas Mattingly, AF Lt. Col. Loren Shriver, Marine Lt. Col. James Buchli, AF Maj. Ellison Onizuka, and AF Maj. Gary Payton would not conduct the traditional prelaunch news conference nor hold one after landing. The U.S. Air Force would not disclose how long the crew would stay in orbit or what flight path they would take on the premise it might help the USSR determine mission purpose or interfere with the mission. Previously the Washington Post had reported that Challenger would carry into orbit a sigint (signals intelligence) satellite that could intercept telemetry from Soviet missile tests. The Associated Press later had reported that the satellite could pick up radio, ground-to-space communications, and longdistance telephone calls made by microwave relay. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger would not comment on the reports' accuracy. The USAF had not filed a flight-path plan with the United Nations, and the location of two ships that would recover the solid-fuel rocket boosters was also secret. There would be no public air-to-ground communications during the flight. (W Pbst, Jan 23/85, A3)
The Washington Post reported that Fairchild Industries would sell its 50% interest in American Satellite Co. and Space Communications Co. for $105 million to Continental Telecom Inc., which owned the other half of the two joint ventures. Observers considered the two satellite communications subsidiaries Fairchild's leading growth opportunities. American Satellite of Rockville (Amsat) provided private and general satellite communications services. It transmitted regional editions of The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, and other newspapers and had won a large number of government contracts. Space Communications of Gaithersburg (Spacecom) owned and operated the tracking and data relay satellite system for NASA, provided communications to the Space Shuttle, and was building a $122.8 million communications network for the Air Force. Fairchild president Emanuel Fthenakis said the company decided to sell its interests in Amsat and Spacecom to consolidate its other businesses. "We are addressing the same market with more than one company," he said. "The main reason is to consolidate our activities and address these markets with our wholly owned subsidiaries." Analysts said the move showed Fairchild was unwilling or unable because of troubles in its other operations to invest the large amounts of capital required to continue to expand the two companies. (W Post, Aug 9/85, B1)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced that a team from its Wallops Flight Facility completed studies of the atmospheric ozone profile at Natal, Brazil. The team acquired data from 9 to 40 miles above the earth at an equatorial site using the improved "A" version ROCket OZonesonde (RO-COZ-A). The team took seven profiles during ozone-measuring satellite overpasses to compare the ROCOZ-A data with other satellite data for the same time and place. Although the primary mission was to support the SAGE II ozone measurements acquired by the ERBS/SAGE II satellite, the team would also compare the data with that from the solar backscatter ultraviolet spectrometer on the Solar Mesopheric Explorer (SME) satellite. Each ROCOZ-A launch included the supporting launch of a super-loki datasonde dart (a small meteorological rocket) to collect temperature data from 9 to 43 miles in the atmosphere and an electrochemical concentration cell (ECC) balloon-launched ozonesonde to collect lower-atmospheric (below 18 miles) ozone, temperature, and pressure data. The team would use the supporting data to define the atmosphere at the site for comparison with the appropriate satellite. The team provided ROCOZ-A coverage during five dual and two single satellite overpasses. There were at least two ROCOZ-A profiles for each satellite with four profiles for the NOAA-9. (GSFC Release 85-17)
Observers had anticipated seeing the world's first man-made comet 72,000 miles above earth (over the Pacific Ocean west of Lima, Peru) the morning of December 27, 1984, the JPL Universe reported. Although clouds obscured viewing from official ground-observation sites, scientists called the artificial comet a success, marking another milestone in the active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE) program sponsored by the U.S., West Germany, and the United Kingdom. Mission goal was to inject, from a satellite tracer, ions of lithium and barium inside, outside, and just within the earth's magnetosphere (creating the comet appearance) and to detect and monitor these ions with two other satellites as the ions convected and diffused through the inner magnetosphere. Scientists hoped that this new data would improve understanding of the influence and mechanisms of interaction of the solar wind with earth's magnetosphere, including formation of the van Allen Belts. A NASA Convair 990 reported a six-minute viewing; an Argentine Boeing 707 an eight-minute view. Overall intensity of the "comet" was lower than expected; the 12,000- to 20,000-km tail was somewhat shorter than expected. Experimenters withheld other canisters of chemicals aboard the German ion-release module (IRM) for AMPTE experiments later in the year. GSFC managed the U.S. portion of the project; a JPL mission control team operated the charge composition explorer (CCE) spacecraft to observe the cloud. GPL Universe, Jan 11/85, 1; GSFC News, Jan 85, 3)
The Celestis Group, an organization of Florida undertakers, signed a contract with Space Services, Inc., headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original seven U.S. astronauts and based in Houston, to orbit a payload of cremated human remains at 1,900 miles high, the NY Times reported. The mission, scheduled for late 1986 or early 1987, would cost about $15 million. The Department of Transportation (DOT), which must approve the contract, indicated it had no immediate objections. In 1982 Space Services had become the first private company to launch its own rocket, the 36-foot Conestoga, into suborbital flight. The company's original liquid-fuel rocket had exploded on the launching pad a year before. The space-burial mission would use a second-generation Conestoga capable of putting 1,500 lb. into orbit. John Cherry, who had formed the Celestis Group, said that a Conestoga nose cone could contain as many as 13,000 capsules, each 3/8 inches by 1/4 inches, holding ashes reduced in volume by a Celestis-developed technique. Burial price would be $3,900 a customer. A reflective material would cover the nose cone in the first launch, enabling viewing of the satellite mausoleum as it passed overhead. Later missions would be deep-space burials, in which the nose cone would eject the capsules for dispersion into the cosmos. The Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 empowered the DOT to license all commercial space launchings. DOT examined proposals for their effect on public safety, national security, and international treaty obligations. (NY'^Jan 25/85, A13)
USA Today reported that its debate for that day would explore the pros and cons of U.S. manned space missions. In its editorial, USA Today said, "Human brains can adapt to change. Machines cannot. Without men and women in space, there would be no one to even try to fix the Navy's stranded satellite" [Navy communications satellite carried on the Discovery 51-D mission], ". . . Space is our last frontier. Without humans aboard to ride rockets to the stars and beyond, man will never embrace what he has envisioned," the editorial concluded. USA Today guest columnist Geoffrey Keller, a professor of astronomy at Ohio State University, wrote that one of the values of the manned space program was that it would help to lengthen the useful life of expensive space telescopes (for example, the Hubble Space Telescope), by permitting astronauts to replace worn-out telescope parts and to make telescopes more powerful as new and more efficient cameras were invented and installed. In an opposing view, James Van Allen, a professor of physics at the University of Iowa, wrote that nearly all of what he considered the really important and durable products of space technology were "achieved by much-less-expensive unmanned spacecraft, operating automatically and under cornmand control from ground stations, often for many years in earth orbit or in the far reaches of the solar system. ". . . The public acclaim for the Apollo program has left a permanent imprint on NASA and has, in effect, committed it to an overriding emphasis on further development of manned space flight," Van Allen continued. "This emphasis is simultaneously NASA's greatest strength and its greatest weakness. Manned space flight, with all its mythological foundations, has assumed the aura of a religion. The space shuttle and the proposed permanently manned space station are primarily embodiments of this religion," he wrote. But, he added, "the relevant results to date are far too meager to justify such hyperbolic expectations and such enormous expenditures. Meanwhile, the proven applications of space technology are languishing for lack of resources." (USA Today, Apr 16/85, 8A)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)
Scientists analyzing data recently sent from two monitoring devices aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite said the observations confirmed a progressive deterioration in the earth's ozone layer above Antarctica, the NY Times reported. Since 1974, the satellite data showed that a "hole" appeared each October in the ozone layer there, meaning the layer in that area became less able to shield the earth from damaging solar ultraviolet rays. This had caused scientists to predict that increased atmospheric pollution was causing the gradual depletion of stratospheric ozone; the new data seemed to show researchers that the ozone loss was proceeding much faster than expected. However, Goddard Space Flight Center's Dr. Donald Heath, who had monitored the satellite recordings for several years, said he was uncertain of the reason for the ozone decline. In addition to the theory that fluorocarbons caused ozone depletion, some scientists blamed the depletion on the sulfur compounds and other particles ejected into the stratosphere in the 1982 eruption of El Chichon in Mexico. And Heath said there were other possible explanations, such as the sunspot cycle, which was then near a minimum. According to a study by NASA scientists, the chemical reactions that produced stratospheric ozone were stimulated by a form of ultraviolet radiation that became weak when sunspots were fewest. Even under normal conditions the ozone layer was subject to wide variations, so it was difficult to establish that the recent depletion was part of a long-term trend. Heath also pointed out that it was not clear whether the Antarctic readings manifested a local change in atmospheric circulation or a global depletion, since the condition of the winter atmosphere over Antarctic was unique. Government officials in 1977 imposed a ban on fluorocarbons as spray-can propellants, but it became evident that the ozone varied in response to a variety of interacting natural and human influences. By 1984 a National Academy of Science report estimated fluorocarbon-caused ozone reduction at only 2 to 4%. (NYT, Nov 7/85, B21)
Scientists at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory's (AFGL) Space Physics Div. developed a computer program that predicted the electrical effects of the highly charged polar space environment on spacecraft. These effects could range from the production of noise in circuits to system failure in extreme cases, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Called Potential of a Large Object in the Auroral Region (POLAR), the code simulated in three dimensions the electrical interaction of the Space Shuttle or any other space vehicle with the polar space environment in the region from 100 to 600 miles above earth. Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base would orbit through the polar region, and the polar charging code could provide important data for the design of large space structures such as space stations. Lockheed Corp. used POLAR to predict the effect of charging on the Space Shuttle in low-altitude polar orbits with payloads funded by the Air Force Space Test Program Directorate and other Air Force and NASA programs. RCA performed calculations with POLAR for the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program vehicles. NASA's Spacelab 2 mission scientists used POLAR to predict the electrified gaseous environment, or plasma, of the Space Shuttle when the Plasma Diagnostics Package, a free-flying satellite, deployed. And NASA's LAGEOS Satellite Project Office would use POLAR to study charged particle drag on this laser reflecting satellite. POLAR was a successor to NASCAP (NASA Charging Analyzer Program), the computer code AFGL developed with NASA to model charging of Air Force satellites at geosynchronous altitude. The European Space Agency (ESA) had used that code to design weather and TV relay spacecraft, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used it to design the Galileo satellite. POLAR would incorporate data derived from future spacecraft flights and would become a computer-aided design tool for the construction of the advanced extravehicular mobility unit, the manned maneuvering unit, the NASA-proposed space station, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 20/85, 7) Transatmospheric Vehicle
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
On October 27, Hughes engineers ignited the satellite's engines to take it up to its intended orbit 22,300 miles above the Pacific Ocean, then Hughes and Navy engineers completed a month of testing. Following the certification, Hughes president Steven Dorfman commented, "We are meeting all our specifications. Six months later than originally intended, we are going into service." The successful repair turned around a loss for Hughes and its insurance carrier, which had paid the company $85 million. Dorfman said the insurer would get back $65 million by sharing revenues with Hughes over the satellites's ten-year lifespan. (IVPost, Dec 1/85, A3) SEARCH FOR EXTRATERRESTRIAL INTELLIGENCE
The European Space Agency (ESA) and the Department of Commerce's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced that the U.S. agreed to lend ESA its GOES-4 standby geostationary weather satellite as a temporary substitute for ESA's Meteosat-1 spacecraft. Meteosat-1, launched in 1977 with a planned 3-year lifetime, had run out of station-keeping fuel and would drift out of view of ESA's ground-station network in July. NOAA would move GOES-4, which had been at 140° W longitude over the Pacific Ocean, westward by 4° a day to bring it by mid-June to its new position at 10° W longitude above the Atlantic Ocean. Because ESA group equipment was not compatible with the GOES-4 command system, NOAA would operate the satellite for ESA from its satellite guidance facilities at Suitland, Maryland, and Wallops Station, Virginia. ESA's Meteosat ground facilities in Darmstadt would receive data from the spacecraft. When NOAA's Atlantic-area GOES-East Satellite lost its imaging capability in 1984, ESA's Meteosat-2 provided U.S. weather watchers with weather data, including information on the eastern Atlantic hurricane breeding grounds. (ESA Release, May 7/85)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B today launched satellites for Mexico and Australia, the Washington Post reported. The crew launched Mexico's Morelos B in the morning, just hours after liftoff. Morelos B was a Hughes 376 satellite, a standard design used by many foreign national and private companies, Kennedy Space Center's Spaceport News said. It would provide telephone, TV, and wire services to Mexico through a total of 22 transponders. A PAM-D payload assist module then boosted the satellite to geosynchronous orbit 22,300 miles above earth. The satellite would drift, unused, until it reached it final stationary position in 1989. Mexican officials chose to store Morelos B in orbit because launch cost for the satellite could increase to four times the amount that Mexico paid to NASA for today's deployment. Payload specialist Rudolfo Neri Vela, the first Mexican astronaut, was onboard to observe satellite deployment. In June 1985 crew in the orbiter Discovery deployed the first Morelos satellite. At 8:20 p.m. the Australian satellite AUSSAT 2 spun out of the Atlantis's cargo bay. "We got a good deploy," said mission specialist Sherwood Spring, who supervised the satellite's spring ejection. "It looked like it might have gone a second early," he added. AUSSAT2, also a Hughes 376 satellite, was the second of three operations satellites for the government-owned Australian National Satellite System. It had eleven 12-watt transponders and four 30-watt transponders to provide domestic communications to Australia's 15-million population. Australia would also use the satellite to improve maritime and air traffic control communications, relay digital data for business purposes, provide standard telephone communications, and direct satellite to home TV broadcasts. A PAM-D would also boost the satellite to geosynchronous orbit. In August 1985 the Discovery crew deployed the first AUSSAT. Mission commander Brewster Shaw had tested all systems aboard Atlantis and reported that one of four videotape recorders was not working. Mission control gave him permission to take apart an electronic cabinet to look for a wiring flaw, but Shaw said he could not see anything that was obviously wrong. Later, following directions from the ground, Shaw cycled a circuit breaker and reported, "Bingo. That seems to get power to VTR1." (IV Post, Nov 28/85, A28; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
NASA announced plans to deploy for the first time two small experimental satellites from Get Away Special (GAS) containers mounted in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger during the STS 51-B mission scheduled for launch in late April. Under the GAS program, NASA would deploy for $10,000 each the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) and the Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) in hopes of establishing an inexpensive way to deploy small satellites during routine Space Shuttle operations. Clarke Prouty, technical liaison officer for the GAS program at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said the GAS containers had been upgraded with ejection systems for the 51-B mission and that GSFC had developed a motorized door (full diameter motorized door assembly) for the can similar to the one first flown on the seventh Space Shuttle mission, which would allow the GAS payload to be exposed to space. The door assembly permitted GAS container insulation before and after satellite deployment and provided a means for keeping the satellite in the container in case of malfunction. GSFC had also adapted the spacecraft separation system used in the Delta rocket program for the GAS ejection systems. The GLOMR satellite, designed and built by Defense Systems Inc. was a data relay, communications spacecraft that was expected to remain in orbit for about a year. The NUSAT, designed, built, and tested by Weber State College, Ogden, Utah, in coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration, was an air traffic control radar system calibrator that would measure antenna patterns for ground-based radars operating in the U.S. and member countries of the International Civil Aviation Organization. NASA would first launch the NUSAT, then the GLOMR, at the end of Spacelab 3 science activities on the sixth day of the seven-day 51-B mission. Independent user ground stations would operate the satellites following deployment. The GAS program was available to anyone wishing to fly a small (for containment in 2Vi- by 5-ft area) scientific research and development experiment. The Space Shuttle had flown 29 GAS containers, including those for materials processing, life sciences, biology, seed and crystal growth, and cosmic radiation. (NASA Release 85-35)
NASA announced today the launch by Atlas/Centaur 64 from KSC of the Intelsat V-A (F-11), second in a series of improved International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) commercial communications satellites launched by that vehicle. Intelsat V-A had a capacity of 13,500 voice circuits compared with Intelsat Vthat had 12,000; Intelsat IV-A, 6,000; and Intelsat IV, 4,000. All satellites had two TV channels. Figures collected as a result of the INTELSAT-sponsored global telecommunications traffic conference indicated that an Intelsat IV-A satellite would have insufficient capacity by the early 1980s to cope with the traffic and load on the Atlantic Ocean primary satellite and on the Indian Ocean satellite. Although one solution could have been to orbit another Intelsat IV-A Atlantic Ocean and Indian Ocean satellite, subsequent planning proceeded toward the development of a high-capacity Intelsat V satellite. After an international bidding process, the INTELSAT Board of Governors at its September 1976 meeting awarded a contract for development and manufacture of seven Intelsat V satellites to Ford Aerospace and Communication Corp. as prime contractor and an international team of manufacturers as subcontractors. Since that time, the board decided to order two additional Intelsat V satellites and to order six higher-capacity Intelsat V-A spacecraft for launch in 1985 and beyond. Members of the international manufacturing team included Aerospatiale (France), GEC-Marconi (United Kingdom), Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (Federal Republic of Germany), Mitsubishi Electric Corp. (Japan), Selenia (Italy), and Thomson-CSF (France). (NASA MOR M-491-203-85-09 [prelaunch] May 27/85, [postlaunch] July 17/85)
The military crew of the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51—J deployed today two communications satellites for Department of Defense, the NY Times reported, citing reliable sources. After release from the Space Shuttle, the satellites, known as Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS III) and weighing a ton each and measuring 38 feet long with solar panels extended, rocket engines boosted them to a point 22,300 miles above the earth. According to General Electric Co., which built the satellites but would not confirm their presence on the Space Shuttle, both satellites were strengthened to withstand radiation from distant nuclear blasts and had a device to send emergency action messages from the President to the nation's nuclear forces. The Department of Defense (DOD) scheduled Atlantis to land at Edwards Air Force Base on a date that was classified; NASA and DOD said they would announce the time of landing 24 hours in advance. (NY Times, Oct 5/85, A46)
NASA said that the GOES—6 weather satellite turned its eye toward space for about four and a half hours today before NASA personnel reversed it, the Washington Post reported. Located at a fixed point about 22,000	miles above earth, the satellite transmitted weather photos widely used by TV stations and newspapers across the nation. NASA repositioned the satellite in a reprogramming effort that required transmission of 14 groups of 256 commands each, retiming the revolving satellite so that its instruments would come on when facing the earth. Since August 1984 when GOES-5 lost its ability to transmit photos because a light in it failed, GOES-6 was the lone fixed-point satellite making transmissions. NASA had scheduled for launch in spring 1986 a replacement for GOES-5. If a failure like the one that occurred on August 25 were to last longer, it could have a serious impact on the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) ability to monitor severe storms. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A8)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's crew on mission 51-D landed the orbiter at 8:54 a.m. EST April 19 at KSC, a return characterized by the worst damage in 16 Space Shuttle missions—a burn-hole in a wing, two failed brakes, two blown tires, and at least 123 broken heat-shield tiles, the Marshall Space Flight Center's Star and the Washington Post reported. NASA scheduled the mission to last five days, but extended it by two days to give the crew a chance to correct a malfunction in the Hughes Leasat 3 satellite. The damage to Discovery could set back preparation for its next mission scheduled for June 12. NASA would have to replace protective tiles, probably damaged when the Space Shuttle lifted off through the rain [see Apr. 12]. "There's little question that we suffered more severe damage on this landing than on any other so far," Space Shuttle launch director Robert Sieck said. Concerning the brakes, Sieck said, "Brake damage we've seen on previous flights. Brake failure is something we've never seen." NASA had waved off Discovery for a 7:16 a.m. landing because of rain over Cape Canaveral. One orbit later, Discovery headed down to KSC, where NASA told Commander Karol Bobko to land on runway 33 instead of 15 because of sun glare. Bobko landed with no headwind to slow him, touching down at 231 mph, the fastest any Space Shuttle had landed. As Discovery rolled down the three-mile concrete runway, it encountered a nine-knot crosswind and began veering to the right. When Bobko corrected for the wind by braking one side, the strain apparently caused one of the inboard brake assemblies to lock. Moments later the inboard brake assembly on the other side also locked, causing rubber to burn. A burn-hole the size of a dinner plate nearly penetrated through aluminum on the Space Shuttle's left wingtip where a landing flap apparently dislodged several protective tiles. Regarding the Leasat 3, a Hughes representative said initial belief that a lever failed to release was in error [see Apr. 18]. Once Discovery had maneuvered to within 10 feet of the satellite, the crew reported the lever had released. The crew successfully snagged the lever twice to ensure it was fully released, and reported the only change in the satellite's status was a slowing from two to one revolution per minute. The first congressional observer in space, Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), had difficulty negotiating the steps down to the runway and required assistance into the van that took the crew to the dispensary for medical examinations. There had been some controversy over his presence on the flight, including a NY Times editorial that said, "Having pressured NASA to give him his space trip, Mr. Garn is now indebted to the agency. That's a pity for those whom he represents in supervising NASA's budget and its request to build an $8 billion space station." However, Garn commented that "I'm carrying my own weight. I knew I had to prove myself . . . I've dealt with NASA for 10 years. I'm working on the space station right now, setting policy." (Marshall Star, Apr 24/85, 1; W Post, Apr 11/85, B1, Apr 20/85, A1; NYT, Apr 20/85, 22)
NASA announced the appointment effective November 25 of Joseph Alexander to deputy chief scientist with responsibility for providing assistance to the chief scientist in advising the Administrator and in establishing policy related to scientific aspects of NASA programs and missions. Alexander joined Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in 1962, where he participated in the establishment of NASA's program in space radio astronomy and conducted studies of the sun, the planets, and the galaxy from earth-orbit, lunar-orbit, and planetary flyby spacecraft. In 1970 he became head of the Galactic Studies Section where he was responsible for scientific studies associated with the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite program. Following leave as a visiting scientist at the Department of Astro-Geophysics at the University of Colorado, Alexander became head of the Planetary Magnetospheres Branch and directed a research team conducting both experimental and theoretical studies of planetary environments by using instruments on board spacecraft such as the Interplanetary Monitoring Probes, Mariner-10, Magsat, Pioneer-11, and Voyager 1 and 2. From January 1984 until March 1985, Alexander was a senior policy analyst at the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy where he concentrated on issues related to space science and technology in the civil space program. He then returned to GSFC as associate chief of the laboratory for extraterrestrial physics. A member of the American Geophysical Union, the U.S. National Committee of the International Union of Radio Science, and the International Astronomical Union, Alexander received in 1960 a B.S. degree and in 1962 an M.A. degree, both in physics, from the College of William and Mary. (NASA anno., Dec 2/85)
"The Dream Is Alive," a new IMAX movie that was perhaps the most advanced film of its kind ever made, opened today at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Post reported. The $3.6 million production, narrated by Walter Cronkite, was the first ever shot almost completely on location in space and was an informal sequel to "Hail, Columbia," the story of the U.S.'s first Space Shuttle. Because the film was shot on three of the most dramatic and action-packed Space Shuttle flights of the previous year, it was essentially a video yearbook full of special happenings, the Washington Times reported. The film showed the rescue and repair of the Solar Max satellite, the deployment of the 100-foot-tall solar array that someday could help power the space station, launching of two communications satellites, and the first spacewalk by an American woman. Among what appeared to be special effects produced in Hollywood were the immensity of Hurricane Josephine as seen from 200 miles overhead and the silence of a satellite drifting noiselessly in the blackness of space. The astronauts who shot the footage said the IMAX format came as close to capturing the real view and the true feel of spaceflight as any format ever had. IMAX expert Graeme Ferguson, who produced and directed the film, said the next step was to modify an IMAX camera so it could be taken outside the Space Shuttle. (W Post, June 22/85, D1; W Times, June 20/85, 3B)
NASA announced that one of the satellites in the COSPAS/SARSAT system, an international program with the U.S., USSR, Canada, and France serving as major partners, made possible the rescue of a man 140 miles off Cape Henry, Virginia. On April 17 Jack Boye departed Miami to sail to New York Harbor for the dedication of a memorial to Vietnam veterans of Airborne 173, his wartime squadron. Three days into the sail his radio went out, and a storm caused the sloop's electrical and electronic equipment and engine to fail and the boat to capsize. When the boat rolled over and started filling with water, Boye activated an emergency position-indicating radio beacon that trailed at the stern of the boat. An orbiting Soviet sea and rescue satellite, one of three USSR and two U.S. satellites equipped with sea and rescue equipment in the COSPAS/SARSAT satellite system, first received the distress signal and beamed it to the Rescue and Command Center at Scott Air Force Base, Illinois, who alerted rescue forces. After an electronic search for the distress signal, a Coast Guard aircraft located the sloop and requested assistance from a navai ship in the vicinity. The USS Detroit sent a whaleboat with the ship's doctor to the sloop. To date, the COSPAS/SARSAT system had been instrumental in the rescue of more than 400 people. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the U.S. portion of the system; Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for system research and development. (NASA Release 85113)
NASA launched at 7:29 p.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B to practice methods for building a space station and to launch three satellites, the Washington Post reported. People more than 400 miles away in South Carolina and Key West, Florida, saw the launch. There had been only two other previous U.S. night launches: in 1972 when the Apollo 17 crew left for the moon in the middle of the night and in 1983 when the Space Shuttle Challenger departed in early morning. Nine minutes after launch, mission control reported Atlantis was in a secure orbit about 200 miles high, and launch director Gene Thomas said the countdown was the smoothest yet in the Space Shuttle program. Crew onboard Atlantis were Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, commander; Lt. Col. Bryan O'Connor, pilot; mission specialists Dr. Mary Cleave, Maj. Jerry Ross, and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring; and payload specialists Rudolfo Neri Vela (Mexico's first astronaut) and McDonnell Douglas engineer Charles Walker. During the mission the crew would launch Mexico's Morelos B satellite, Australia's AUSSAT 2, and RCA's Satcom KU-2. Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring would also take two long spacewalks to assemble 93 aluminum struts into a 45-foot beam and six 12-foot beams into a 64-lb. inverted pyramid to test techniques that might be used to build the proposed permanently manned space station. Following each spacewalk, the mission specialists would disassemble and stow the beams. Cameras would record every move so that later a computer could reduce the photos to a motion study that engineers would use to determine how construction work could best be performed in the zero gravity of outer space. (NASA Release 85-153; W Post, Nov 27/85, A3)
NASA announced that flight controllers for its International Cometary Explorer (ICE) performed the first and largest of four midcourse corrections to direct the spacecraft toward a September 11 intercept of Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Conducted from ICE mission control at Goddard Space Flight Center, these corrections used two thousand pulses of the spacecraft's two-lb. hydrazine thrusters to change its heading so it would fly through the comet's tail 16,200 miles from the comet's nucleus. The thruster burns lasted four-and-a-half hours. In 1982, NASA redirected the International Sun-Earth Explorer, which was launched in 1978, toward the comet for what would be the first satellite/ comet encounter in history. This encounter would provide scientists with their first look at the makeup and dynamics of a comet's tail. The ICE trajectory adjustment would place the satellite/comet encounter within the coverage window of the world's largest single dish radio astronomy telescope located at the Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico. The 300-m dish, managed by the National Science Foundation, would supplement coverage by three NASA deep space network stations at Goldstone, California; Madrid, Spain; Canberra, Australia; and the recently completed 64-m antenna of the Japanese Space Agency at Usuda, Japan. NASA based ICE's course adjustment on telescopic observations of Giacobini-Zinner as the comet emerged in April from behind the sun, the first observation since July 1984. The comet was approximately 149 million miles from the sun on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. NASA would direct three smaller orbit maneuvers as ICE approached the comet, the last scheduled for three days prior to encounter. Course corrections were necessary because material spontaneously outgassed from the comet's core, acting as jet thrusters on the comet's body, slightly altered the its orbital path. Astronomers in 1900 discovered Giacobini-Zinner, which returned to earth's neighborhood every six-and-one-half years. It would not be visible to the naked eye, but amateur astronomers with small telescopes would be able to see it. (NASA Release 85-86)
NASA announced that Harris Corp. successfully deployed on the ground a 50-foot antenna system, marking a milestone in NASA's program to demonstrate that large space antenna concepts were feasible. In the test, a hoop-column antenna unfolded, umbrella-style, from a compact package to a combination of thin structural members, quartz filament cords, and gold-plated mesh. The mesh, serving as a precision reflecting surface stretching across the diameter of the supporting hoop, was shaped like a dish but could be made flat, spherical, or conical, depending on the intended application. The antenna column was a precise telescoping hub, forming the central structure of the antenna, tensing the cords that shaped the antenna surface, and housing the electronic feed mechanisms. The size of potential large space antennas meant a significant boost in effective radiated power from space and an increased sensitivity to weak signals from the ground or from space. One potential application was in communications, because at that time each earth station had to have a large antenna to receive the weak signals transmitted through small antennas on satellites. Large antennas in space would greatly reduce the size and cost of the antennas required at ground sites. And a few super-antennas placed in high geosynchronous orbit could cover the globe, instead of the great number of smaller satellites otherwise required. Millions of inexpensive home rooftop or land mobile unit antennas could receive satellite signals then picked up only by a few very large ground stations. NASA believed the 50-foot antenna system was the largest precision antenna designed for space that could be accommodated in existing ground electromagnetic test facilities. However, the ultimate deployable space antennas might have 150- to 300-foot diameters. Studies showed that these larger antennas required space assembly. (NASA Release 85-76)
NASA announced that its Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) issued a request for proposals to LTV, Martin Marietta, and TRW to compete for a contract to design, develop, and manufacture an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). The three companies worked previously on OMV definition studies and had until December 20, 1985, to respond. NASA expected to award the contract in June 1986 and planned the first OMV flight for early 1991. The contract would include provisions for testing and hardware flight testing before the OMV's actual operational missions. The company selected would build one vehicle, with NASA having an option to request construction of a second. Often called a "space tug," the OMV would transfer satellites and other objects between earth orbits and would extend the reach of the Space Shuttle by about 1000 miles. It would have the ability to retrieve satellites from high orbits, bring them back to the Space Shuttle for maintenance and repair, then return them to their operational orbits. The OMV would also be able to reboost satellites as their orbits gradually decayed. The OMV would be an unmanned spacecraft, 15 feet in diameter and approximately 4 feet long. Its life would be about 10 years with refurbishment and on-orbit maintenance included in the design. NASA expected initially to deploy the OMV from the Space Shuttle for short duration missions; later the OMV would remain in orbit for extended periods for use in both Space Shuttle-based and space station-based modes of operation. (NASA Release 85-151) Civilian Programs
The National Society of Professional Engineers had recognized Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) role in the first Spacelab mission as one of the nation's 10 outstanding engineering achievements for 1984, the center announced. Because the 10-day mission occurred so late in 1983, the society had placed it in the 1984 competition. The society also cited MSFC for its management of NASA's role in Spacelab development, which had included the transfer tunnel connecting the Space Shuttle orbiter cabin to the module and other components necessary for successful laboratory operation, for its technical and programmatic monitoring of Spacelab's European design and development activities, and for lending technical expertise and support to the European Space Agency (ESA) in the project. MSFC's deputy director Thomas Lee had accepted the award on behalf of center employees at the society's winter meeting in Albuquerque, New Mexico. (MSFC Release 85-5) February /. The U.S. Navy awarded Dr. Robert Stevenson, an oceanographer with the Office of Naval Research (ONR), its Meritorious Civilian Service Award for his role in the application of space technology to the solution of oceanographic problems, the U.S. Navy announced. The award cited Stevenson as the "father" of space oceanography in the western world, recognizing him as one of the first American scientists to suggest that remote sensing instruments in space could accurately record oceanographic measurements. As an advisor on space-related programs, Stevenson had worked with the National Council for Marine Resources and Engineering Development, the National Academy of Science, North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), and NASA. Stevenson was a Fellow of the Geological Society of America and author of numerous scientific articles on ocean surface-layers' research, particularly as observed from earth-orbiting satellites. (Dept, of the Navy Release 1-85)
Adm. James Watkins, speaking to reporters after a ceremony during which astronaut Thomas Mattingly was promoted to commodore and named to head the Navy Space Program Office, said that a Navy oceanographer who had traveled on a Space Shuttle flight the previous fall had brought back "some fantastically important" information that would make it easier for U.S. submarines to hide in the world's oceans, the Washington Post reported. Watkins said the oceanographer, whom he would not name but was known to be Paul Scully-Power, a civilian who worked at the Naval Underwater Systems Center, New London, Connecticut, said the information was vital in trying to understand the ocean depths. When asked if satellite technology might not be hastening the day when submarines could be tracked from space, Watkins acknowledged that technology was opening some doors on submarine tracking. However, he pointed out that the question was whether doors opened on detecting submarines faster than doors opened on learning about the oceans depths. He added that "we're still ahead of the game in the latter category. "So the ability to track submarines—we don't see that as being a threat to our forces until the turn of the century or later, depending on what kind of breakthroughs we might find at the end of this decade or into the next," Watkins concluded. (W Post, Mar 22/85, A10)
A computer failure 25 minutes before launch today forced postponement for at least two days of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the NY Times reported. Launch crews planned to replace the malfunctioning computer, inspect the Space Shuttle's fuel plumbing, and try to launch Discovery on August 27 at 7:02 a.m. EDT. At 7:15 the Space Shuttle crew and Johnson Space Center (JSC) flight controllers almost simultaneously noted warnings that a backup guidance and control computer was registering errors. This came as the backup computer was undergoing a final check to see that its programs agreed with those driving the Space Shuttle's four main computers. NASA halted the launch countdown while engineers at Kennedy Space Center and JSC examined data retrieved from the malfunctioning computer and compared it with data from one of the regular computers. They concluded that the trouble was an apparent failure in the computer, which could not be remedied in time for a launch. That the computer worked perfectly in tests before August 25 and worked in tests after the failure, although it showed signs of trouble, puzzled engineers. NASA was about 99% sure that it was a hardware failure, although only an inspection of the computer by JSC engineers would determine the exact nature of the problem. It was the second postponement in two days for the Discovery and its crew of five, and NASA officials were growing concerned that Discovery might not reach orbit in time for repair of the crippled Leasat 3 satellite. Any delay beyond August 29 would cancel the repair effort, and the crew would have to confine themselves to deploying three communications satellites in the first three days of the mission. The flight would thus fall short of the eight days then planned. Arnold Aldrich, manager of the Space Shuttle program at JSC, said NASA would not reschedule beyond August 29 any attempt to repair Leasat 3, as that would have too disruptive an effect on other flights scheduled in the next few months. If it had been only a matter of replacing the computer, the delay would have been a day. However, the need to inspect insulated ducts that carried liquid-hydrogen to the Space Shuttle's three main engines necessitated the twonday postponement. After NASA had pumped the super-cooled fuel into the Space Shuttle system two consecutive mornings and drained it again, there was a chance that the contractions and expansions caused by the alternating freezing cold and Florida heat might have damaged the engines, which in extreme cases could cause them to explode in flight. (NYT, Aug 26/85, All) November27: NASA announced that it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base until mid-July 1986. NASA originally scheduled this mission, STS 62-A, for no earlier than March 20, 1986. Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward "Pete" Aldridge, Jr. said, "There are no major problems at the Vandenberg site. We have repeatedly stated that safety and quality would not be sacrificed for schedule. Our decision reflects our continued commitment to this philosophy." Aldridge added that, "We have had to make some facility modifications because of what we learned from routine Air Force/NASA operational readiness inspections. We have also added time to the schedule to allow for better preparation and evaluation of the operational systems tests and we have extended the training period for the launch crew of this historic, first West Coast shuttle mission. "This revised schedule will permit us to complete ongoing modifications, inspections, rework and operational testing with higher confidence than could be permitted with the March 20 schedule," he added. "It also minimizes the potential for conflict with the NASA Ulysses and Galileo planetary missions scheduled in May." NASA Office of Space Flight associate administrator Jesse Moore concurred, adding, "NASA agrees completely with the Air Force regarding Vandenberg. Our first commitment is to the safety of the crew and the reliability of the vehicle and launch systems. The development of the Vandenberg site is proceeding very smoothly. This readjustment gives us all more time to carry out our commitment to safety and reliability." The decision to delay meant NASA would deliver the orbiter Discovery to Vandenberg around March 1, 1986, and NASA and Air Force officials would continue to evaluate the STS 62-A schedule in order to establish after January 1 a firm launch date. (NASA Release 85-158)
Scientists from China's Ministry of Astronautics announced the previous week plans to improve the design of their existing rockets so they could launch heavier satellites into geostationary orbits, thus challenging the western nations' domination of commercial exploitation of space, the New Scientist reported. China had a rocket that could put 750-kg communications satellites into geostationary orbit, which they used the previous year to launch their first such satellite. Jean Vandenkerckhove of the European Space Agency (ESA) said the rocket made "Chinese launch capability equivalent to Europe's Ariane 3 rocket." China's rocket, the Long March 3, had two liquid-fuel stages and one cryogenic stage fuelled by liquid hydrogen and oxygen. Chinese engineers said they planned to add extra boosters to allow them to put heavier loads, possibly two satellites, into space. The engineers also spoke of plans to develop a cryogenic upper stage for the rocket that could launch 2.5-ton satellites 35,000 km high into geostationary orbit. That would give China a capability close to that of Ariane 4, Europe's newest rocket. However, Wu Ke Li, in charge of Chinese interest at the Paris Air Show where China for the first time had an exhibit, would not confirm or deny the plans. Western engineers were impressed by China's existing ability because Long March 3 placed their satellite into correct orbit without flight tests, since China could not afford such tests. Instead, the Chinese relied on elaborate space simulators for checking satellites and launch components. Vandenkerckhove said China's launch facilities were at a disadvantage compared with Ariane because the compartment for satellites on Long March 3 was smaller than on Ariane 3, measuring 2.3 m rather than 2.9 m. However, Yi Zluo Hyang, one of the Long March 3 designers, said, "Our launch costs will be lower than any other service, partly because we have lower labor costs, but also because we will be supported by the government." During the past year, China had signed cooperative agreements in space science and technology with the U.S., W. Germany, France, and Britian; and they were pursuing an interest in remote-sensing satellites. (New Scientist, June 6/85, 4)
NASA announced that NASA, the Department of Energy (DOE), and the Department of Defense (DOD) selected the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for further design, development, and ground demonstration testing in Phase II of the SP-100 space reactor power program. The SP-100 program required developing and demonstrating a compact nuclear power system that would provide a safe and highly reliable source of hundreds of kilowatts of electric power for a broad range of civilian and military space applications including the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) in the early to mid-1990s and beyond. In the past, lower power nuclear sources provided the electric power for several NASA and DOD missions including Transit, Pioneer, Apollo, Viking, Voyager, and Lincoln Experimental satellites. The Galileo and Ulysses missions would also use nuclear electric power sources. The selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept followed three years of Phase I data collection and technical investigation. The three agencies considered four reference reactor system concepts employing different power conversion techniques: in-core thermionics and out-of-core thermoelectrics, which were both static energy conversion processes, and Stirling and Brayton cycle engines, which were both dynamic energy conversion machines. Selection criteria included safety; reliability; the capability of the system to meet mission power requirements; the potential for the technology to cover a range of power requirements up to 1000 kw; cost, schedule, and programmatic risks; survivability; and launch operations. The three agencies determined all of the power system technologies were adequate under those criteria; however, they ranked the reactor thermoelectric power system as having the greatest potential to fulfill reliably the overall requirements for future space power needs with minimum performance and schedule risk. The next steps in the SP-100 program required DOE to prepare the request for proposals and, pending the availability of funds, to select competitively a contractor to design, develop, fabricate, and test during the period FY 19861991 the major systems of the selected concept. DOE would select shortly a site for the reactor system program test. (NASA Release 85-116)
As a result of White House prodding, the Air Force had signed an agreement to use NASA's Space Shuttle for at least eight flights a year for 10 years starting in 1988, and the Air Force would get a discount when NASA worked out a new pricing policy for the start of FY 89, the Washington Post reported. The Air Force would pay a fixed fee at the start of each fiscal year, then a per-flight charge less than commercial and other government customers would pay. Under the agreement, NASA would drop opposition to an Air Force plan to buy 10 single-use unmanned rockets to orbit two satellites a year for five years starting in 1988, and NASA and the Department of Defense would work together to ensure a fully-operational and cost-effective Space Shuttle. NASA hoped the Space Shuttle would begin to break even in 1987, as the agency anticipated making from that time on 24 Space Shuttle flights yearly for 10 years. The new agreement called for the Air Force to use one third of all Space Shuttle flights for the 10 years starting in 1988. The agreement also permitted the Air Force to pick the single-use rocket it would use to orbit secret satellites too small for economical use of the Space Shuttle. (W Post, Feb 27/85, A22)
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
NASA launched at 11:15 a.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis, the maiden voyage of the orbiter and the 21st mission in the Space Shuttle program, on mission 51 -J, a secret flight for the Department of Defense (DOD), the NY Times reported. The secrecy was part of DOD's efforts to make it difficult for the Soviet military to monitor the Space Shuttle takeoff and find out the identity and mission of the payload. Despite these precautions, it was widely reported that a primary goal of the flight was to launch a pair of $100-million military communication satellites. DOD apparently planned to station the satellites, designated DSCS III for Defense Satellite Communications System, 22,300 miles above earth, where they would relay messages to U.S. military forces around the world. The commander of Atlantis was Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, flying his third Space Shuttle mission; the pilot was Air Force Lt. Col. Ronald Grabe. Other crew members were Maj. David Hilmers of the Marine Corps, Army Lt. Col. Robert Stewart, and Air Force Maj. William Pailes. The first four were members of NASA's astronaut corps; Pailes was an Air Force pilot assigned to the mission to assist in deploying its secret payload. In accordance with security rules, NASA gave out little information about the flight. There were no space-to-ground communications released to the public and no postlaunch news conference. Nearly five hours after the launch, mission control in Houston said, "On the maiden voyage of Atlantis, the crew is doing well and all systems on board the orbiter are performing satisfactorily." NASA officials said it would issue no other status reports during the mission, which might last a week or more. Atlantis was the lightest and most advanced of the four orbiters. In its planning and construction, engineers removed minor design flaws found in earlier versions and incorporated the latest in electronic technology and light-weight, high-strength structural materials. NASA strengthened Atlantis mainly so it could withstand more vigorous launchings from the Air Force's facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base. These launches, which would take the Space Shuttle into orbits around the earth's poles, required greater thrust from the Space Shuttle's engines. Although the mission was devoted to the military, NASA officials said there was a civilian experiment on board to study exposure of the orbiter and its crew to cosmic rays, which were extremely high-energy particles from space that bombarded the earth and the orbiting Space Shuttles. (NY Times, Oct 3/ 85, A18, Oct 4/85, B5)
NASA's Inventions and Contributions Board awarded the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Dr. Robert Nathan a plaque and a check for $20,000 for his work in planetary image processing, the JPL Universe reported. Nathan received the award for his "combined technical contributions to planetary and biomedical image processing and scientific data analysis techniques." Nathan invented digital image processing, a technique in which computers remove noise, correct distortions, and enhance different images such as planetary objects or biomedical images. Nathan joined JPL in 1959 to manage scientific data analysis for the upcoming Ranger moon missions. The Ranger spacecraft used the best available cameras, but they were subject to distortion and noise contamination. Nathan devised techniques to eliminate extraneous patterns from the images. His processes and the creation of the image processing laboratory (lPL) established JPL as an important center for planetary image processing. In 1969 Nathan launched JPL into biomedical imaging with a $2 million grant from the National Institutes of Health, which later led to formation of the JPL biomedical image analysis facility. In 1976 Nathan developed a system at the IPL to handle large amounts of data by means of a large array filter using very-large scale integration (VLSI) system silicon chip technology. The microchip reduced computer time by a factor of 100. He was currently working on another microchip design that would perform high-quality geometric image manipulations and filter chips that would perform pattern recognition functions. (JPL Universe, Nov 15/85, 1) During November: NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center (LeRC) received four of Research & Development magazine's IR—100 awards to honor the 100 most significant new products developed during the past year. A panel of technical judges selected the winners from more than 1,000 entries. The award-winning products were servomechanism for propeller-pitch change, transmit module, communications traffic processor, and rotary power-transfer device, all of which LeRC and private firms under contracts to the center developed jointly. LeRC researchers Stuart Loewenthal and Bruce Steinetz with General Electric engineers developed the servomechanism for propeller-pitch change, which could accurately control the propeller blade angle of large (10,000 kw) turboprop aircraft propellers over the complete spectrum of flight operating conditions. With certain modifications, the product should be adaptable for applications as aircraft wing pivot mechanisms, tank turret aiming actuators, and other heavy mechanisms, requiring very accurate pointing and tracking control. The transmit module, developed by LeRC researchers Thomas Kascak, Godfrey Anzic, and Denis Connolly along with Rockwell Internatl. engineers, provided rf signal amplification and phase shifting at a frequency of 20 gigahertz. The device was of monolithic design in which all module functions were contained on a single 6.4 by 4.8 millimeter semiconductor chip with the smallest circuit feature about 40-millionth of an inch. This development made possible the production of weight- and cost-effective phased array antenna systems for future communications satellite systems. LeRC engineer Russel Jirberg along with electronics engineers from Motorola Corp. developed a communications traffic processor for the next generation of communications satellites. The system provided the capacity and routing flexibility needed to handle the nation's growing demands for telephone and computer message traffic. When used aboard satellites having multiple narrow beam antennas, the device enabled more than 60,000 individual voice messages, video pictures, and computer data to be routed directly to users throughout the U.S. equipped with low-cost ground terminals. LeRC engineer David Renz in cooperation with Sperry Flight Systems engineers developed a rotary power-transfer device that transferred electrical power through a rotating joint. It had a low loss space-type design capable of transferring high power (hundreds of kilowatts), AC or DC, to frequencies such as 20 kilohertz. One of its outstanding features was loss of only 22 watts per circuit while transferring 100 kilowatts. Renz and his colleagues said the roll-ring assembly device had the potential to be one of the major components of the proposed space station and other spacecraft where large amounts of power are required. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 10)
NASA announced plans for a March 4, 1985, Space Shuttle 51-E launch from KSC, with a landing at KSC on March 8. NASA based its launch decision on flight readiness-review results. The completion of cargo integration and orbiter-systems testing necessitated additional time in the schedule. The current 51—E launch date would not change the planned launch of STS mission 51-D, which was planned for no earlier than March 19, to retrieve the Long-Duration Exposure Facility and to launch the Navy Syncom satellite. (NASA Release 85-27)
NASA launched today at 2:50 p.m. EST the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-C with its five-man military crew to carry out secret military objectives, the NY Times reported. NASA, which had delayed launch due to subfreezing temperatures [see STS/Launch Schedules, Jan. 23], did not announce liftoff time until nine minutes before launch. One and a half hours after launch, Houston Mission Control reported the Space Shuttle had reached its intended orbit, the altitude and position of which were secret. How long the astronauts would remain in orbit was unknown; although most Space Shuttle flights lasted five to eight days, the apparent Discovery mission to launch a single satellite might limit it to three or four days. Discovery carried a 32,000-lb. propulsion, inertial upper stage capable of boosting a large satellite to 22,300 miles above the equator south of the USSR. This was the first test of the rocket system since a predecessor had misfired on a Space Shuttle mission in April 1983. Many newspapers had already published reports, based on information in the aerospace trade press and other unclassified documents, that the secret payload was an electronic spy satellite. Both the U.S. and USSR had engaged in electronic eavesdropping from orbit for several years, and the USSR had obtained many of the plans and engineering information for the earlier U.S. electronic reconnaissance satellite Rhyolite. The Carter administration had cancelled an advanced version of Rhyolite, the Argus, but the Reagan administration had revived the project. Most reports described the Discovery's payload as the most advanced and sensitive form of orbital electronic spying. The Air Force began an investigation to find the officials or contractor employees who had provided information about the secret payload aboard Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Inquiries were not aimed at news organizations, Michael Burch, a Department of Defense (DOD) spokesman, had said. When questioned about a photo of an early-warning satellite published on the cover of Aviation Week, Burch said the picture should not have appeared. However, the Pentagon later acknowledged that the Air Force had given the photo to the magazine after determining it was unclassified. Burch refused to say what action the government would take if it could identify those who leaked information on the Space Shuttle mission. Brig. Gen. Richard Abel had previously warned reporters not to speculate about the Space Shuttle's cargo. After the Washington Post had reported it was an intelligence satellite intended to eavesdrop on the USSR, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the story might have given "aid and comfort to the enemy." Abel later had told a Univ. of Georgia journalism class that little or nothing in the Post story was not available from public sources. Aviation Week's January 21 issue had described the Pentagon's next generation of early-warning surveillance satellites, which would monitor missile and spacecraft launches from Soviet territory and be protected against Soviet laser weapons. {NYT, Jan 25/85, A1; W Post, Jan 25/85, A3)
NASA had brought under control a $5Q-mil!ion weather satellite, NOAA-8, that had tumbled helplessly in space for nearly a year due to a malfunctioning oscillator, the Washington Times reported. The defective oscillator gave out during April, allowing NASA and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) scientists to activate a backup oscillator and reprogram the satellite via remote control. NOAA was checking and calibrating the spacecraft's instruments before putting it July 8 into service to transmit daily weather photos and information. (IV Times, May 24/85, 3A; W Post, May 24, 85, A8)
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
In a letter to the editor in the NY Times, Saunders Kramer, a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society, commented on the NY Time's report of speculation in a London newspaper that debris from a satellite reentering the atmosphere may have struck the Air-lndia jetliner that crashed in July [see Aviation/Civil Aviation, July 29]. "You dismiss that possibility as 'bizarre,'" Kramer wrote, "Not quite." Kramer then related a tale of an incident that occurred in the early 1960s, when passengers on a airline flight from Honolulu to Tokyo saw at 30,000 feet a white flash and heard a thud. "After they landed at Tokyo, inspection revealed a smooth dished-in area (about 18 inches across) on the plane's right wing leading edge between the two starboard engines," Kramer continued. There was no evidence of a bird collision. When the navigator returned home, he related the tale to Kramer, who checked North American Air Defense Command'a (NORAD) space-tracking data bulletins, which showed reentry of satellite debris at the time and location of the Pan Am flight. "We concluded that the debris had indeed struck the plane," Kramer wrote. "The propulsion section of the last stage of a satellite booster is frequently massive enough to survive reentry. Had it struck the tail section severely or struck the cockpit from above, it is certainly conceivable, however remote, that destruction of the aircraft could have been instantaneous," Kramer concluded. (NYT, Aug 2/85, A24)
NASA Administrator James Beggs criticized the Air Force and NOAA for plans to launch some satellites aboard surplus Titan II missiles rather than using the Space Shuttle, saying it would cost NASA $500 million, the Washington Post reported. "You know the old syndrome," he said, "if it wasn't invented here [at the Air Force] it can't be all that good ... I don't like it. It is not good for our short-term future and makes it that much more difficult for us to get on an even footing in the next five years." The controversy had begun with an Air Force decision to refurbish and redevelop obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch up to 12 Air Force satellites that NASA had assumed would be flying on the Space Shuttle. When NOAA heard of the Air Force decision, its acting administrator, Anthony Calio (a former NASA official), had contacted the Air Force about launching over the next seven years three advanced weather satellites, called Metsats, into polar orbit. When questioned, Calio had said the Air Force offered a deal that would save NOAA $90 million—it would cost $100 million to redesign the Metsats to fly on the Space Shuttle and $105 million in launch fees versus an Air Force charge of $115 million for the three Titan II launches, resulting in a net saving of $90 million. "This agency has a budget of $1 billion a year so we're talking about 10% of our annual budget. This is strictly a business deal," Calio concluded. Beggs responded that he always assumed the Air Force and NOAA would use the Space Shuttle, although they had not signed a formal agreement. He said he did not believe NOAA would save that much and that the Air Force would bear the refurbishment cost to redevelop the Titan II, estimated by Beggs at $100 million. "I believe what we're talking here is a savings to NOAA and a net loss to the U.S. Treasury," Beggs said. "I think this whole scheme should be looked at very carefully by the administration and by Congress." And he mentioned his concern that the Air Force plan could set a dangerous precedent. (W Post, Feb 25/85, A1)
NASA announced the postlaunch status of the NOAA-A, -B, and -C missions carried out for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In addition, NASA announced it scheduled NOAA-D for launch in 1987.	NASA submitted on January 24, 1984 a postlaunch report for NOAA-E (launched March 18, 1983) and would submit a postlaunch report for NOAA-F (launched December 12, 1984) after a full year of data collection and evaluation. NASA successfully launched NO.AA-A (NOAA-6) June 27, 1979, from the Western Space and Missile Center into a sun-synchronous orbit. The satellite ceased providing usable atmospheric soundings on October 22, 1983, when the filter wheel assembly became inoperable. NASA still used the primary imaging system. NOAA-G would replace NOAA-6 in November 1985. During NOAA-B launch on May 29, 1980, one of the two Atlas booster engines had a thrust reduction. This premature booster engine cutoff caused a deficit in velocity and altitude of the Atlas, making the sustainer engine burn 55 seconds longer than planned. As the sustainer engine was still thrusting when the spacecraft attempted to separate from the launch vehicle, the spacecraft consumed most of its attitude control gas as it fought the booster for its attitude control. The apogee kick motor burn put NOAA-B into a highly elliptical, 269 x 1466 km, 92.5° inclination orbit. As a result of the combination of incorrect orbit and loss of attitude control, NASA terminated the mission. The aborted NOAA-B mission brought about changes in subsequent NOAA launches, and the next three launches were successful. On June 23, 1981, NASA successfully launched NOAA-C (NOAA-7) from the Eastern Space and Missile Center into a sun-synchronous orbit. Failure of the filter wheel assembly on February 7, 1985, terminated the collection of usable atmospheric soundings. On February 25, 1985, NASA placed the primary imaging system on standby when NOAA-9 became the operational spacecraft for afternoon observations. NASA achieved the mission objectives of NOAA-A and -C, and the spacecraft provided useful sounding and imaging data far in excess of their two-year design life. NASA certified these missions successful. Due to launch vehicle malfunction, NASA terminated the NOAA-B mission and reported that mission unsuccessful. (NASA MOR E-615-79-01 [postlaunch], E—615— 80-02 [postlaunch], E-615-81-03 [postlaunch] Apr 16/85) During May: The Canadian government had cut $5 million (Canadian) from the National Research Council of Canada's space sciences budget, eliminating the sounding rocket program and most of the balloon research, Spaceflight reported. The cuts meant the end of nearly a quarter-century of space research with the indigenous Black Brant family of sounding rockets. The council did not cut major satellite and Space Shuttle research projects. (Spaceflight,, May 85, 201)
A new study issued by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) said competition from other nations and several private companies in launching spacecraft put the U.S. under pressure to protect its economic and technological leadership in space, the NY Times reported. This protection could be accomplished by reassessing the Space Shuttle's pricing policy, promoting greater private investment in space-related goods and services, and forging a long-term space policy to assure a competitive edge, report recommended. The European Space Agency, a consortium of 11 western European governments, broke the U.S. monopoly in launch services for the West with its Ariane rocket program. Arianespace, a corporation owned by the French government and European banks and aerospace companies, was aggressively pursuing customers for Ariane's services and had won several contracts that would otherwise have gone to U.S. conventional rockets or the Space Shuttle. France was planning later in the year to use the Ariane to inaugurate the world's first commercial remote-sensing satellite service, competing with U.S. Landsats that surveyed the world's geologic, water, and agricultural resources. China announced the previous month a new commercial space program using its own satellites, launching rockets, and ground stations. The Chinese had rockets capable of boosting satellites into the high orbit needed for communications satellites. Japan, emphasizing the export potential of space technology, was developing its own rocket launching capability and was planning to launch the next year the first of a series of ocean and land remote-sensing satellites. India also had joined the nations launching satellites, and Brazil was building a rocket base with the intention of becoming the first South American launching power. Although the USSR was apparently tempted to enter the commercial market, western space experts questioned whether the Russians would ever be a major force in commercial space operations. They said the USSR might be reluctant to allow outside scientists and businessmen access to their facilities and other governments would probably not allow advanced communications satellites to be exported to the Soviet Union. In its report, the OTA said that other nations developed their own space launching capabilities out of a desire to be technologically independent, to gain any economic benefits that derived from space technology, and to be regarded as "space powers." Consequently, the report concluded that the U.S.'s "competitive strategy based on price or superior technology alone will not prevent foreign entry into the launch service business." At stake, besides prestige, was a share of what by the end of the century could be a $50 billion annual business, according to estimates by some economists in the aerospace field. The report recommended that the U.S. government investigate new trade and regulatory policies to reduce the risks and uncertainties that hindered private investment in space technology. The study concluded that NASA by itself was "not well-equipped either to promote or to regulate growth in the commercial exploitation of space." The report suggested the regulation of "space industries" should be integrated with the regulation of their counterparts on earth. (NYT, July 26/85, A1)
NASA announced a launch date of no earlier than April 12, 1985, for the 51-D Space Shuttle mission, with two windows for launch on that date: from 8:04 a.m. to 8:18 a.m. EST and from 8:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. EST. The orbiter Discovery would land April 17 at approximately 8:14 a.m. EST at KSC. During the mission, crew would deploy the Canadian Telesat (Anik C1) and the Hughes Syncom IV (LEASAT) and operate the McDonnell Douglas continuous flow electrophoresis system. (NASA Release 85—43) During March: NASA announced it had scheduled for no earlier than March 3 from KSC the launch of Space Shuttle mission 51 -E, which was the 15th Space Shuttle mission and the orbiter Challenger's 7th flight. The Challenger was scheduled to land on March 7 at the 15,000-foot Space Shuttle landing facility at KSC. NASA previously announced the flight crew [see Feb. 7]. Challenger would carry the heaviest cargo taken into space by a Space Shuttle; total weight of the payload bay and cabin payloads would be nearly 53,400	lb., almost 15,000 lb. heavier than the previous record set on Space Shuttle mission 51-A. After liftoff and insertion into orbit, the crew would prepare to deploy the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B)/inertial upper stage (IUS). Following release, the crew would maneuver Challenger to a safe distance and observe the IUS perigee kick motor firing, placing the TDRS in geosynchronous transfer orbit. Following IUS first-stage burn of about 2 minutes 26 seconds, which would then drop off, the TDRS/IUS second stage stack would coast for six hours on the way to geosynchronous orbit altitude of 22,300 miles. Once there, the IUS second stage would fire for 1 minute 49 seconds to stabilize the TDRS in geosynchronous orbit and the IUS would drop off. The IUS was an advanced solid-propellant, two-stage booster designed to carry heavyweight payloads into orbits higher than the Space Shuttle could reach. NASA first used the IUS on the STS-6 mission for launch of TDRS-A. Changes to the IUS since then corrected problems that developed during the STS-6 mission. The IUS first stage developed about 46,500 lb. of thrust, the second stage about 18,500 lb. On the second day, the crew would use the Challenger's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) engines to raise their orbit to above 180 miles for deployment during the 22nd orbit of the 7,347-lb. Telesat-1 (Anik C-1) and its payload assist module (PAM). (NASA Release 85-24)
New car buyers in 1988 might find a Navstar Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver among their list of options, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "It would essentially be a small TV screen that shows your position on a map," said 1st Lt. John Schoenewolf, GPS cargo manager for the Eastern Space and Missile Center. A small cursor, or mobile electronic dot, would pinpoint a car's location to within 300 miles, he added, and map cassettes could be purchased separately. Before the satellite electronic car map became a reality, along with other GPS applications both military and civilian, the Air Force between 1986 and 1988 would have to launch 28 satellites, the most ambitious launch rate attempted in space-launch history. "We plan to launch the satellites for the GPS system at a rate of one every seven weeks aboard the shuttle." Schoenewolf said. "We will need a total of 18	to start operating the system, and the target year is 1988 to begin operating." The East Coast Navstar GPS launch facility opened in August at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to help make possible the accelerated launch rate. At the facility's ribbon cutting ceremony, Maj. Gen. Donald Henderson said the facility and GPS itself "will revolutionize the way we perform precision navigation." He noted the satellite system would be the largest constellation ever established and would have an influence on everything that floats, drives, flies, or submerges. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 5)
NASA announced cancellation of the March 7 Space Shuttle Challenger flight due to problems associated with the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B). NASA officials determined that, in addition to repairing the previously announced problem with one cell of the TDRS's 24-cell flight battery, it was necessary to remove the TDRS-B from the Challenger cargo bay in order to repair a timing problem that became apparent during testing of the TDRS-1 then in orbit. Under certain operational conditions, the timing circuits could cause errors in the system switching sequences, interrupting user support. Tests run February 27 and 28 at spacecraft contractor facilities confirmed the problem. Although NASA and its contractors had developed procedures to operate the TDRS-1, these procedures were not acceptable for multiple spacecraft operations, requiring modifications for TDRS-B and subsequent spacecraft. Because the TDRS spacecraft had encryption devices to protect the system from interfering signals, NASA could not provide further technical detail on the problem. NASA expected a delay of several weeks for modifications, at which time it would remanifest TDRS-B. NASA would place the Anik-C (Telesat-I) satellite scheduled for the STS 51—E mission on the Discovery STS 51-D mission and delay retrieval of the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) from the 51-D mission to a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 85-31)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
Astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today completed repair of the Leasat 1 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Steven Dorfman, president of Hughes Communications Corp., satellite owner, referred to the effort as the "most remarkable salvage mission" tried in space. During the second day of the salvage mission [see Satellites, Aug. 31], astronaut John Lounge, using the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm, raised the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay and placed its center of gravity on a straight line with that of the orbiter Discovery. Outside, van Hoften stepped into foot restraints on the end of the arm, and Lounge lifted him to the satellite. Reaching up, van Hoften placed gloved hands on the bar he had earlier attached to the satellite and pushed down as hard as he could to start the satellite spinning. Three more pushes sent the satellite spinning evenly into space over the equator near the west coast of South America where officials planned to operate it as a Navy radio relay. Although Hughes was still concerned that very cold temperatures might have permanently damaged the satellite, it did beam to earth its first signals since deployment on April 13. The signals indicated that temperatures in the satellite's outer shell were normal, suggesting that the inner drum holding the two onboard rocket engines and more than 7,500 lb. of rocket fuel might have survived the varying temperatures of space and be ready to carry the satellite into permanent position 22,300 miles above earth. (IV Post, Sept 2/ 85, A3)
NASA announced that effective January 24, Dr. Dale Compton became deputy director of Ames Research Center (ARC), where he had been director for engineering and computer systems since February 1983. Compton joined NASA in June 1957, serving as deputy director of astronautics, then chief of the space science division and manager of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). Recipient of the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal, Compton earned a B.S. degree in 1957 and an M.S. degree in 1958, both in aeronautical engineering, and a Ph.D. degree in aeronautical and astronautical engineering in 1969. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/ 85) During February. Ames Research Center (ARC) announced it had formed the information sciences office to do basic and applied research in artificial intelligence (Al), automation sciences, and space-related computer science technology, with emphasis on applications to the NASA space station. NASA had designated ARC as the lead center in Al research, and the new office's research would cover Al programming languages, expert-systems development, knowledge representation and information understanding, machine vision and learning, sensor fusion, and optical processing. Space-related computer-science research would focus on symbolic-processing and data-flow architectures; network design, protocols, and simulation; and optical read/write information-storage technology. ARC would combine in-house studies, primarily on applied research and development of flight experiments to validate and demonstrate the technologies being developed, with the work of outside research organizations, such as SRI International, Symbolics Inc., Innovative Optics, Inc., Stanford University, University of California at Berkeley, MIT, University of Texas, and University of Michigan, on basic research issues to accomplish project objectives. ARC would orient research toward the user community, particularly other NASA centers, focusing on both technology development for user applications and help to users during implementation. Space station automation would be the primary application, and ARC had signed agreements with Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center to work together on this implementation. ARC would also advise on space station automation through participation on NASA advisory groups such as the space station automation study team, space station automation and robotics panel, advanced-technology automation committee, and NASA headquarters space station data systems steering committee. (ARC Release 85-6)
NASA announced that space age technology was in use in the Republic of Gabon, Africa, where solar photovoltaic power systems installed in four rural villages would improve public health and education facilities and lighting and sanitary water supplies. NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the project, which was jointly funded by the U.S Department of Energy (DOE) and the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources of the Republic of Gabon; the Gabon government selected the villages to participate in the program. The project provided a photovoltaic power system, lights, air circulation fan, and a refrigerator/freezer for vaccine storage to each village dispensary and a power system, lights, and a color TV and video cassette recorder/player to each village school. The villages' sanitary water systems had a newly drilled well, a photovoltaic system, a submersible well pump, a water storage tank, and a water distribution system that piped water to village fountains. Public lighting systems included a power system and sodium vapor lamps mounted on poles. All systems were instrumented to collect data for performance analyses. Total photovoltaic array capacity for all systems was 12.1 kw; output of the smallest array was 80 watts for street lights, the largest 3 kw for one water pump. Batteries for the solar arrays should last about 10 years before replacement; solar arrays had a life expectancy of at least 20 years. According to Tony Ratajczak, project manager at LeRC, "The goal of DOE and the Republic of Gabon, for this project, is to investigate and evaluate the economic, social and technical value of photovoltaic power systems in aiding progress and improving the quality of life in Gabon." (NASA Release 85-68) During November: NASA announced that three physicians from Washington University Medical Center, St. Louis, Misssouri, met the previous month with NASA scientists from National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) to discuss using remote sensing techniques as an analytical tool for use in the field of body scanning known as nuclear magnetic resonance or NMR. Dr. Michael Vannier, radiologist and principal investigator for the project, said NMR was already used on a number of organ systems in the brain. However, interest had grown in how magnetic resonance imaging might fit into the scope of breast diagnostic techniques. So Drs. John Gohagan and Ed Spitzna-gel, also of Washington University, on behalf of the National Cancer Institute's Breast Imaging Project joined Vannier at the discussions. The meeting resulted in a three-year collaborative effort among the Mal-linckrodt Institute of Radiology in St. Louis, NSTL, and the Kennedy Space Center. Vannier commented that the union with NASA was vital to maximize the potential of NMR scanning. "One of the characteristics of these magnetic resonance scanners is that they provide very specific anatomic information about the location and size of a tumor. However there are other ways to get the same information, one being the use of a mammogram, or breast X-ray." At NSTL, scientists Doug Rickman and Jim Anderson were responsible for applying the analytical capabilities to make NMR scans a notable advancement over other methods of X-ray and body scanning techniques. They had demonstrated the use of ELAS software to enhance NMR images, thus increasing disease detection accuracy. Vannier explained, "No one in medicine really has the kind of experience with classifying or analyzing these types of images this way. That's why we are using NASA expertise to help us." By incorporating the ELAS software used in processing satellite imagery into the system, NMR scans could provide not only information on the location and size of a tumor, but also its biological behavior. That is, physicians could determine the status of a mass of tumor directly from the NMR image without having to enter the body surgically. Close affiliation with pathologists while working on actual cases was important in determining whether there had been misclassification on the image processing machines, Gohagan said. "Our goal is to ultimately get the kind of discrimination necessary to distinguish different anamolous conditions," he explained. For example, blood clots would appear distinctly different from benign tumors, and a marked difference would be evident between benign and malignant tumors. Vannier concluded that, as a result of the collaboration, an improvement should evolve in the way NMR images are acquired. "I think it will have significant influence on what we do in the future," he said. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 7)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
NASA announced that it had launched INTELSAT V-A (F—12), 10th in a series of 11 Intelsat V-type satellites to be launched in the 1980 to 1985 period for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), from its facilities at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station aboard an Atlas/Centaur launch vehicle. INTELSAT assigned the satellite to the Indian Ocean region to replace Intelsat V{F-1), which INTELSAT ordered moved to the Pacific Ocean Region where, in combination with Intelsat V (F—8), it would replace Intelsat IVA satellites that were running out of stationkeeping propellants. INTELSAT awarded Ford Aerospace as prime contractor and an international team of manufacturers as subcontractors a contract for development and manufacture of Intelsat V-A satellites. INTELSAT was also considering a number of follow-on satellites with modified and expanded communications capabilities. (NASA Release 85-134; NASA MOR M—491-203-85-10 [prelaunch] Sept 19/85, [postlaunch] Oct 10/85.)
NASA announced that astronauts Paul Weitz, Dr. Kathryn Sullivan, and Dale Gardner would support NASA activities at the 36th Paris Air Show at Le Bourget from May 31 through June 9 [see Space Station Program, Mar. 22], Weitz, then chief of astronaut appearances at Johnson Space Center, was a member of the first Skylab crew in 1973 and later commanded the first flight of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger in April 1983. He had logged 793 hours in space. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED i m ..JNWiTIOlunj Sullivan, an astronaut since 1978 with 197.5 hours in space, served as a mission specialist on the October 1984 Space Shuttle mission 41-G and was the first American woman to perform an extravehicular activity or space walk, during which she and astronaut David Leestma conducted a 2.5-hour demonstration of the potential of refueling satellites in space. Gardner, an astronaut since 1978 with 337 hours in space, had flown on the August 1983 Space Shuttle mission STS-8, the first night launch and landing using the orbiter Challenger, and in November 1984 on the 51-A mission, during which the crew retrieved two communications satellites that had failed to achieve proper orbits after launch from an earlier Space Shuttle flight. NASA refurbished the satellites for reflight. During the Air Show, the astronauts would make numerous public appearances, participate in media interviews, and assist NASA's marketing efforts at its exhibit in the U.S. pavilion. (NASA Release 85-72)
Arianespace officials blew up the European Space Agency's (ESA) Ariane V15 rocket, which carried the third in the European Communications Satellites (ECS-3) series and the U.S. communications satellite Spa-cenet F3, less than ten minutes after liftoff when the rocket veered off course and began falling, threatening inhabited areas, the Washington Post reported. The failure was Ariane's third in 15 launches. French President Francois Mitterrand, on a stopover on his way to French Polynesia, watched the failed launching. Liftoff at the Kourou (French Guiana) launch site was on schedule at 8:26 p.m. Reports said Ariane was on course during the first minutes of its ascent, but then it suddenly went off course and lost altitude because of a propulsion problem in the third-stage motor. Ariane's other failures were on May 23, 1980, on its second launch, and on May 9, 1982, on its fifth. (W Post, Sept 13/85, A12; ESA release Sept 2/85)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) would transfer spacecraft tracking and data acquisition operations from its Beltsville Tracking Station to its Wallops Flight Facility by early 1986, consolidating the operations to support balloon, sounding-rocket, and aeronautical-flight research. Diminishing need for ground stations due to the new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) necessitated the realignment. TDRSS would consist of three communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit, providing global coverage by earth-orbiting satellites and replacing the worldwide network of ground stations. NASA had launched the first TDRSS satellite in April 1983 and would launch the second about February 20. GSFC would phase out or transfer to other agencies most of its tracking stations. In addition to Wallops, however, GSFC would maintain ground stations at Bermuda and Merritt Island, Florida, to support Space Shuttle launches from KSC. The White Sands, New Mexico, station was the ground terminal for orbiting TDRSS satellities (NASA Release 85-11)
At a news conference to discuss the recent flights of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgiy Grechko, Soviet space officials said today that they expected to have a permanently manned space station by 1990, but that the Salyut 7 orbital laboratory would not be the spacecraft that hosted the rotating crews, the NY Times reported. Oleg Gazenko, head of the health ministry's Biomedical Problems Institute, which oversaw space medicine, said no unresolved problems remained to block development of the permanent station and that the crew rotation on Salyut 7 showed that incoming cosmonauts performed their research work better when they were spared the start-up operations needed to reactivate the space laboratory. At about the same time, Soviet officials told a U.S. Congressional delegation headed by Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) [see U.S. Space Policy/International, Oct. 10] that it was building a new space station that would be ready for launch in 1986, Defense Daily reported. Because the Soviets did not want to have two space stations in orbit at the same time, timing of the launch depended on the condition of the orbiting Salyut 7station, which was nearly doubled in size in September by the orbiting and deployment of a large new module. Nelson said the Soviets gave no details of the new station, which, if it is designed to be permanently manned, would beat the planned U.S. space station by seven or eight years. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C11; D/D, Oct 21/85, 259) October31: The Soviet Union, which had kept its space program under tight military control since it launched in 1957 the first satellite, announced creation of a civilian space agency, the NY Times reported. The agency would be responsible for the design, construction, and use of spacecraft for scientific research, remote sensing applications such as surveys of resources and crops, and joint space programs with other countries. In making the announcement, the government newspaper Izvestia identified the new agency as the Main Administration for the Creation and Use of Space Technology for the Economy and for Scientific Research, the Post said. It would be known as Glavkosmos, an acronym for the Russian terms "main" and "space." Izvestia did not specify the position of the agency in the Soviet government's table of organization but did identify the head of the agency as A. I. Dunayev. The only other publicly disclosed space-related agency in the Soviet Union was the Space Research Institute, founded in 1965 and a unit of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Western officials generally regarded that institute as performing some civilian space coordinating functions. However, in announcing Glavkosmos, Izvestia said, "It goes without saying that the effective use of space technology is of interest to many government ministries and agencies and to scientific organizations. The space program has reached such scope as to require the creation of a special coordinating agency." According to the announcement, the new agency would consider proposals for projects, work out long-term plans, and administer programs. It would also be responsible for launching satellites on vehicles expected to be supplied by the military and for collection and dissemination of satellite information. Izvestia said the agency would administer the Intercosmos program and the search and rescue satellite program, an international effort of the Soviet Union, the U.S., Canada, and France. The announcement did not make clear whether the new agency would administer any manned flights; but the emphasis seemed to be on automated space vehicles concerned with remote sensing, which until then had been part of the Cosmos series, a mixture of nearly 1700 civilian and military satellites launched since 1962. (NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13)
In addition to TV programs, the satellite would transmit newspaper facsimile, educational programs, medical consultations, weather information, and computer linkages. (Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese, May 30/ 85)
Martin Marietta Corp. completed an agreement giving it a 25% stake in Equatorial Communication Co., a provider of satellite-based data communications networks, the Washington Post reported. Under the agreement, Marietta acquired about 3.6 million shares of Equatorial's common stock for $13.87V2 a share and warrants to purchase an additional 1.8 million shares for $17.50 each. Marietta would assume two seats on Equatorial's board, which would expand to seven members. Equatorial, which provided small, low-cost micro-earth stations, satellite transmission capacity, and other services that let companies construct and control their own private data communications networks, said it planned to use the funds to reduce debt and provide working capital. Marietta and Equatorial said they planned to pursue joint ventures in the information systems market. (W Post, Aug 20/85, E4) AEROSPACE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
NASA announced it had scheduled the 51-E Space Shuttle mission from KSC for no earlier than March 3, 1985, with landing on March 7, 1985, at KSC. The 7th flight of the orbiter Challenger would include deployment of the 2nd Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and Telesat Canada's Anik Cl communications satellite and the French echocardiograph and postural experiments. Mission 51-E crew would be Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and payload specialists Patrick Baudry and Sen. E. J. "Jake" Garn (R-Utah). Thermal protection system refurbishment [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Launch Schedules, Feb. 6] had necessitated the delay from February 20. NASA had yet to accomplish step measurements, gap filler installation, and tile-bond and quality verifications. NASA said the current 51-E launch date did not affect the planned March 19 launch date of the Space Shuttle 51-D mission. (NASA Release 85-20)
NASA announced that through a cooperative effort with Satellite Communications for Learning Worldwide (SCOLA), it would televise live via satellite to hundreds of high schools, colleges, and universities across the U.S. all the science events on the Space Shuttle Discovery following its launch no earlier than April 12 from KSC. Two days prior to launch, NASA scientists and engineers would conduct a permission videoconference with the schools to acquaint students and teachers with the planned mission and science experiments. Students from selected schools would ask questions of the NASA briefers. NASA's educational affairs office was providing Discovery mission and educational materials to the participating schools. SCOLA, an association of schools, colleges, and universities based at Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska, was one of the largest voluntary associations of institutional satellite antenna owners in the U.S. (NASA Release 85-51)
In reporting on NASA's concerns over the effects of vibrations and noise on the Space Shuttle's passengers and cargo, the Washington Post quoted astronaut Air Force Col. Frederick Gregory saying that after his return from a Space Shuttle mission that "Nothing prepared me for the sensation of those main engines starting and those solids lighting up underneath us. That son-of-a-gun really rattles and rolls when it takes off." Although NASA maintained that the Space Shuttle was no rougher a ride than the Titan launch vehicle, doubts were creeping into the minds of some people planning the Space Shuttle program, the Post said. Troubles arose on Gregory's flight when astronauts discovered the latch that released the airlock holding the Spacelab wide-field camera was badly bent—possibly because of the rough ride. In another Spacelab incident, all pressure was lost after four days in the laser spectrometer at the heart of an experiment to measure molecules of synthetic chemicals that could be attacking the earth's protective ozone layer. Space Shuttle managers were quick to defend the spacecraft, the Post reported. Columbia, Challenger, and Discovery had flown 17 times in four years without a serious incident. At least two of the three satellites that failed in space did so because of onboard rocket engine difficulties, not because the Space Shuttle was too rough. Johnson Space Center Director Gerald Griffin said in an interview with the Post that "occasional" mistakes had led to mishaps, but he insisted that "we are not repeating our mistakes." He used as an example the Syncom (Leasat-3) satellite deployed in April with no power to raise it to a higher orbit. He said that NASA would not have deployed the Syncom without any power if NASA had insisted that Hughes Communications Corp install a device that flashed a warning to the Space Shuttle's cockpit that the satellite had no power. "We've always insisted our customers adhere to our safety standards to protect the crew and the shuttle, but we've never insisted they do anything else," Griffin said. "We don't want to be 'Big Brother' but we're beginning to think that some of the [the customers] design features are not good for us. I'd like to see more data for the crew in the cockpit." (W Post, May 24/85, A1)
A Federal grand jury today indicted General Dynamics Corp., three of its current executives, and its former executive vice president, James Beggs, currently Administrator of NASA, for allegedly seeking to defraud the Defense Department in connection with producing two prototypes of the DIVAD, an anti-aircraft gun for the Army, Time magazine reported. The seven-count, 33-page indictment stated that between January 1978 and August 1981, while General Dynamics was working on a $41 million program to build the prototypes, it made false statements to the government and was guilty of fraud. The indictment charged the company with illegally billing $7.5 million of its expenses to other government accounts, of which $3.2 million was paid. Along with Beggs, the indictment also named Ralph Hawes, division general manager; David McPherson, program director; and James Hansen, assistant director. Beggs, who took a leave of absence from NASA, denied the charge, saying, "I have not been involved in any criminal wrongdoing ... I do not intend to leave, and this is not the first step to a resignation." A General Dynamics spokesman said, "The issue is a highly sophisticated regulatory and accounting matter, which should be resolved in a civil forum, not in a criminal case." (Time, Dec 16/85, 46) The Navy anticipated a series of NROSS satellites with enough launches to keep an operating satellite in orbit unless sensor or other changes made faster launches desirable. NROSS-1's expected lifetime would be three years; an NROSS-2 would depend on needed oceanographic data. The system would help battle group commanders predict ocean conditions for antisubmarine warfare operations, force placement, and plan use of advanced weapon systems. {A/D, Jan 10/85, 50)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
The U.S. Air Force couldn't decide whether the next test of the miniature homing vehicle antisatellite (ASAT) system should be against a target in space, Aerospace Daily reported. The Air Force was evaluating data from its November 13 ASAT test, in which the miniature homing vehicle MHV infrared sensor tracked a star, but had said that its next ASAT test would be flown against an instrumented target vehicle. Congressional limitations barred such a test until March 1 and until President Reagan had certified to Congress that the test was needed and wouldn't undercut the potential for negotiations with the USSR. The previous day the magazine had discussed a House Republican research report recommending raising the limit of three U.S. ASAT tests against objects in space during that fiscal year. (A/D, Jan 16/85, 84; Jan 15/85, 73) May 24: The U.S. Senate voted today, 74 to 9, to approve a proposal by Sen. John Warner (R-Va.) to allow three final-stage antisatellite tests next year as long as President Reagan told Congress the test would not disrupt negotiations aimed at banning antisatellite weapons, the Washington Post reported. The Senate previously rejected, 51 to 35, a testing ban proposed by Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.). The U.S. antisatellite (ASAT) weapon was a small warhead atop a rocket carried by an F—15 jet to the edge of space, where it was released to pursue its target. Although the U.S. had tested the weapon in stages, the U.S. had not fired the weapon against a target in space. The Pentagon had scheduled that final round of testing to begin within several months. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	m 9UX |[0 INTENTIONALLY BLANK During the Geneva negotiations on weapons reductions, the USSR sought a halt to ASAT tests, while the Reagan Administration said it was open to such a proposal but had refused to halt ASAT testing as a condition to talks. In 1984 Congress banned tests of the U.S. system in hopes the pause might help negotiations, which had not then started. The Washington Post earlier had reported that electronic problems would raise the cost of the antisatellite system and stretched out its testing program. The Air Force planned a test, originally scheduled for fall 1984, for late July in which the target would be two metallic balloons attached to an orbiting satellite. However, the Air Force was cautious about the first test against a target in space, fearing that a well-publicized failure would hurt the space defense program. Sources told the Post that it might be impossible for the Air Force to carry out a second test of the weapon against the balloon target in space during the current fiscal year. Originally the Air Force had planned for three tests in 1985. (WPost, May 25/85, A4; May 16/85, A27)
Japan's highest space policy board, the Space Activities Commission, adopted in a meeting of its four commission members a plan to begin in FY 85 development of a rocket booster capable of putting a two-ton geostationary satellite into orbit, FBIS, KYODO in English reported. The new booster, code named H—II, a two-stage, 240-ton liquid-fueled rocket, 46-m high and 4-m in diameter, would dwarf the country's biggest rocket, N—II, whose capacity was up to 350 kg. Officials expected the project to cost 200 billion yen and take six to seven years to complete. The commission also agreed to start work on a science satellite and geostationary weather satellite, both intended for 1989 launch, and authorized the PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	163 naJUr.. INTENTIQNALU BLAHS design, beginning in FY 85, of a space module that Japan would construct as part of an international space station program planned for early in the 1990s. (KYODO in English, Mar 13/85) MATERIALS PROCESSING
Assured access to space is one of the Defense Department's "bottom lines" in fulfilling its mission, said Col. Victor Whitehead, deputy for the Air Force Space Command's (AFSC) Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV), "and we're quite proud of our record," AFSC's Newsreview reported. "We've gone three years in a row without a launch failure. In that time we have launched 30 totally successful ELVs. "We've learned over the years what makes a successful launch; we don't go until everything is ready." The Space Command was examining what might be beyond the Space Shuttle and ELVs for space transportation, considering both manned and unmanned systems as a follow-on. "But I don't think you'll see a future scenario in which we will be dependent on a single system," Whitehead said. "There will be alternative ways of flying payloads. Our job is to determine what they are." The colonel pointed out that the Space Shuttle was a very good system, but that the Air Force recognized that if it stopped using ELVs and was dependent on the Space Shuttle alone, "our access to space would be limited if the shuttle, for some reason, is not available. We therefore found we needed a complementary ELV." Whitehead noted the follow-on Titan 34D7 would fulfill this alternative need. "This new booster will give us into the mid-1990s a totally separate way to launch a payload," he said. "We determine it should have the same capabilities as the shuttle in terms of performance, payload, and volume. This way, a payload that could fly on the shuttle can also fly on the Titan 34D7." But it was a true complement to the Space shuttle in that it had "no common modes with shuttle. We have a completely separate set of contractors and separate launch facilities for the shuttle and Titan. If one system is down, the other continues on and flies those payloads," Whitehead concluded. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 26/85, 3) November 2Ch NASA announced it had scheduled an Air Force AF-16 satellite for launch December 12 aboard a Scout launch vehicle from Wallops Flight Center. NASA and the Department of Defense entered into agreements in June 1962 for joint use of the Scout launch vehicle. NASA and the Air Force Systems Command continued the agreement under a memorandum of understanding dated April 19, 1977, and amended May 17, 1983. Under the agreement, NASA maintained the Scout launch vehicle system, and DOD used the system for appropriate missions. The Air Force had requested NASA to provide Scout launch vehicles for the Instrumented Test Vehicle Program. The Air Force would pay in accordance with the existing interagency agreements the costs associated with this launch of a Scout vehicle. (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [prelaunch], Nov 20/85)
Under pressure from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to define its requirements in the internationally authorized 1,544 to 1,660.5	MHz-frequency band and to make allocations in this band for commercial mobile-user communications and surveillance systems, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) indicated satellites might play a key role in air navigation, surveillance, and communications in its follow-on generation, air-traffic control system. Therefore the FCC was trying to protect the radio spectrum required for such services, Aviation Week reported. In addition, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) would review at the 1987 World Radio Conference the earlier-assigned band, seeking to assure sufficient spectrum availability for civil aviation operators' future global needs. The Special Committee 155 of the Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics said it would report at an April 26 ICAO meeting results of its yearlong study intended to define future spectrum operational requirements for the year 2010 and beyond for all classes of airspace users. The report called for service over both land and water, from the surface to a 70,000-foot altitude, a requirement most easily met by spaceborne systems. The FAA had considered spaceborne systems for air traffic communications for nearly two decades, but had rejected them as not cost-effective replacements for terrestrial-based facilities (except for transoceanic communications). However, at the urging of the Air Transport Assn. (ATA), the FAA had initiated in the early 1970s a joint program with the European Space Agency (ESA) to explore satellite use for oceanic aircraft communications, resulting in contracts with Comsat Corp. for the service and GE to build a satellite; the FAA had terminated the program when ATA lost interest. More recently, Aviation Week said, the FAA had responded cooly to DOD's push for FAA adoption of its Rockwell Navstar Global Positioning System, partly because of Pentagon-imposed signal accuracy limits of 500 miles (1,640 ft.) for civilian users. Currently, commercial applications to the FCC for authorization to offer domestic communications- and surveillance-satellite services to users, ranging from trucks to aircraft, had raised serious FAA concerns. FAA officials doubted the technical suitability of some of the proposed systems to meet airspace users' demanding requirements. The government traditionally had owned and operated the surveillance, navigation, and communications facilities the FAA used for air-traffic control. If the FCC, under the Reagan Administration policy of commercializing space activities, should allocate spectrum currently assigned for aviation to nonaviation use, this could preclude a future optimum global spaceborne-avia-tion system. Therefore, the FAA task force was studying spectrum needs for several types of spaceborne systems, including multifunction satellites, and expected to have recommendations ready for submission to the Future Air Navigation System Committee and the National Telecommunications and Information Agency, which addressed government frequency-allocation issues. (AvWk, Feb 4/85, 36)
Gen. Lawrence Skantze, commander of the Air Force Systems Command, declared that the U.S. military space program was about to begin a new era in which military space systems competed against terrestrial systems to determine which could better handle military situations, Defense Daily reported. Three developments had created the military space program, reaching what Skantze called a "critical mass." These were the establishments of the Unified Space Command that provided for the first time an advocate for U.S. space activities; the Project Forecast II technology study, which would propose among other things "quantum leaps in space capabilities;" and the growing momentum of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). "This 'critical mass,' merging with the proven combat enhancement roles of space systems and a tight defense budget, would thrust the military into a new era of force structure decision," Skantze said. "A limited budget and its allocation process will place space systems in direct competition with terrestrial systems for resources and solutions to military problems," he commented. Space systems would have to demonstrate that the benefits they provided were worth more than the terrestrial force addition that would have to be foregone for the space system, Skantze pointed out. In the past, "space systems have often competed for R&D dollars with terrestrial systems that have traditionally done the same or similar jobs," he explained. "At times we have the luxury of being able to afford both. These times are gone. Given the more sophisticated treat, and the corresponding increased complexity and cost of all aerospace systems, tradeoffs among different mission areas are now essential. "In an era when fielding a single military satellite can cost up to $.5 billion, we need to carefully consider what we are willing to give up to get a space system," he asserted. Regarding the outlook for a shift to space systems, Skantze said that "future tradeoffs of space systems will be tough for several reasons. One is that right now, space systems are fewer in number, more costly, and subject to different logistics concepts than terrestrial systems. While multiyear contracting can reduce cost, we haven't been able to take advantage of economic order quantities the way we have for missiles, bombs, or even planes. Development and production costs for spacecraft will continue to exceed the flyaway cost of a B-1B or F-15—even with on-orbit satellite repair on the horizon. "While the Shuttle offers that possibility," he added, "we still have to build space systems reliable, redundant and survivable. For two to ten years at a time, military spacecraft must survive in-space radiation or combat, regulating their own systems or responding to remote controls. Ultra-high reliability is costly, but we can't yet afford squadron-level maintenance of military satellites on-orbit. For now, we're working on new maintenance concepts and better materials, propellants, and hardening to reduce some of the cost of space systems. However, they will remain expensive military alternatives until we find a new way of doing business." A second reason making tradeoffs between space and terrestrial systems difficult was that "the payoffs are different, and hard to compare," since space systems were "force multipliers," that is, they made weapon systems more capable, Skantze said. And a final reason that made tradeoffs difficult, he said, was "that a decision for a space system can be all or nothing," meaning the number of fighter wings could be pared and still provide an effective force to some extent, "while the Unified Space Command cannot cut back on satellite numbers and still operate an effective system. The investment question can boil down to doing it all or just not doing it," he commented. (D/D, Dec 18/85, 241)
The Syncom II communications satellite lost one of its 13 channels, described as an important wide-band channel, and efforts were underway to reactivate it, Defense Daily reported. The U.S. Navy leased the satellite from Hughes Communications Inc., which was under contract to provide four such Leasats to the Navy. NASA in September 1984 launched Syncom I and II from the Space Shuttle and launched in April from the Space Shuttle Syncom III, which failed to fire in orbit. The Space Shuttle crew in July repaired Syncom III, with a reboost attempt scheduled for October. NASA launched in July from the Space Shuttle Syncom IV, but its communications failed in orbit. (D/D, Oct 3/85, 174)
NASA announced a new Space Shuttle manifest for 41 Space Shuttle missions through December 14, 1987 that included nine flights for the remainder of 1985, 15 flights in 1986, and 17 flights in 1987. Highlights for 1985 included the first Atlantis flight in late September for a Department of Defense mission; a Spacelab 3 flight in late April, Spacelab 2 with extensive European Space Agency participation in July, and another Spacelab flight in October dedicated to W. German scientific investigations. Also during 1985 NASA would deploy communications satellites for Hughes, AT&T, RCA, Mexico, Australia, Canada, and the Arabsat consortium. In 1986 the first launch of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base would occur. The first liquid-hydrogen-powered Shuttle Centaur upper stage would be used to deploy Ulysses (formerly the International Solar Polar Mission), and the Galileo mission to Jupiter (also using the Shuttle Centaur) and the Hubble Space Telescope flight would be launched. NASA said launch dates of missions to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and to retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF-1) were under review. Also, NASA assigned Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce McCandless as mission specialists for the Hubble Space Telescope flight on mission 61-J in August 1986. (NASA Release 8550)
NASA issued a revision of its October 28 report on the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) [see Astronomy, Oct. 28], in which it noted a major IRAS survey discovery that many galaxies emitted far more energy in the infrared than in the optical band where normal stars emitted the bulk of their luminosity. Astronomers considered these galaxies to be of three distinct kinds. The first was "starburst galaxies," those that were presumably undergoing an active period of star formation leading to a large infrared luminosity and in which as much as 10 to 20 solar masses of gas and dust were being converted into new massive stars each year. Another class was sometimes called Seyfert galaxies, which astronomers believed were powered by matter falling into an accretion disk surrounding a black hole. The active regions of these galaxies had a great deal of interstellar dust, which absorbed the optical and ultraviolet radiation from the accretion disks, accounting for the large infrared luminosity. The third and most mysterious class of extragalactic objects discovered by IRAS was the extremely luminous infrared galaxies corresponding to very faint optical galaxies. Such galaxies produced 100 to 300 times as much energy in the infrared as in the optical, and the total luminosities of these galaxies were approximately 100 times those of ours. Astronomers believed the infrared radiation in these galaxies was probably from thermal dust emission, where the dust was reradiating energy absorbed from shorter wavelengths. Astronomers found a large fraction of the active infrared galaxies were interacting galaxies, that is, galaxies that were undergoing a collision or near collision with a neighboring galaxy. The IRAS survey demonstrated the profound effect such collisions had on galaxies, and it could well be that such events dominated the evolution of most galaxies. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [postlaunch] Oct 28/85, revised Dec 2/85)
The Soviet Union signed a memorandum of understanding with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) to formalize its relationship with the 109-member nation global satellite consortium, the Washington Post reported. However, neither the USSR nor INTELSAT indicated that the understanding would lead to full-fledged membership for the nation that was the largest nonmember user of the satellite network. The understanding, which came after seven years of negotiations, laid the groundwork for increased use of INTELSAT'S network for global transmission of Soviet voice, data, and TV transmissions. If the Soviets increasingly used INTELSAT, experts said, it would be to expand their broadcasting system to reach Third World countries. In 1984 the USSR broadcast 441 hours of TV programming over INTELSAT'S satellites, representing 1% of the consortium's total TV traffic. By contrast, the U.S. used INTELSAT TV transmission capacity over 6,884 hours, 14% of the organization's TV traffic. INTELSAT had to accept the membership of any nation that belonged to the International Telecommunications Union, which included the Soviet Union. INTELSAT denied using the Soviet Union as a means to deflect competition the organization was facing from entrepreneurs seeking to launch their own satellite systems. (WPost, Aug 28/85, G1)
The USSR today boosted the nuclear-reactor core of its Cosmos 1607 radar ocean-surveillance satellite (RORSAT) to a higher orbit, marking the end of its 92-day mission, Aerospace Daily reported. Some observers linked the maneuver to the failure the week before of Cosmos 1625, a solar-powered electronic ocean reconnaissance satellite (EORSAT). They believed that EORSATs and RORSATs worked together to monitor movements of potentially hostile ships and that, upon the failure of Cosmos 1625, the Soviets decided Cosmos 1607 was not worth maintaining. Others said the Soviets terminated the Cosmos 1607 mission because it had operated successfully for three months, and were therefore uncertain of the satellite's reliability if kept in operation any longer. (The Soviets had problems with RORSATs in the past—parts of the Cosmos 954 reactor came down in Canada in 1978, and the nuclear power-pack components of Cosmos 1402 reentered over the Indian Ocean and South Atlantic in early 1983. Cosmos 1266 lasted only about a week in 1981, and in that same year Cosmos 1299 only a little longer. In 1982 Cosmos 1412 was operational for only 40 days.) Cosmos 1607 was the second Soviet RORSAT of 1984; they safely boosted the power pack of Cosmos 1579, launched June 28, to a higher orbit on September 28. The Soviets boosted the power packs to high orbit so their decay would occur after half-life of the nuclear elements. (A/D, Feb 11/85, 1)
Robert Cooper, director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), in testimony before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee's research and development subcommittee, said the U.S. had developed a secret graphite coating that could shield spacecraft, satellites, and missiles from Soviet laser beams, the Washington Times reported. The new material could be highly effective at a modest weight penalty, perhaps 10% of a spacecraft or missile's payload, and could withstand as much as 100 times more laser energy deposited on it than the typical aerospace material. The CIA estimated that the Soviets could have a space-based laser capable of shooting at U.S. satellites by 1988 and one capable of shooting at targets on the ground possibly by 1990. The development added a new dimension to the controversy over President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. Critics had argued that it would be difficult if not impossible for a space-based laser to destroy an ascending missile in its early and vulnerable boost phase before its multiple warheads had been launched. Development of the new class of lightweight shielding materials appeared to bolster this argument, increasing the possibility of missiles as well as spacecraft and satellites being made impervious to laser destruction. When questioned about the Soviets using such a material to thwart a U.S. space-based defense system, Cooper replied, "I don't know what implementation it has for a Soviet space or missile system. I'm not sure they have the technology, or even could achieve it in the near term." (W Times, Mar 29/85, 1 A) April23: Anthony Battista, the U.S. House Armed Services R&D subcommittee senior staff adviser, said on April 3 that a "reasonable" funding effort for the Reagan Administration's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program would be between $2.2 and $3 billion for FY 86, Defense Daily reported. Battista noted that the reductions in SDI should be taken from surveillance, acquisition, and targeting, which represented about $1.5 billion of the $3.7 billion requested by the administration and that "the one troublesome part about SDI, from a command and control point of view right now, is that there is not enough emphasis on the hardening of detectors to live in the thermo-nuclear environment. I'm worried about the ability of missiles to live in that environment." However, in testimony before the Senate defense appropriations subcommittee, Under Secretary of Defense Fred Ikle said on April 23 that a reduction in the FY 86 SDI budget would be extremely harmful to the program and a poor policy decision. SDI "is not some optional experiment, to be continued or curtailed depending on short-term budgetary or arms control considerations," he said. "It is a vital long-term effort to strengthen our ability to prevent nuclear war. ". . . If we slow down the SDI in this early phase, we would not have the answers in the next decade that we need to chart our long-term strategy and arms control policy." The Administration planned to spend $4.9 billion in FY 87 and $16 billion in FY 88-89 on the program. (D/D, Apr 3/85, 185, 24/85, 305)
NASA announced a new launch date of no earlier than March 7 from KSC for the 51—E Space Shuttle mission with landing at KSC on March 11. Routine checkout of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite had disclosed that one cell in a 24-cell flight battery would not accept a charge. Rescheduling the launch would permit battery repair and retesting. The three nickel-cadmium batteries would supply full power to the satellite during orbital-flight, solar-eclipse periods when its solar panels could not provide the required electrical power. Final checkout of the Space Shuttle orbiter systems was progressing satisfactorily. The 51 —E launch date would cause an STS 51-D launch date of no earlier than March 22. (NASA Release 85-29)
A fare war had broken out in space, Fortune reported, and Arianespace, a consortium of European governments and private companies that operated the European-built Ariane rocket, was grabbing communications satellite launches away from the U.S. Space Shuttle by aggressively underpricing it. Although NASA had launched 30 satellites, nine aboard the Space Shuttle, over the previous four years and the Ariane less than 12, the Europeans would become major competitors, Fortune predicted. A Space Shuttle launch cost $25 million; Arianespace charged $24 million. And Arianespace had cut that price by as much as $3 million to lure some U.S. customers. Arianespace officials said its throwaway rockets were more efficient at the single task of launching satellites than was the complex Space Shuttle, which NASA had designed to perform a range of scientific and military missions. "Using the shuttle for launching satellites," Charles Bigot, director of Arianespace, said, "is like flying a supersonic Mirage jet fighter when all you need is a puddle jumper." American entrepreneurs who wanted to get into the satellite-launching business complained that prices charged by both Arianespace and NASA were ridiculously low as a result of government subsidies. Transpace Carriers Inc., for example, held the rights to buy the Delta rocket from its manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp., but couldn't launch a satellite for less than $45 million. The U.S. Department of Transportation, which wanted to encourage private companies like Transpace Carriers, was encouraging President Reagan to set Space Shuttle launch rates high enough to make the commercial launches profitable. So the future of the launch business, Fortune said, would rest with President Reagan's decision on Space Shuttle pricing—and on Arianespace's reaction. If Reagan boosted Space Shuttle launch fees, it would please entrepreneurs anxious to get into the space business. But that would also give the Europeans a bigger opening into the space business than they've had so far. (Fortune, May 27/85, 138)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-1 took time August 29 to observe Hurricane Elena, the Washington Post reported. Commander Joe Engle took photos of the storm, a dense white circular mass that stretched across almost half of the Gulf of Mexico, and noted a second storm in the western part of Gulf. Among the contingencies NASA faced was the possibility that the storm could strike the Houston area and knock out communications with the Johnson Space Center. A NASA spokesman said they could quickly switch operation to the Goddard Space Flight Center. The crew also that day launched the Syncom IV-4 satellite, which was almost identical to the satellite the crew would attempt August 30 to salvage. (IV Post, Aug 30/85, A3)
NASA announced that personnel at Ames Research Center (ARC) would break ground March 14 for the numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) facility building to house the world's most powerful supercomputer system, which was intended to provide a national computational capability that would complement NASA's experimental facilities in maintaining national preeminence in aeronautical research. Researchers would use highspeed supercomputers in the system to solve complex aerodynamic equations describing the fundamental fluid physics and large scale aerodynamic flows associated with aircraft flying in earth's atmosphere. In effect, they would test aircraft configurations by "flying" them in the NAS supercomputer system, reducing both time and costs associated with development of new aircraft. NAS would also support other research, including computational materials and structures, chemistry, and astrophysics; weather predictions; and genetic engineering. ARC also intended to make the supercomputer network available to remote users in universities, private industry, and other government research agencies via satellite. Cray Research's Cray 2 supercomputer, with an expected operating speed of 250 million calculations per second when working aerodynamic problems, would be the heart of the initial NAS network when it became operational in mid-1986. NASA intended to incorporate even faster supercomputers as they became commercially available, with the aim of including supercomputers with up to one billion calculations per second in 1988 and 10 billion calculations per second in the 1990s. In an effort to create a partnership between people and machines that, in itself, would advance computer simulation, NASA had architects Hunt and Co. design the 90,500-sq. ft. concrete building so as to encourage scientists who would use the computers for research to work closely with the people who would operate, maintain, and develop the NAS system. Building contractor was Perini Co. (NASA Release 85-37)
Engineers with Hughes Communications Inc., owner of the Syncom 3 communications satellite, sent at 11:53 a.m. today from the company's Guam ground station a radio command to fire the marooned satellite's rocket booster, causing the satellite's ICBM-type rocket motor to fire for 64 seconds as planned, the Washington Times reported. The undertaking capped the most ambitious space salvage effort ever attempted, the Times said, a two-day effort in August by two astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery (see Satellites Apr 22 and Aug 31). The engineers fired the rocket without knowing whether it would blow up or work properly after months exposed to freezing temperatures. "We really nailed it," said Albert Wheelon, president of the Hughes space communications group. "We'll have it in synchronous orbit round about the first of November and then we still have 30 days of checking out the radio equipment and all the systems." Insurance underwriters stood to recoup 85% of the insured cost of the satellite, a boost for an industry that had lost more than $600 million in the past 20 months because of seven satellite failures including Syncom 3. (W Times, Oct 28/85, 3A)
During 1985 the Soviet Union launched 96 spacecraft, the U.S. 17, the Washington Post reported, reflecting what space specialists said was the fact that most Soviet spy satellites burned out within weeks while U.S. satellites often remained in orbit for years. The Soviets launched 33 photo reconnaissance satellites, amounting to more than one-third of the total Soviet launches from January 1 through December 26. In 1985 the Soviets continued to stress the ability to locate with satellites U.S. ships at sea, Navy officials commented. One type of Soviet ocean surveillance satellite, which had radar beams that could penetrate clouds, sought aircraft carriers and other big ships. The radar provided the location of ships below the satellite, forcing the Navy to resort to new methods to foil radar detection. Nicholas Johnson, advisory scientist to Teledyne Brown Engineering Co., kept a widely used log of U.S. and Soviet space launches, and he said that the Soviets launched in 1985 five ocean surveillance satellites, two carrying radar and three equipped with electronic eavesdropping gear. He added that Soviet launches included 19 communication satellites, two of a variety never seen before, and seven satellites designed to warn Moscow of a nuclear attack. Through espionage the Soviets had learned a great deal about U.S. spy satellite capabilities and had taken steps to mask some of their military activities, intelligence officials noted. Space specialists largely agreed that the U.S. was well ahead of the Soviets in the art of spying from space, although they indicated the Soviet's reconnaissance satellites were steadily improving. (IVPost, Dec 31/85, A4)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pioneered the concept of a satellite system for mobile users and, because a U.S. mobile satellite industry was emerging, was turning its attention to developing technologies critical for future systems, the JPL Universe reported. Similar to cellular phones popular in urban areas, the mobile satellite system (MSS) would provide voice and data communications for the entire North American continent, employing one or two satellites in geosynchronous orbit to relay communications instead of depending on ground-based, line-of-sight relay towers that celluar phones used. There were four categories of MSS users: people who needed uninterrupted communications while they traveled over wide geographical areas, for example interstate truckers; those responding to unpredictable events such as medical emergencies or natural disasters; people working at planned but temporary installations such as oil or gas drilling facilities, mining camps, or archeological excavations; and those in very remote areas. The new technologies JPL was developing included mechanically steerable low-profile and electronically steerable medium-gain vehicle antennas, digital speech compression, digital modems, and multiple-access techniques for integrated voice and data. NASA was working with industry and, through a joint endeavor agreement, would exchange a Space Shuttle deployment for 15% of the channel capacity for two years to test the system. “But first," said Dr. Firouz Naderi, JPL's mobile satellite experiment project manager, "we must further develop the technology and try to squeeze as many channels as we can from a very narrow frequency allocation. That is the biggest obstacle we face." Also, JPL must design sophisticated multi-beam antennas that service "spot areas" and create techniques so frequencies could be reused to provide the most efficient use of the limited spectrum. Recently JPL sponsored a two-day briefing on the state of the industry. Attending were more than 250 representatives of 120 organizations including the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which would regulate the MSS; 11 of 12 candidate companies that petitioned the FCC for the right to operate the system; communications equipment manufacturers such as General Electric, Harris, and Motorola; Canadian government and industry representatives; banking officials; and potential users of the system. At the briefing, the FCC said it hoped by the middle of 1986 to assign a frequency to the mobile satellite industry as well as license an operator to be in charge of the system. NASA scheduled for launch in 1990 the first generation satellite with a 5 to 7 m antenna. During the program's second phase, NASA would launch from the Space Shuttle a 20m (65 ft.) antenna. NASA then planned for the program's final phase to construct on the proposed space station a 50m (180 ft.) antenna for deployment into geosynchronous orbit. (JPL Universe, Nov 29/ 85, 1) During November. Quoting from the Congressional Record, NASA reported remarks of Rep. Don Fuqua, (D-Fla.) chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, who introduced the Federal Science and Technology Revitalization Act of 1985. The act ". . . would establish an alternative personnel management system for scientific and technical people in the federal government," Fuqua said. "This is something I have been interested in for a long time, and I am hopeful that the proposal I am introducing will be able to help improve the quality of government-operated federal laboratories by encouraging the recruiting and retention of highly qualified scientific and technical individuals." Major provisions of the bill would permit agencies to include scientific and technical personnel in the new personnel management systems; simplify job evaluation and remove covered positions from the classification requirements of 5 U.S.C., Chapter 51; provide flexibility to develop a salary structure that ensured a competitive position in the labor market and that reflected the hiring and pay policies needed to attract, retain, and motivate a highly qualified scientific and technical work force; increase base pay on performance, not longevity; allow waiver of the pay cap for up to 5% of specially qualified scientific and technical personnel; provide for performance and special awards and remove the pay cap for lump-sum awards; and create a senior scientific and technical personnel service. In May 1983 the Federal Laboratory Review Panel of the White House Science Council chaired by David Packard reported that federal laboratories had several serious deficiencies and, consequently, a number of them did not meet the quality and productivity standards that might be expected, Fuqua explained. The panel reported that salaries at federal laboratories were noncompetitive with the private sector at entry and senior levels and that federal laboratories had to deal with a personnel management system that was cumbersome and had little flexibility. As a result, there existed what the panel referred to as an alarming "inability of many federal laboratories—especially those under civil service constraints—to attract, retain, and motivate qualified scientists and engineers." The panel concluded that administrative and legislative actions should be initiated to create, at government-operated laboratories, a scientific-technical personnel system that was independent of current civil service personnel systems, Fuqua continued. This "bill is the legislative attempt to deal with these very real problems," Fuqua said. "My own experience ... is that the requirements for NASA and Department of Agriculture labs may be very different, but attracting and retaining quality personnel is absolutely essential for the space program and for emerging fields in agriculture." (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 9)
The USSR today launched Cosmos 7667 intended for the continuation of research on the effects of spaceflight on living organisms, TASS in English reported. During the flight, there would be experiments to study processes of adaptation to weightlessness and to investigate opportunities for radiation shielding during spaceflight. The satellite carried two monkeys, Verny and Gordy, for studies on vestibular and hemodynamic responses of living organisms to weightlessness at the acute period of adaptation. Experiments carried out at that time would take quantitative measures of the excitability of the vestibular apparatus and to note increases in its reactivity. The experiments would also yield direct data on the outflow and inflow of blood to the head. Experiments with 10 male rats aboard the satellite were intended to determine the influence on all parts of a living organism of the acute period of adaptation to weightlessness and later readaptation. Ten tritons (mollusks) carried on the satellite previously had a portion of their front limbs and lenses amputated in order to study possibilities of regeneration and division of cells at zero gravity. And a biocalorimeter would monitor 1,500 Drosophila flies aboard the satellite to determine processes of energy exchanges during the emergence of the flies from nymphs and to study the flies' metabolism. Guppy fish, cornseeds, and crocuses were also experimental subjects. Scientists from the U.S., Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Poland, Romania, Czechoslovakia, and France cooperated with Soviet scientists in developing the experimental equipment for the flight and in pre- and postflight examination of the animals and plants abroad the spacecraft. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 10/85, July 13/85)
Peoples Republic of China astronautics minister Li Xue said China would put their Long March 2 and 3 rockets on the international market to provide satellite launching services for local and foreign clients, FBIS Beijing XINHUA Hong Kong Service in Chinese reported. The decision resulted from the October 21 launch by a Long March 2 rocket of an earth surveying satellite and an April 8, 1984 launch by a Long March 3 rocket of China's first experimental telecommunications satellite. Li Xue said the recent Long March 2 launch was its seventh consecutive success, indicating the two-stage liquid-propellant rocket could reliably put a satellite of about two tons into a near-earth orbit from the Jiuquan launching center, in addition the Long March 3 launch from the Xichang launching center of a satellite into geosynchronous orbit showed China had mastered the technology for placing a satellite in that orbit. He added that in addition to launch services from the two centers, China could provide satellite orbital control and support from the Xian control center, which had an ocean-based survey vessel component. And he pointed out that China could provide preferential prices for foreign customers, would train technicians, and had the capability, through the Chinese People's Insurance Co., to underwrite satellites that were launched. In conclusion, he said that, after the Long March 2 and 3 rockets were on the international market, they would promote international technical and economic cooperation in the astronautics field and contribute to the maintenance of world peace. (FBIS, XINHUA Kong Hong Service in Chinese, Oct 26/85) January 1Ch Four years after cancellation of the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), the U.S. Navy had begun to develop a simple, low-cost system to monitor ocean conditions routinely from space, Aerospace Daily reported. Budgeted at about a third the estimated cost of NOSS, the Navy Remote Ocean Sensing System (NROSS) would have nearly the same capability as NOSS by 1989, lacking particularly the synthetic aperture radar, and would use many of the ocean observation capabilities NASA's Seasat program demonstrated in 1979. The Pentagon had avoided $591.5 million in FY 1981-88 costs by cancelling NOSS (NASA and NOAA contributions would have made the total over $1 billion). NROSS would use a single-satellite system with no backup; the Navy would resolve later the issue of replenishment satellites. NROSS would also use existing or already planned data-processing equipment at the Navy's Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center and the USAF's Defense Meteorological Satellite Program command and control facilities. The Navy expected to spend about $200 million from FY 85 development through a launch in 1989, with a NASA contribution of $115 million ($35 million for the satellite program and $80 million in research). The Office of Management and Budget had vetoed use of NOAA's NOAA-D spacecraft as the NROSS bus, so NROSS would use a Block 5D-2 DMSP spacecraft. The Navy had planned an Atlas E launch, but was considering a refurbished Titan II ICBM. Planners rejected a Space Shuttle launch as too expensive.
Colombia lodged a protest with the U.S. over placement of a private U.S. satellite in geostationary orbit over that country, FBIS, Bogota Emisoras CARACOL Network in Spanish reported, space that Colombia claimed as its own. Colombia's Foreign Minister Augusto Ramirez Ocampo said the satellite was placed there secretly, since the firm owning it had not presented a request to the interested nation in accordance with international legal procedures. Colombia's United Nations Ambassador Ernesto Rodriguez Medina denounced the situation before the U.N.'s Legal Subcommittee for Outer Space, saying his country planned to place its Satcol satellite in that same position in orbit. (FBIS, Bogota Emisoras CARACOL Network in Spanish, Apr 11/85)
Already far ahead of their work schedule, astronauts aboard Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 began preparing tools they would use in an attempt to revive the U.S. Navy Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Mission planners had hoped the satellite repairs could be made during an August 30 spacewalk, but they added another spacewalk for August 31 because ground tests showed that the Space Shuttle crippled robot arm could not work fast enough to complete the repair job in one day. "It appears we are faced with a two-EVA (extravehicular activity) plan," flight director Bill Reeves said. He blamed a failed circuit that prevented Discovery's robot arm from operating in an automatic mode. Reeves noted that ground tests showed that the robot arm, when operated manually, would need about 75% more time to maneuver the Syncom 3 satellite and that it would take two 6-and-a-half hour spacewalks to complete the repair. Mission specialists Dr. James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher spent about four hours August 28 checking out electronic gear they would use to repair the satellite. Mission specialist John Lounge would work the robot arm from inside the cockpit, while van Hoften and Fisher worked outside on the satellite. The robot arm would play a crucial role, holding van Hoften in place while he worked on the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay. Lounge would also use the robot arm to help van Hoften turn the satellite so Fisher, standing in foot restraints inside the bay, could remove a panel and disengage a timing lever, then plug two electrical cables into the panel and, in effect, jump start the satellite. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A3)
A Titan 34-D booster carrying a classified payload, possibly a reconnaissance satellite, exploded August 28 minutes after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Because of the classified payload, the Air Force revealed little information about the launch. Booster rockets typically carried an internal destruct package that ground controllers could activate in the event of a malfunction. The explosion and subsequent crash of the booster started a 20-acre brush fire near the launch pad. An Air Force spokesman said it took firefighters more than five hours to extinguish the blaze. The Air Force was conducting an investigation to determine the cause of the booster failure. (NYT, Aug 31/85, A14)
President Reagan informed Congress that the U.S. planned shortly to conduct the first test of an antisatellite weapon (ASAT) against a target in space, which a spokesman said would provide an "incentive" to the USSR to negotiate limits on such weapons, the Washington Post reported. Reagan promised the U.S. was bargaining in good faith with the Soviets to limit ASATs, although the White House repeated the administration's opposition to a Soviet proposal for a moratorium on ASAT development and testing. Officials said they expected the test of an ASAT fired from an F—15 at an obsolete U.S. satellite to take place in September or early October. Technical problems with both the antisatellite weapon, called the miniature homing vehicle, and the intended target, an instrumented balloon to be inflated in space, delayed the first test. Since the original target was still experiencing problems, the test would use an obsolete satellite. That same day Presidential spokesman Larry Speakes read to reporters a lengthy statement criticizing Soviet advances in antisatellite weapons and technology and said this provided justification for the first U.S. test against a target in space. Speakes added that a moratorium on antisatellite weapons tests would "perpetuate" a Soviet "monopoly" on antisatellite systems. (W Post, Aug 21/85, A1)
U.S. Air Force Maj. Gen. Donald Kutyna said today that the Defense Department had decided to proceed with a $500 million program to design a hypersonic plane capable of flying around the globe in less than two hours and of flying in the highest reaches of the atmosphere and to provide a low-cost method for launching satellites and other equipment critical to President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, the NY Times reported. Speaking at a Colorado Springs symposium on space technology, Kutyna said construction of the plane itself could cost $2 to $3 billion. "It is something we are very serious about, and we think the technology is now within reach," said Kutyna, who coordinated the Air Force's research and development of space systems. "We have been examining the principles for some time, and now we are ready to head into the next phase." However, in Washington an aide to George Keyworth II, the President's science advisor, said, "Funding for the project's next phase is not assured." He noted Congress would have to approve the program. "This is all a little premature," the aide noted. "We have not yet presented the plan to President Reagan." But on November 20 Keyworth and top officials on the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and NASA presented details of the plan to members of Congress interested in aerospace issues. Unlike the Space Shuttle, which was launched vertically with rocket boosters, the aerospace plane would take off like an ordinary airplane, but would not have jet engines with heavy compressors, making the aerospace plane a light-weight vehicle. "Once you reach about Mach 3," or three times the speed of sound, Kutyna said, "the air streaming through the engines begins to compress itself. Some studies indicated that the plane could attain speeds of Mach 20, although there were experts who said half that speed would be more reasonable. If successful, the project could solve a key problem for the military: drastically reducing the cost of placing satellites and defensive space weapons in orbit. (NYT, Nov 22/85)
In a commentary in the Washington Times in response to a U.S. Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) study that had asserted NASA's plans for a permanent space station were not scientifically, economically, or militarily justified, Robert Melton, assistant professor at Pennsylvania State University, wrote that the study missed the point of NASA's current efforts to define better what should go into the station before proceeding with actual design and construction. He wrote that NASA had entered Phase B, the definition study of the project, in which contractors would provide NASA with thorough analyses of exactly what missions would be carried out in what time schedule and with descriptions of necessary equipment and technology together with a breakdown of costs. Such a detailed study was necessary to avoid premature overemphasis on design and to avert technical problems as the program progressed. Melton argued that the permanent space station was a logical next step after the Space Shuttle program and could serve as both a laboratory and base of operations for scientific, commercial, and security purposes. The space station could also serve as a permanent base for repairing and routinely servicing satellites, as a depot for permanently, space-based orbital transfer vehicles capable of delivering and retrieving high-orbit payloads, and as a base for building other large structures that would remain in orbit. Melton noted that the benefits of a permanent space station would make the $8 billion expenditure spread over several years seem a fairly small amount, especially when compared to other items in the federal budget. However, Melton acknowledged that the OTA study proved NASA had to do a better job of defining its space station goals and of impressing upon the public the importance of the project. (W Times, Mar 13/85, 2D)
NASA announced that a Scout vehicle today launched the Navy SOOS-I spacecraft from the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. As a result of a 1962 NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) agreement for joint use of the Scout launch vehicle, the U.S. Navy asked NASA to provide Scout launches for the Navy Transit and NOVA programs. The Navy reimbursed NASA for the cost of Scout launch vehicles, WSMC launch services, and mission support requirements as needed. The Navy and other vessels used the Transit program, an operational navigation system, for worldwide ocean navigation. Prior to the August 1 launch there were six operating satellites in the system. NASA maintained two Scout vehicles on standby status to launch replacement satellites to fill any operational gaps occurring in the system. The Navy SOOS-I mission had two Transit satellites in a stacked configuration. The spacecraft, which weighed 283 lb., had orbital parameters of 670 km, apogee; 554 km, perigee; and 89.83°, inclination. (NASA MOR M-490-606-85-01 [postlaunch] Sept 30, [prelaunch] July28/85)
When launched August 12, 1978 from Cape Canaveral, ICE was known as the International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE-3). The 1054-lb. 16-sided spacecraft became the first spacecraft to orbit at the sun-earth libration point (that point in space where a satellite is suspended in a gravitational equilibrium between the sun and the earth-moon system) and the first to traverse the earth's distant geomagnetic tail. ISEE-3 also was the first spacecraft to make multiple swings by the moon and the first to use a lunar gravity-assist maneuver for targeting-escape trajectory. It made more gravity-assist maneuvers (five) than any other spacecraft. After the spacecraft completed most of the objectives of its original mission, it remained in good operational condition and had approximately 75% (150 lb.) of its total propellant reserves (200 lb.). Engineers at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), under the leadership of Dr. Robert Farquhar, developed a plan that would divert ISEE-3 from its libration point orbit, take it past the moon five times, and propel it out toward Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although the spacecraft was not designed for cometary investigation (it had no cameras or dust detectors), GSFC scientists believed it was well-suited for measurements of a comet's plasma properties, a chief objective of cometary exploration. In addition, the trajectory developed by Farquhar and his colleagues brought the spacecraft within range of a March 1986 upstream intercept of Comet Halley. That 1986 upstream pass, following an October 31, 1985 distant pass, was important because ICE would provide data on the solar-wind state upstream from Halley and earth-based telescopes would then observe the effect of the solar wind on Halley's tail. The spacecraft would return in July 2012 to the vicinity of earth, where a lunar gravity-assist maneuver could place the spacecraft into an earth orbit from which it might be retrievable. (NASA Release 85-121)
NASA announced that its National Space Technology Laboratories, working with the University of Colorado at Boulder, uncovered information using remote sensing techniques suggesting a civilization existed before the Incas in subtropical Peruvian jungles. The university's anthropology department requested NSTL collaboration on the investigation because of the laboratories' expertise in satellite remote sensing and image analysis. After remote sensing by satellites and aircraft permitted mapping and determining priorities for field investigation sites, Tom Sever, NASA principal investigator, and Tom Lennon, an archaeologist and co-director of the university's Rio Abiseo National Park project, completed a five-day expedition into the jungles of Peru's Rio Abiseo National Park. Remote sensing had discovered Cerro Central, a site including more than 350 buildings. The previous major point of interest was the ancient site Gran Pajaten, which included only 30 buildings. "We now know that Pajaten is probably the smallest and least important of the sites," Sever explained. "We are fairly confident that we have approached the very edges of a new civilization, and we believe that the farther in we go, the higher and more complicated the elevation and architecture and civilization will be." Sever added that the investigation represented in his opinion the best example of a remote sensing application to archaeology and perhaps the only known means by which to obtain his project's objectives. (NASA Release 85-160) During November. Gene Gilbert, a technician in Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Laboratory for Oceans was searching for a way to measure rainfall at sea by using an oil rig, Goddard News reported, in order to assist in the development of a system called the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM). TRMM could take the form of a satellite or space station attachment operational in the mid-1990s to improve upon rainfall sensors that flew aboard Nimbus satellites. But developing better sensing capabilities first required accurate ground truth measurements to test the accuracy of remote observations. Over the years, meteorologists had developed a good picture of weather over land masses. But they still needed to know what happened over the remaining two-thirds of earth. When putting a collection bucket on a ship, Gilbert explained, different locations on deck gave differing results depending on whether the bucket was sheltered from the wind. In addition, the ship's movement gave angular measurement of the rain, not a true vertical one. And a buoy was not an improvement. "It may look stationary" Gilbert said, "but it really is not." Even the largest ones, which were 50 feet across, tossed in a storm, splashing and spraying and negating results. "What is needed," Gilbert pointed out, "is a surface that is stationary, vibration free, and splash-proof. I think oil platforms could satisfy all those conditions." GSFC's Microwave Sensors and Data Acquisition Systems Branch in July placed the first rain gauge on a oil producing platform in the Gulf of Mexico off Lafayette, Louisiana. "The very next month a hurricane knocked out our data transmission antenna," Gilbert recalled. "But we repaired the damage easily, and we have been getting good data since then." The rain gauge was a teeter-totter with a shot-glass sized cup at each end. The cups filled successively with 1/100th of an inch of rain and then dropped the measure back into the ocean. Each count was transmitted to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) and then back to GSFC via NOAA's data processing facility in Suitland, Maryland. "The goal is to demonstrate that using a gauge on an oil rig gives us our most accurate ocean rainfall data to date," Gilbert said. "If it does, we may expand to include other oil rigs. Then we will finally have good ground truth data for measuring rainfall over the ocean by satellite, at least for those oceans that include oil rigs." (Goddard News, Nov 85/ 2) SPACE STATION PROGRAM
The Commerce Department and Eosat, which was selected the previous fall to operate the system, had not yet finalized the contract, but a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) official told Congress the contract would be signed within two weeks. Eosat was proposing to provide two satellites and a new ground station for a fixed price of $250 million, satellite hardware continuing present capabilities with improvements, greater data processing capabilities at the new ground station, and a program covering 10 years. Government funding would occur in the first five years. (A/D, June 21/85, 1)
In his "National Security Launch Strategy" directive, President Reagan told NASA and the U.S. Air Force to begin a study leading to joint development of a bigger and more powerful space shuttle that could begin flying missions just before the year 2000, the Washington Post reported. In a major policy change, the Reagan Administration indicated that the Air Force should share with NASA the cost of designing and acquiring the second-generation space shuttle; NASA had borne the $10 billion cost of developing the current Space Shuttle, although the Air Force used it one third of the time. The directive also covered an agreement by the Air Force to use NASA's Space Shuttle at least eight times a year for the 10 years after 1988 and approved an Air Force decision to buy an improved version of its Titan rocket to supplement the Space Shuttle for military launches starting in 1988 and ending in 1993 [see Feb. 27]. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger said in the directive that the Air Force had decided to buy 10 Titan 34D7 single-use rockets for $2.09 billion between then and September 1993 from Martin Marietta Corp. The directive did not resolve the dispute between NASA and the Air Force over Air Force plans to sell at bargain rates obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch three weather satellites for NOAA [see Feb 25]. NASA was disappointed in the Air Force decision to buy the Titans, as it had tried to persuade the Air Force to buy an upgraded version of the solid-fuel rocket booster that helped put the Space Shuttle into orbit. Present rocket power limited Space Shuttle cargo weight, flying height, and its crossrange (limiting landings to Kennedy Space Center, Edwards AFB, and the White Sands Missile Range). The permanently manned space station planned for 1993 would require loads up to 75,000 lb. carried into polar orbit and at least 100,000-lb. loads into near-equatorial orbit at altitudes of at least 500 miles. (W Post, Mar 3/85, A12)
An air-launched antisatellite missile (ASAT) hit its target in the Air Force's first ASAT test against a target in space, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. An F—15 from Edwards Air Force Base launched the two-stage ASAT missile 35,000 to 40,000 feet above the Western Test Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base, then two boosters carried the ASAT into space. When the ASAT's infrared sensors locked on to the target, which was about 350 miles over the Pacific, small rocket motors guided the weapon to its kill. The Air Force in 1979 launched the ASAT's target, an Air Force satellite known as P78-1, which gathered scientific data on the space environment but which had outlived its usefulness. In 1984 F—15s launched two live-fire tests but not at targets. The first was an ASAT launch to a point in space; the second tested the ASAT sensor's ability to home in on a star's infrared emissions. Air Force plans called for nine more target tests against specially instrumented balloons and satellites that had completed their missions. The Washington Post later reported that, according to Robert MacQueen, director of the high-altitude observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado, the Solwind satellite destroyed in the test was providing "very useful data" on solar activity until the moment it was hit. MacQueen said he was surprised and upset at seeing a fruitful experiment being used as a military target and said it was "deplorable" that the Pentagon "had taken a scientifically useful thing and sacrificed it in this way." The satellite carried seven experiments for the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and other government agencies. One NRL experiment used a corona-graph that sent to earth during each of the satellite's orbits, or roughly 15 times a day, images of activity on the sun's surface. Several months previously, NRL scientists had to draft what one source said "they thought was a routine paper to justify continued operation of their coronagraph." Although the scientists acknowledged problems with the spacecraft system, the source said, they wrote that it should continue. NRL scientists were told in July that "the satellite would be turned off sometime after August 1, but they weren't told how," the source said. The Washington Post reported on September 6 that Solwind was the likely target for the ASAT test because the original target, an instrumented balloon, was plagued with technical problems. A Pentagon spokesman said the satellite was intended to operate for three years at most and that recent data from the satellite had "marginal value." The Washington Post reported that another Defense Department official said the Solwind research satellite was originally scheduled as a target in the weapon's seventh test, which probably would have come in 1987. The satellite's solar research program was expected to be ending by then, scientists associated with the program said. Although Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger described the satellite as "burned out," an Air Force spokesman said the fact that the satellite was still sending signals back to earth played a key role in its selection as a target. "We had to have an active telemetry system to verify it had been hit," the spokesman said. "A dead satellite would not have given us that." (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 27/85, 1; W Post, Sept 20/85, Al, Sept 21/85, A9)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis, scheduled October 3 for its maiden voyage, would deploy two defense satellite communications system (DSCS-III) satellites to support all three military services and to carry a single channel transponder used to transmit emergency messages from the president to nuclear forces, the Washington Post reported the Federation of American Scientists said on September 9. The group said the classified mission could be determined by anyone including the Soviets, who carefully scrutinized public documents, and that it was revealing the payload because keeping the mission secret "inhibits public awareness and discussion of U.S. military activities in space." The group indicated it found reference to the satellites in various military publications, the most recent of which was a December 28, 1984, issue of Defense Daily that said two DCSCs would "be launched together next year on a single space shuttle mission, apparently on the Atlantis mission . . ." (W Post, Sept 10/85, A5)
Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Vasyutin, Viktor Savinykh, and Aleksandr Volkov continued their work aboard the Salyut 7/Soyuz T-14 orbital station following the October 2 docking with Cosmos 1686, FBIS Moscow in English to North America reported. Soviet space officials designed Cosmos 1686 to function as a heavy transport vehicle, an inter-orbit tug, or as a specialized module for research or production. During docking, the Soviet's flight control center and crew on the orbiting complex guided search for the satellite, approach, and mooring. Cosmos 1686 delivered equipment and various other cargo for continued functioning of the complex; the cosmonauts would test satellite equipment and elements of its construction and develop methods of controlling orbital complexes of large dimensions and masses. Soviet science correspondent Boris Belitskiy said of the Cosmos 1686 mission: "The experience gained in recent years in operating such modular spacecraft with the Salyut 6 and Salyut 7 stations showed that such satellites can considerably extend the active life of future orbital complexes and make their operation more fruitful. Satellites of this new type have an advanced computerized control system, a large supply of propellant, and a power system incorporating solar batteries. The satellite's control system makes possible the automatic search for an orbital station, rendezvous, and docking, all in an unmanned mode. The onboard computer enabled mission control to transmit flight assignments that would over several days, if necessary months, assure the autonomous functioning of the satellite's control system. "Also, the satellite's control system is highly economical," Belitskiy continued. "The control system itself could select an optimal mode dictated by considerations of saving propellant. A previous heavy satellite of this new type, Cosmos 1443, was tested in 1983 as a transport craft of large cargo capacity. It was fitted with a recoverable capsule which returned a 350-kg payload to earth. The present Cosmos 1686 is a modular version. Such a modular design of future extraterrestial colonies is particularly promising because long-term orbiting stations can most reasonably be assembled directly in orbit from separate modules. "Can such automatic craft make space research significantly more efficient?" Belitskiy continued. "That is the question the flight of Cosmos 1686 is expected to answer. The total weight of the craft with its payload exceeds 20 tons, and it's almost as long as the Salyut 7station. The diameter of its widest part exceeds four meters and it carries over three tons of propellant and five tons of cargo. Docked with the Salyut 7 station, Cosmos 1686 has almost doubled the working space available aboard the orbital station and made conditions for the crew more comfortable. Its flight program provides for extensive research for economic needs." (FBIS Moscow in English to North America, Oct 17/85, Oct 2/85)
Hughes Communications Inc., manufacturer and owner of the Syncom 4 satellite launched August 27 from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, today declared it a failure due to a faulty cable between the satellite's UHF radio transmission system and its broadcast antenna, the Washington Post reported. Failure of the $85 million satellite, known as Leasat 4 after its lease to the Navy, pushed satellite insurance losses to $234 million in a single week and to about $570 million for the past 18 months. Satellites insured for $84 million and $65 million were also lost that week when Arianespace blew up a malfunctioning Ariane rocket. (IV Post, Sept 17/85, All)
NASA announced that the third phase of the active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE) magnetotail probe, a U.S., West German, and United Kingdom scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, was underway. Gilber Ousley, AMPTE project manager of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said that the first AMPTE magnetotail release of barium occurred March 21 at 4:20 a.m., EST and that the release conditions had been well within established criteria. The German ion release module spacecraft immediately detected a magnetic field change as expected. The satellite would make one additional release of barium and two of lithium (the tracers) into the earth's magnetotail. The U.S. satellite would analyze the charged-particle space environment around the magnetotail to determine the effects on the environment of the injected elements. Ousley also said that all ground stations except the one in Argentina reported clear weather and that the observatory at Kitt Peak, Arizona, reported visual sighting with the naked eye for about 20 minutes. The airborne NASA Convair 990 and Argentine Boeing 707 observation aircraft had recorded the event. The first phase of the AMPTE project had consisted of lithium releases September 11 and 20, 1984, into solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Lima, Peru. Results of the experiment indicated that the artificial comet was "eroded" by the solar wind much faster than previously anticipated. The only scheduled AMPTE experiment remaining after the March-April releases was formation July 13 or 14, 1985, of another artificial comet on the opposite flank of the magnetosphere from the December experiment. All releases had to satisfy several criteria, including clear voice communications between the U.S. AMPTE science data center located at Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Lab and the German Space Operations Center in West Germany, where German scientists gathered to view the data. The latter sent the command for release through their center and NASA's Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the U.S. portion of AMPTE for NASA's office of space science and applications; Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab under contract to NASA had built the U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release 85-42) July II: Dr. Mario Acuna, project scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), announced that the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers (AMPTE) project, an international scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, would produce on July 18 or 20 at midnight EDT the world's second artificial comet. In the fourth and final phase of the project, a West German satellite would release at 70,000	miles above earth two barium canisters into the solar wind on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere. The release would create an artificial comet expected to be visible in the southwestern United States to the unaided eye for approximately four minutes. In the first phase of the AMPTE project, the West German satellite released September 1984 lithium into the solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere. Preliminary results of that experiment indicated that less than 1% of the solar wind gained access to the magnetosphere under the conditions in which the releases took place. In the second phase, the German satellite created on December 27, 1984, a barium cloud on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Peru. Data from the artificial comet indicated that the solar wind eroded it much faster than scientists had anticipated. Releases on March 21 and May 13, 1985, of barium and lithium into the earth's magnetotail region ended the third phase of the AMPTE experiments. Acuna said of those releases, "Although, disappointingly, no tracer ions were detected by the U.S. satellite (Charge Composition Explorer) located inside the magnetosphere, this fact is in itself a very significant result. It implies that fundamental revisions to our current models of the magnetosphere need to be made to account for these negative observations." (NASA Release 85-105)
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), Washington, D.C., announced its scientists devised a precise timing system that used highly efficient and relatively small hydrogen maser clocks that the laboratory expected would enhance timing in the Navstar Global Positioning System (GPS). GPS, a navigational system based on synchronized clocks (accurate to billionths of a second), would permit users to pinpoint their position within a 30-foot radius by measuring differences in the arrival times of radio signals received from NavstaPs satellites. And GPS would disseminate the Naval Observatory's master clock time to fleet units for their command, control, communications, and intelligence. Maser clocks were considered the most accurate clocks available; however their bulky size and weight (lighter ones weighed over 500 lb.) prevented their use aboard GPS satellites. Also, the massive, tuned cavity where the maser action took place required temperature control and magnetic shielding, which made masers impractical for use in satellites. The research team at NRL led by Ron Beard reduced the size of maser clocks by a factor of 16 and their weight to 50 lb. And by making the cavity smaller, using different resonant structures, and dielectric (sapphire) loading to produce the effect of a larger cavity, NRL "passive" masers (so called because they did not oscillate on their own) proved to be as accurate as the larger versions. Beard noted that NRL's involvement with masers and the subsequent idea to reduce cavity size came about only after two astro-industrial companies were unsuccessful in meeting GPS's timing demands. NRL built and tested two experimental maser development models and two advanced development models. An additional NRL project with Hughes Research Laboratories used a Q-multiplier approach to offset the inherently higher signal losses in small cavities. Research in the NRL maser program included advances in small loaded-cavity properties, beam optics, dissociator reliability, quadropole state selection, thermal/mechanical design, magnetic shielding/design, and vacuum design for space applications. The NRL-developed technology formed the basis for a $12 million contract awarded to Hughes Aircraft Corp. to produce two types of engineering development models of hydrogen-maser clocks. One clock type was for use in satellites; the other, for GPS ground stations and possibly ships. (NRL Release 58-85 R)
