Researchers at the Construction Technology Laboratory found that concrete made from lunar soil, which contains no organic substances, was 5 percent stronger than highstrength Earth concrete. Because NASA planners anticipated a return to the Moon in the 21st century to establish a permanent lunar base, the concept of lunar building materials was a valuable asset when the cost of otherwise transporting them was considered. (NASA Release 8668) '$0** Satellite remote sensing technology, NASAdeveloped software for processing satellite imagery, was used by scientists and medical researchers at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories in conjunction with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) for enhancement of disease diagnosis. NMR, sensitive to soft tissue and superior to Xrays and CAT Scans, is a technology that has been around since the 1940s, but previously had not been used as a diagnostic tool. (NASA Release 8669)
In a White House meeting President Ronald Reagan indicated that he would allow NASA to honor only some of its higher priority contracts for commercial and foreign satellite launches from the Space Shuttle. Regarding a new orbiter, Chief of Staff Donald Regan has reversed his stance and now favors the replacement. Regan changed his mind, he stated, because he believed that NASA would not just correct its major faults, but would bring the Shuttle up to date with current technology. In a related matter, the Senate agreed to reimburse NASA with $56.3 million for military launches, a move protested by Senator Sam Nunn, who claimed that the money would come at the expense of intelligence activities. (NY Times, Aug 8/86; W Post, Aug 8/86)
Dr. Albert Boggess was awarded the Herschel Medal, by the Council of the Royal Astronomical Society of the United Kingdom, for his contribution to the success of the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE). The IUE satellite was designated to study Comet Halley's evolution as it approached and receded from0*the Sun. Boggess was named corecipient of the award with University of London Professor R. Wilson. (NASA Release 8628)
The Soviet Union recently had their version of the Space Shuttle on a launch pad for tests. Photos of the incident were taken by a U.S. satellite, and Government officials predicted that the country would begin human space flight in 1988. (B Sun, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86)
The sixth FLTSATCOM communications satellite, F7, was launched by an AtlasCentaur rocket fired from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Department of Defense added this satellite to their communications network among naval aircraft, ships, submarines, ground stations, Strategic Air Command elements, and Presidential command networks. With this addition, the network could provide 23 high frequency communication channels and one super high frequency channel with an experimental Extra High Frequency package. The rocket had been grounded since May because of previous NASA rocket failures, beginning in January with the Challenger explosion, and had experienced eight delays before becoming NASA's third successful major flight of the year. (NASA Release 86165; W Post, Dec 5/86)
Communications Satellite Corporation announced that it had found a way to double the life of an orbiting satellite by reducing fuel consumption. Satellites in a geosynchronous orbit appear stationary over the Earth, allowing ground stations to communicate. Because of gravitational forces, most coming from the moon, satellites tend to drift north or south to a degree where communication can be lost. To compensate for the drift, rockets are fired to bring a satellite back to its original orbit. Most of a satellite's fuel is spent firing its rockets. The new approach, elements of which are used by the military, allows the satellite to drift and be tilted by its rockets so that the antenna's "footprint" can be located. Ground stations receiving messages needed to undergo some modifications as well, however. (W Post, Oct 17/86; WSJ, Oct 17/86; NY Times, Oct 17/86)
A Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope for studying gamma ray sources in the universe was the basis for a $93,000 contract awarded to Martin Marietta. By housing the telescope inside of a Space Shuttle external liquid hydrogen tank, which is normally discarded just before the Shuttle achieves orbit, Martin Marietta deemed it possible that the unit could also be set into orbit. Telescope components would be carried in the cargo bay and assembled inside the emptied tank by astronauts, who could enter via an existing 36inch aft manhole port or through tank modifications. The satellite could then be pressurized to provide the needed environment for gamma ray detection technique; the rays would be converted to positrons and electrons that travel the length of the telescope emitting light. Gamma ray astronomy is essential to understanding the evolution of stars and the universe and the physical processes occurring in pulsars, quasars, and black holes. (NASA Release 86111)
NASA scientists were searching for ways to clean up the orbiting debris left from nuclear powered satellites and wreckage from antisatellite weapons testing. Considering the high speed of orbiting craft, scientists reported that even a fleck of paint could be dangerous, the probable culprit that caused a cracked windshield in the seventh U.S. Shuttle flight. Because slightly larger objects could result in catastrophic damage, the planned Space Station sacrificed some valuable weight to armor crew quarters. (W Times, Oct 13/86)
An Energy Department analysis released to Representative Edward Markey stated that radioactive releases resulting from a Space Shuttle accident carrying a plutoniumpowered satellite could cause 367 cancer cases and contaminate 367 square miles of land. The former estimate hinged on people staying in the launch site area for more than a year. (W Post, May 19/86; C Trib, May
was 1 in 1,000 launches as compared to NASA's 1 in 100,000 firings. The panel was created because 19 missions carrying potentially hazardous plutonium power sources (were an accident to occur within the Earth's atmosphere) involved the Shuttle. Two other nuclear powered satellites were scheduled for launches from the Shuttle later in 1986. (WSJ, Mar 5/86; C Trib, Mar 6/86)
The United States and the European Space Agency were pursuing an agreement aimed at preventing Japan from dominating small satellite launches in the same way it had taken over the small car industry. The United States hoped to reach assent with the European Space Agency concerning employment schedules, insurance standards and rates, Government subsidies for research and development, and the leasing costs of Governmentowned launch facilities to private firms. (W Times, Nov 6/86)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which operates the Nation's weather satellites, announced that its polar orbiting satellite NOAA8 was apparently lost. NOAA was informed by the Air Force that its tracking instruments detected "what appeared to be pieces of the satellite" in the vicinity of NOAA8 orbit. (NY Times, Jan 7/86) 0** Dr. William R. Graham, who was appointed Acting Administrator of NASA on January 3, 1986, stated in his first interview that he was the "acting administrator in every sense of the word" and that he felt very comfortable in his new position. He apparently made that statement to put to rest suggestions that the Agency would really be run by NASA Associate Administrator Philip E. Culberston while Graham learned the ropes. Graham was promoted to his new position, from the post of Deputy Administrator of NASA, when NASA Administrator James E. Beggs took a leave of absence to prepare his defense for a trial. Beggs had been charged with defrauding the Federal Government when he served as a top executive of General Dynamics NASA's acting administrator received his master's and doctoral degrees in engineering from Stanford University. He began his professional career at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico and then moved to the Rand Corporation in California. In 1971, he founded R&D Associates, a think tank in Marina Del Rey, California. He was a consultant to the Secretary of Defense and had served on an advisory committee on undersea warfare and human assisted strategic Air Force systems and on nuclear weapons panels. Prior to his appointment as Deputy Administrator of NASA in November 1985, Graham headed, for three years, President Reagan's advisory committee on arms control and The then 48yearold native Texan expressed great optimism in his assessment of the future of NASA and of space exploration in general. He said that "the agency in the coming decade would broaden mankind's understanding of Earth's environment, expand the reach of manned exploration, and extend scientific vision to the far edges of the universe." Stating that space exploration was limited only by "imagination," Graham promised to pursue vigorously President Reagan's mandate to make space more accessible to the ordinary citizen and free enterprise. (W Times, Jan 6/86; 7/86)
East Coast winter storms in the form of cyclones were studied by scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Concentrating their efforts on costal regions of North and South Carolina, where these storms develop and move northward, NASA scientists analyzed the upper atmosphere conditions using moisture and wind sounding balloons and the Nimbus 7 satellite to collect data. Another criterion for understanding these storms was the analysis of the transfer of moisture from the ocean into the atmosphere. NASA flew its fourengine Electra aircraft, outfitted with a combined laser/telescope (Lidar), to detect salt spray and aerosols as it fired a lazar beam that allowed the telescope to measure rising moisture and convection patterns. NASA's ER2 aircraft was used in higher altitudes for the same purpose; it carried microwave radiometers able to detect water vapor and cloud liquid water content. (NASA Release 8630)
The United States planned to resume its efforts to put nuclear reactors into space. The move would renew a program abandoned 10 years previous to this date, but now deemed necessary for President Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), "Star Wars." Even without SDI, said Air Force officials, reactors would be needed for the next generation of spacebased weapons; NASA could use such reactors to power Space0*Stations, lunar bases, interplanetary explorers, and satellite traffic control. The United States has mainly relied on solar energy for its space activities, but SDI would require more power than the panels could give. The Soviet Union never abandoned its plan for space reactors and sent up 20 nuclearpowered satellites, one of which crashed and spread radioactive debris over northwest Canada. (W Post, Apr 14/86)
A weeklong exercise to upgrade the Search and Rescue Satellite System got underway at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, expanding coverage to the Southern Hemisphere. (LA Times, Nov 12/86)
A joint venture of Hughes Aircraft and RCA, the Earth Observation Satellite Company said that the Reagan administration was withholding funds for the Landsat program it managed. The $65 million not released was earmarked for new satellites, receiving stations, and support operations. The Landsat satellite was launched in 1972 as a data gathering operation for the government and public, but its monopoly for providing detailed services to companies and private individuals was broken by the French satellite, SPOT. Elimination of the program, warned a representative from the company, "would destroy the first U.S. attempt to commercialize space." (W Post, Dec 5/86)
Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge restated at a conference of the Aviation Space Writers that the USAF would like to purchase a new rocket that could lift medium weight satellites. The rockets, which the service calls "medium lift vehicles," were needed to launch 12 NAVSTAR navigation satellites scheduled for Shuttle flights. He also informed the conference of an interest in larger rockets, "complementary expendable launch vehicles," (an updated Titan rocket) for putting the Pentagon's heaviest satellites into orbit. (B Sun, May 14/86; NY Times, May 13/86; May 20/86)
A Tracking and Data Relay Satellite lost transmitting capability on an Sband singleaccess antenna, SA1, which provided voice and data links to low Earthorbiting satellites, including the Shuttle. Services were switched to the remaining antenna, SA2, and little or no data loss to customers occurred. (NASA Release 86175)
A Reuters report said that Arabsat1, the Arab world's first communication satellite, built for the Arab League by a Frenchled consortium and launched in February 1985 by a European Aryan rocket, failed to operate in orbit because of technical errors. The report also noted that Iraqi Director General Ali Mashat, the man in charge of the project, was fired last month by a committee of six Arab League communications ministers. (C Trib, Jan 2/86)
For the third time in 19 days, launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed. This time, a malfunction with Columbia's computer control failed to close an oxygen valve. Engineers were successful in closing the valve under manual control, but the additional time it was open resulted in 1,500 gallons to 3,000 gallons of oxygen entering the fuel lines to the main engine, lowering temperatures to an unacceptable level. With 15 flights slated for 1886, another attempt was immediately planned for January 7. The chief goal of the mission was to carry a $50 million communications satellite, Satcom, for RCA. When an RCA engineer announced that 8:47 PM was the cut off point for a launch that would later deliver the satellite at an optimum time, the mission was canceled. Scheduled to ride into space with NASA's astronauts and engineers was Florida's Democratic Congressman Bill Nelson, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications that oversees NASA's budget. (NY Times, Jan 7/86; W Post, Jan 7/86; P Inq, Jan 7/86; C Trib, Jan 7/86; W Times, Jan 7/86; B Sun, Jan 7/86)
The $3 billion launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California was deemed unsafe according to a Senate report released on this date. The salient feature cited was the closed exhaust ducts that could fill with hydrogen gas in the event that a Shuttle's main engines were shut down to abort liftoff or at the end of a flightreadiness testfiring. The report also noted that fog, high winds, and cool temperatures were common to the area and that the proximity of the launch pad to the control center put support personnel at risk. Because the Department of Defense required the California site to achieve polar orbit for reconnaissance satellites, it was recommended that they adopt the "new" Titan missiles. (W Times, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jun 18/86; Jul 9/86)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it had signed an agreement to launch a communications satellite for Federal Express from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 1989. Because the Titan 3 rocket to be used could deliver payloads up to 32,00 pounds, the corporation was searching for another customer to join the launch. Reagan administration officials were quick to point to the agreement as the birth of the private rocket industry. (W Post, Sep 5/86; P Inq, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 5/86)
Three government agenciesthe National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)proposed a longterm plan for the study of human effect on the Earth's environment. The project envisioned cooperation from other scientifically advanced nations and would use the disciplines of geology, meteorology, oceanography, forestry, agriculture, and computer and satellite technologies to study the Earth as an integrated system. NSF director, Erich Bloch, noted that "for the first time in history we have the capability to observe the entire Earth from the outer reaches of its atmosphere to its molten inner core." NASA's Earth System Sciences Committee predicted that the program, enlisting satellites from countries around the globe, would be in full swing by the middle 1990s. (B Sun, Jun 27/86; CSM, Jun 30/86)
Remote sensing via satellite, combined with a computer technology that could provide a simulation of the properties and processes in the soil, related Dr. Elissa Levine, would allow shortterm prediction of changes that occur in soils over a period of time and the ability of the soil to support different types of plant life. Advancing her theory at an annual meeting in New Orleans, Levine noted, "We can obtain critical environmental data which will help us understand how changes brought about by both nature and humankind will affect the total ecosystem over time." (NASA Release 86170)
Elizabeth Dole predicted that U.S. rocket companies would begin launching private satellites by 1989 and capture 50 percent of the international market. Her announcement came after President Ronald Reagan's confirmation that NASA would no longer handle the business. Representatives from General Dynamics Corporation and Transpace Carriers, Inc. expressed hope that they would soon announce launch contracts. Some satellite officials, however, were less enthusiastic because NASA had the goahead to launch at least some of the 44 commercial satellites, leaving the agency with limited but palpable competition. In a related matter, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that a large portion of future flights would be devoted to scientific missions and that he expected a commercial launching industry to supplement the Shuttle. (W Post, Aug 19/86; W Times, Aug 19/86; NY Times, Aug 19/86; CSM, Aug 26/86)
The Challenger accident forced NASA to reconsider expendable launch vehicles as a means for putting satellites into space. Believed to have been rendered obsolete by the Shuttle, these rockets were once again deemed necessary for meeting the growing schedule of launches. The change of position0*notwithstanding, NASA and the Department of Defense appeared ready to request another orbiter. (B Sun, Feb 27/68)
NASA had another successful launch; a 25yearold rebuilt AtlasE rocket, a onetime ICBM, carried a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration weather satellite, NOAA10, into orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA Director Larry Heacock said that the polar orbiting satellite would render "half of our satellite program restored to full working capability." (Public Affairs Plan For NOAAG Launch; ':0*Trib, Sep 18/86; W Post, Sep 18/86; W Times, Sep 18/86; NY Times, Sep 18/86)
Launching of a Delta rocket carrying a weather satellite was postponed because of a quarter cup of leaking rocket fuel. The delay, said officials, would be from 1 to 10 days, depending on the extent of the problem. This was to be the first NASA launch since the Shuttle accident. (NY Times, May 2/86; W Post, H&May 2/86; P Inq, May 2/86; B Sun, May 2/86)
For the fourteenth time since August 1985, the launch of a weather satellite that the Air Force had hoped to put into orbit was again postponed, this time because of a leak of liquid oxygen. Past delays were caused by technical problems with the AtlasE booster rocket and its payload and scheduling conflicts. The satellite was next intended to be launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on August 30. (LA Times, Aug 26/86; NY Times Aug 26/86)
In Space Station Phase B Program Level Agreement, NASA and the ESA announced agreement on hardware elements for a preliminary design of a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module and a polar orbiting platform, the latter for conducting Earth observations. Under the agreement, ESA would conduct research on a preliminary design of a mantended freeflyer (pressurized module and resource module) for international utilization, primarily in the fields of material and life sciences and fluid physics, that would require both a longduration and undisturbed microgravity environment. (NASA Release 86104) '10*August 5: Preliminary data from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE), a threesatellite project that began in October 1984, indicated that clouds reflect more heat than they retain and appear to cool Earth's climate, possibly offsetting the "greenhouse effect." Incomplete coverage and sporadic observations have limited decades of study on global heat flows done with sounding rockets, balloons, and satellites. In a broader attempt, the ERBE instruments measured the average monthly heat budget on regional, zonal, and global scales; tracked the seasonal movement of heat from the tropics to the poles; and determined the average daily variation in heat on a 620mile regional monthly scale. An ERBE package contained two radiometer instruments. One, a scanner, was used for narrow fieldofview scanning with shortwave measurements of reflected solar energy and longwave measurements of Earthemitted energy. The other, a nonscanner, was used for wide fieldofview of the entire disc of the Earth, a 10degree region of Earth, and the total output of the sun's radiant energy. (NASA Release 86105)
NASA launched its first successful rocket since the Challenger accident, a Delta rocket from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Carrying two payloads for the Strategic Defense Program, one satellite would attempt to track down and intercept the other. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, manufacturer of the rocket, viewed the event as a stepping stone that might lead to the company's entry into commercial launches. NASA had two more Delta rockets in its inventory, one committed to a U.S. Government weather satellite identical to the one lost in May and the other to an Indonesian weather satellite. (NASA Release 8632; WSJ, Sep 8/86, P Inq, Sep 6/86; NY Times, Sep 6/86; Sep 8/86; W Post, Sep 6/86; C Trib, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 6/86)
Members of a House Space Subcommittee endorsed NASA's $7.7 billion budget and authorized funds for a new shuttle and President Ronald Reagan ordered that a replacement orbiter be built. The craft would take about seven years to construct, according to administration officials. The money for the project, earmarked to come from other space programs, would be allotted annually. The first payment was to be $200 million, and the rate of progress for building it depended on future financing. The President also restated his hopes for private industry to develop a capacity for launching commercial satellites. (W Times, Aug 14/86; Aug 15/86; B Sun, Aug 14/86; Aug 15/86; NY Times, Aug 15/86; C Trib, Aug 15/86; W Post, Aug 15/86; CSM, Aug 18/86)
The U.S. Marine Corps salvage operation for the 51L Space Shuttle accident, which involved the Freedom Star, the Liberty Star, and the Independence vessels, came to an end after a sevenmonth effort. It was the largest ocean recovery operation in history and at its peak involved 22 ships and 6,000 personnel, as well as numerous aircraft. The search yielded 45 percent of the Challenger, 50 percent of the external tank and solid rocket boosters, 95 percent of the SpartanHalley spacecraft, 35 percent of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, and 90 percent of the Inertial Upper Stage. (NASA Release 86121; C Trib, Aug 29/86; B Sun, Aug 29/86; W Times, Aug 29/86; W Post, Aug 31/86)
Because the ocean surface mirrors the ocean floor as gravity pulls water down into depressions and forces it up around the mountains (looking north from Puerto Rico, for example, the ocean surface drops nearly 60 feet), scientists at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, employed satellites to map the ocean's floor. Data taken from altimeters on the Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and the Sea Satellite were used to generate a computer image of the ocean surface, reflecting the Earth's structure underneath the water. The data, said Dr. James Marsh, also increased knowledge of circulation and current systems. (NASA Release 86172) 'H0*December 9: Fortynine research proposals from 45 small, high technology U.S. firms, totaling about $23 million, were selected for immediate negotiation of Phase II contract awards. These proposals were chosen from 100 submitted to the Small Business Innovation Research program, a program designed to strengthen the role of small business participation in Federal research and development and contribute to the growth and strength of the private sector. (NASA Release 86174)
A $13 million Air Force satellite that had served as a museum piece at the Smithsonian Institution was renamed Polar BEAR and lifted into polar orbit aboard a Scout rocket, NASA's smallest booster. The satellite's mission was to photograph the Northern Lights and sample electrical particles and the magnetic field in order to design better communications. (NY Times, Nov'C0*15/86)
NASA officials confirmed that the Agency had considered reproduction of the Delta rocket and was ordering at least one from McDonnell Douglas for launching an Indonesian communications satellite early in 1987. Officials at the corporation assured NASA that the grounded Delta rocket could be ready for launch in a few months because problems were worked out and the production line for the rocket was partially restarted. (W Post, Jun 27/86; WSJ, Jun 27/86)
NASA planned for a display of current and future technologies at the 34th Annual EAA International FlyIn Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition, with an exhibit entitled "21st Century Aviation," August 18 in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Featured would be hypersonic cruise vehicles and high altitude aircraft that could fly from the U.S. West Coast to Tokyo five times faster than subsonic flyers and have the capability of taking payloads and passengers to Earth orbit. In addition, NASA also planned advanced cockpit displays in which aircraft controls reacted to voice commands, and presentations of a supercomputer capable of one billion computations per second, rotocraft research and potential applications, aeronautical art, and the Search and Rescue Satellite (SARSAT) system. The latter display was intended to show how using a satellite saves time in rescuing air and maritime casualties. (NASA Release 8690)
Columbia, flight STS 61C, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a Space Shuttle record of seven postponements. The crew completed their mission of launching RCA's $50 million satellite into orbit, for which NASA received $14.2 million from the corporation. Ironically, after a 25day delay in getting off the ground, the Space Shuttle was told to come down a day early. NASA engineers feared that bad weather might hamper the original landing date. Already behind schedule, NASA wanted extra time to prepare the Shuttle for the next flight in March and its mission of observing Halley's Comet. The needed orbit for studying the comet would leave little room for delays of this launch. Most of Columbia's experiments were completed, but a camera device for photographing Halley's comet failed to work because a light intensifier had been inadvertently left on during the ship's seven launch delays. It was not until January 18, after a twoday delay because of poor weather, that Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California. Engineers had hoped to land the craft at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, from where it was scheduled to be launched on March 6. Therefore, an estimated five days were scheduled to be cut from its preparation time so that the critical date for observing Halley's Comet could be met. (NY Times, Jan 13/86; Jan 14/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 24/86; USA Today, Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86 W Times, Jan 13/86; CSM, Jan 13/86; Jan 21/86 P Inq, Jan 13/86; B Sun Jan 13/86; W Post Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 16/86; C Trib, Jan 13/86)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, developed an airborne sensing device, an infrared radiometer, for measuring ocean surface temperatures and charting temperature and wind maps. Tested over southern California's ocean aboard the Goodyear blimp Columbia, the new instrument was unique in that it could distinguish water temperature from the temperature of the air immediately above it. Researchers expected that the device could greatly enhance satellite capability to monitor ocean weather. (NASA Release 86169)
The Congressional Budget Office estimated that it would cost $5 billion to both replace the Challenger Shuttle and build more expendable launch vehicles for carrying payloads into space. NASA had planned to make all of its satellite launches from an orbiter, but changed its position after the Challenger accident. The shift was welcome news to the rocket industry, even though the companies would need two years to get ready for launch inasmuch as the rocket program, with no crew assistance, had been all but replaced in the United States by the Shuttle program. (NY Times, Mar 13/86; W Post, Mar 13/86)0** NASA and Morton Thiokol found new evidence suggesting that the putty used in joints of the solid rockets to protect the orings could have stiffened from the cold and prevented the oring from sealing. They also noted that the putty could have cracked and exposed the oring to hot gases. Adequate data measuring the effect of cold on the putty did not exist. Dr. William Graham notified the Presidential Commission of these findings. (WSJ, Mar
Another setback for Western launch capability occurred as an Ariane rocket was destroyed by ground controllers 4 minutes and 36 seconds after liftoff in French Guiana, when its third stage failed to ignite. Also lost was an Intelsat V communications satellite; it was the third time failure in the rockets had occurred for that reason. Arianespace, a French company that sold space on the rocket, was in fierce competition with NASA for multimilliondollar commercial contracts, but ceded its monopoly when forced to postpone future flights while the accident was being investigated. With the grounding of the U.S. space program, western nations were left with the Ariane rocket as the only means to place commercial satellites into space. (LA Herald, Jun 1/86; CSM, Jun 16/86)
Using data collected between June 1978 and summer 1986, from NASA's costal zone color scanner on board the Nimbus7 satellite, scientists from many international institutions completed a computergenerated color image that shows the distribution of microscopic plant life, phytoplankton, in surface waters over the North Atlantic Ocean. This image was generated by measuring sunlight reflected from the sea surface at five wavelengths to determine ocean color. The most striking feature of the study for understanding man's role in carbon dioxide and other important cycles is the "spring bloom," high phytoplankton concentration extending across the Atlantic and into the North Sea. (NASA Release 86147)
Administration sources said that President Ronald Reagan might delay funding for a new orbiter until 1987. Because budget restraints made any commitment to a replacement impossible, many advisors were in favor of producing expendable launch vehicles for private satellites. (W Post, Jul 30/86; P Inq, Jul 30/86; WSJ, Jul 31/86)
NASA extended a $1.32 billion contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company for processing services at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The contracted price, however, did not reflect the schedule changes brought on by the Challenger accident; the changes would be handled through contract amendments. NASA also awarded contracts at $500,000 million each to five different firms for the study of designs for second generation solid rocket boosters. The companies were required only to submit concepts for a newly designed rocket. (LA Times, Sep 6/86; WSJ Sep 8/86)'80** NASA cleared a site at Wallops Island, Virginia, for use by Space Services, Inc., a new rocket company, to launch its Conestoga rocket. The company planned to put cremated remains of 10,000 people on a satellite that was to orbit the Earth. (P Inq, Sep 9/86)
Lasers on board weather satellites (LIDAR), said Wayne Baker of the Goddard Space Flight Center's Laboratory, promised more accurate forecasting. In the past, satellite data offered only marginal improvements over traditional methods and even deteriorations for some predictions. With the addition of a laser, however, scientists would have access to wind measurement throughout the atmosphere, keys to following the weather that were before limited to ground stations and weather balloons. CSM, Jan 16/86)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. was awarded a contract to replace the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost in the Challenger accident. Plans called for a replacement spacecraft and followon satellites to keep the TDRS system operational through the end of the century. As of this date, one TDRS was in geosynchronous orbit near Brazil over the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 8670; WSJ, May 30/86)
An advanced reconnaissance satellite, believed to be a KH11 photographic reconnaissance satellite, was lost as the Titan rocket carrying it exploded seconds after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. With only one HK11 in orbit, officials were concerned that verification of arms control treaties would be hampered and that it would be more difficult for the Soviet Union and the United States to sign the treaties. Older satellites dropped film after photographing, but the KH11 beamed pictures to ground stations and could maneuver about while in orbit. An HK11 was lost in August 1985 when another Titan rocket failed. Assistant Secretary of Defense Donald Latham, estimated that it would be six or seven months before the Department of Defense could launch another satellite. Outside experts believed that the government might approve an emergency0*Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base because the only other reconnaissance satellite remaining on the ground was an HK12, believed too big for an expendable rocket. (NY Times, Apr 20/86; Apr 22/86; CSM, Apr 21/86; USA Today, Apr 21/86; W Post, Apr 22/86)
NASA and SPACEHAB signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to establish cooperation for the latter's efforts to develop and market payload bay habitable modules, truncated metal cylinders that would be additions to the orbiter's crew department and connected by tunnel adapters. These modules, designed to increase the pressurized volume of the Space Shuttle, would serve as additional living and work space for the astronauts by providing an additional 1,000 cubic feet. Another MOU, signed by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), was intended to give NASA access to Synthetic Aperture Radar data from the first European Remote Sensing Satellite for Government research purposes at the Fairbanks, Alaska, station0*that NASA was developing in connection with its Navy Remote Ocean Sensing Satellite System Scatterometer (NROSS). The data received from the ERS1 satellite, engineers hoped, would enhance NASAsupported polar ice research, NROSS, the Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation and Shuttle Imaging RadarC. NASA was then to exchange its Scatterometer and radar imagery for other ERS1 data of interest. The ERS1 was scheduled for launch in 1989. (NASA Release 866; 867; B Sun, Jan 17/86)
COSPAS/SARSAT, an international search and rescue system, was scheduled to monitor the aroundtheworld, nonstop and unrefueled flight of the Rutan Voyager airplane. The SARSAT system uses four satellites, three from the Soviet Union and one'90*from the United States, to locate downed aircraft and ships at sea by picking up their emergency signals. The Rutan Voyager aircraft, designed by aeronautical engineer Burt Rutan and piloted by his brother Dick and Jeana Yeager, carried a 11/2pound prototype beacon that could transmit on a 406 Mhz frequency for location determination and a 121.5 Mhz frequency on which rescue workers could hone in. The signals could also be recorded by a satellite if the aircraft was not in immediate range of a ground station. Since the initiation of the program in September 1982, 606 lives had been saved, by September 1986, in 251 emergencies worldwide. (NASA Release 86132)
The Peoples Republic of China moved to fill the void left by the United States and Europe for commercial space launchings as it negotiated with two U.S. firms. Hughes Aircraft Company expressed an interest in working with China to establish a launch base in the Hawaiian islands. Peking, at the same time, announced an agreement it had made with the U.S. company Teresat, Inc., for putting two of their satellites into orbit in 1987 and 1989 at a price ranging from $20 million to $25 million, about 15 percent less than what Ariane and the Space Shuttle charged. Teresat, however, would first need to locate an insurer for launches and secure approval from the State Department. China claimed its program was capable of 10 to 12 launches per year. (W Post, Jun 16/86; CSM, Jun 16/86; WSJ, Jun 17/86; C Trib, Jun
NASA issued a request for proposals to various contractors for a satellite for use in a joint venture with the French Space Agency, Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, in the Topex/Poseidon oceanographic mission. The satellite would map the'+0*circulation of the world's oceans by using a precise radar altimeter to measure height variations on the sea surface. Contingent upon congressional approval of funds, a launch of the satellite in late 1991 was planned. (NASA Release 8686)
James R. Thompson, of Princeton University's Plasma Physics Lab, nationally recognized propulsion expert, and former NASA propulsion engineer, was named vice chairman of the NASA task force inquiring into the Challenger accident. His appointment was in support of the Commission assigned by President Ronald Reagan to perform the investigation of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8620)' 0*March 3: NASA announced a comprehensive project to evaluate the implications of the Challenger accident on the space program. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions had been postponed, NASA announced that the Shuttle Discovery would be modified so that it could launch spacecraft with a Centaur upper stage rocket. The Challenger accident left only the Shuttle Atlantis with the capability for carrying Centaur payloads. These decisions were made by the Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. William R. Graham, on the recommendation of the Headquarters Replanning Task Force, headed by Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, set up to study program alternatives in the wake of the accident. Other matters considered by the task force included: (1) the requirements for all aspects for an orbiter to replace the Challenger as well as the lost Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) launch vehicle and its support structure attached to a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost with the Shuttle; (2) new launch schedules for the remaining three Shuttles; (3) an additional launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base; (4) the role of expendable launch vehicles for commercial use; (5) the retention of ground communications because only one TDRS, instead of two, was in orbit to link spacecraft to earth because of the accident; (6) and identification of monetary losses other than those from the destroyed equipment. In the meantime, customers who had hoped to launch their satellites from the Space Shuttle were being forced to examine other alternatives. With launch schedules certain to fall far behind and military and scientific communities getting first priority, commercial interests would have either to put their projects on the back burner or use NASA's rival, the European Space Agency's Arianespace company, for more expensive launches. With NASA's announcement that its Shuttle program would be put on hold for 1218 months, Shuttlelinked businesses were searching for other options as well. (NASA Release 8622; C Trib, Mar 3/86; B Sun, Mar 4/86; USA Today, Mar 4/86)
NASA released studies done by Donald Heath, a scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, which reveal that the Earth's ozone layer is thinning at a much higher rate than previously thought, about 3 percent between 1978 and 1984. This data was gleaned from a satellite orbiting 570 miles above the Earth. (C Trib, Oct 20/86; B Sun; Oct 20/86)
Fairchild Space Company proposed a lightweight refueling device to be attached to the Space Shuttle's bay that could service satellites with the fuel required for keeping them in orbit. The refueling device would extend the maximum life span for a satellite about 15 years. Fairchild was in a race with Rockwell International and Martin Marietta for the lightest weight and best functioning design; submission of the designs to NASA was to be no later than November 7. (W Post, Sep 15/86)
NASA scientists halted design of additional shielding for two nuclear powered satellites. The shield, they ascertained, would help only during the first two minutes of launch and would actually become a detriment after that. The Interagency Nuclear Safety Review Panel would not give launch approval for the scientific missions until 1999, but NASA officials saw a good chance for approval of launching the radioisotope thermoelectric generator powered satellites from the Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Dec 15/86)
by the Presidential Commission were followed. The report called for correction of the Shuttle's braking system, development of an escape system, and review of more than 700 critical components; however, the biggest obstacle lay in the redesigning and testing of the booster rockets. The Commission recommended a costly and time consuming fullscale, vertical test for the new rockets. NASA had relied on a less expensive, scaled down, horizontal test for new designs in the past and made no commitment for following this advice. The added preparation time would most adversely affect the Air Force, who earlier had warned that even a 1year delay would produce a backlog of 40 payloads by 1992; some of their satellites could not fit aboard any untended launch vehicle then in use. Some former commercial customers had negotiated flights with the French Ariane rocket program, but because they were also grounded, China and Japan were being sought for President Ronald Reagan, in the meantime, had called for a replacement orbiter, but had not yet revealed how it would be funded. (NY Times, Jun 12/86)
NASA announced plans for extending operations to five of its ground tracking stations located at Ascension Island in the southeast Atlantic, Santiago (Chili), Guam, Hawaii, and western Australia. Closing dates for these stations was moved up and was conditional on the February 1988 launch by the Space Shuttle of a second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS); a TDRS was destroyed during the Challenger accident. Two TDRS's could provide 85 percent coverage of an orbiting spacecraft, compared with the 50 percent coverage provided by ground stations. (NASA Release 86157)
Six days after launch and 24 hours after being put into operation, the Search and Rescue Satellite Aided Tracking satellite (SARSAT) picked up its first distress signal from 4 downed Canadians in a remote area of Ontario. Rescue workers were easily able to locate the downed Cessna, and all four Canadians were taken to safety. Canada, France, the United States, and the former Soviet Union all shared in the search and rescue program known as COSPAS/SARSAT aboard the NOAA10 satellite. (NASA Release 86144)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory Successfully tested a new space radioastronomy technique, Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI), that combined data from radio telescopes on the ground with data from an antenna on NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The result was a better resolution of three quasars (among the most distant objects known and designated 1730130, 1741038, and 1510089) than what groundbased radio studies at the same wavelength could provide. It was the first time an orbiting satellite had been used as a radio telescope. (NASA Release 86140; W Post, Oct 3/86; LA Times, Oct
NASA announced that Lieutenant General Forrest S. McCartney, on assignment from the Air Force, would take over as Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, beginning October 1. McCartney succeeded Richard Smith, who retired on July 31. The press opined that the move would give the military greater control of the space program. McCartney's past Air Force assignments include positions as satellite controller, as project officer in the Titan 3 program, in the Directorate of Space at USAF Headquarters, as monitor for satellite communications programs, and director of range engineering at USAF Eastern Test Range. (NASA Release 86117; W Post, Aug 21/86; NY Times, Aug
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the $10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year 1987, a 40 percent increase from fiscal year 1986. Fletcher, according to NASA officials, planned to meet with President Ronald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of years of underfunding. The increased funds could support the Civil Space Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military aeronautics research program; and the Xray Astrophysics Facility, advanced technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 billion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov
The Pentagon considered waiting until 1991 before a Shuttle would be launched for the first time from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Temporarily closing the $2.8 billion facility would save $400 million a year in maintenance. The major advantage, however, given the increased number of launches per year, is that using only Cape Canaveral in Florida would save time because moving a Shuttle between the two coasts is time consuming. Only launches from Vandenberg, however, could safely put the Air Force's highly classified satellites into polar orbit. (NY Times, May 21/86)
TRW, Inc. was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for design and delivery of the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), a reusable, remotely operated propulsion vehicle for hauling satellites from one orbit to another. The OMV's primary uses would be spacecraft delivery, retrieval, boost, deboost, and close proximity visual observation beyond the operating range of a Space Shuttle. The OMV, "space tug," was also to be made to adapt for use in Space Station activities. (NASA Release 8681; WSJ, Jun 26/86; LA Times, Jun 27/86)')0** The first flight of an aircraft with both a digital jet engine control system and a mated digital flight control system took place at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility with a modified F15. The integration of engine and flight control (Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control) between the system's computers could increase performance 2 to 10 percent. (NASA Release 8682)
A lightweight transmitter for sending messages to weather satellites was placed on polar bears and caribou in the spring of 1985, and had so far functioned very well, said biologist Steven Amstrup. Because of the satellite's ability to track these animals, biologists could determine whether the animals were walking, running, sleeping, or foraging for food. (B Sun, Mar
Another NASA launch ended in failure as a $30 million0*Delta rocket carrying a $55.7 million weather satellite was destroyed shortly after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. An order to destruct by remote control came when the rocket's main engine failed and it tumbled off course. This was the first mishap for the Delta rocket, praised as NASA's most dependable launch vehicle, in 9 years and 43 consecutive launches. The four most used vehicles for launching satellites (the Delta, Titan 3D and Atlas Centaur rockets and the Space Shuttle) were all put on hold, grounding the agency for an undetermined amount of time. A short circut was the leading suspect the Delta loss. (W Times, May 5/86; May 6/86; W Post, May 5/86; May 6/86; WSJ, May 5/86; May 6/86; NY Times, May 5/86; May 6/86)
NASA officials announced that the launch of an AtlasCentaur rocket scheduled to carry a Navy communications satellite into orbit on August 28 was postponed indefinitely. The flight was originally set for May 22, but the Delta rocket accident canceled that liftoff. The Atlas was the only remaining U.S. rocket system that had not been grounded; the delay resulted from the discovery by engineers of problems with some of the rocket's electrical parts. (W Post Jul 24/86)
The third stage of a French Ariane rocket that had been launched nine months earlier blew up on this date. U.S. officials asked Arianespace to look into the matter in order to prevent a recurrence because orbiting debris posed an increased danger to other satellites. (W Times, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86)
NASA scheduled five expendable launches in 1986 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, employing Delta rockets, used in joint management with the McDonnell Douglas launch team, and Atlas Centaur rockets, jointly managed launches with General Dynamics Convair. Of the five satellites, two were for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The Geosynchronous Operational Environmental Satellites were designed for weather forecasting and collecting data on various environmental effects. The other three were for the Department of Defense. Two Fleet Satellite Communication satellites would provide secure communications between landbased facilities and ships, submarines, and aircraft, and one other was for support of the Strategic Defense Initiative. (NASA Release 8632)0*March 20: The U.S. Government considered plans for replacing the Challenger by allowing private investors to raise the money and lease the new Shuttle to NASA, stretching out payments for perhaps 15 years. The plan called for NASA to order a replacement shuttle from Rockwell, but Willard Rockwell's new firm, Astrotech, would buy it. Furthermore, investors would be reimbursed by NASA for any accident loss, and Astrotech would market the launches to commercial customers. (WSJ, Mar 20/86; W Post; Mar 30/86; B Sun, Apr 1/86)
In a statement released by the White House Press Secretary, President Ronald Reagan announced "two steps that will ensure America's leadership in space exploration and utilization." His first target was the building of a fourth Space Shuttle beginning in fiscal year 1987, deemed necessary for accomplishments in space (especially the Space Station). He also announced that NASA would ease out of the business of launching commercial satellites by allowing the private sector to assume the responsibility, which, he said, would eventually be done "better and cheaper." NASA, he stressed, should focus solely on the exploration of space. (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Statement by the President, Aug 15/86)
Boeing Aerospace was selected to supply NASA with Shuttle upper stages to place two Tracking and Data Relay Satellites into geosynchronous Earth orbits. Engineering support and integration of the upper stages with the satellites were also to be provided. The contract was expected to run from March 1886 through April 1990 at a price of approximately $93 million. (NASA Release 8614)
The first Soviet Space Shuttle, expected to be launched in 1986, would likely look very similar to U.S. orbiters, said scientists. Photographs of a scale model Soviet space plane that splashed down in the Indian Ocean revealed a miniature American Shuttle. Plans for the plane were easy for scientists to obtain as the program was never top secret and sources noted that the Soviets had often copied Western aircraft in the past. On a similar note, a report concerning the secretive launch from, presumably, the Soviet Union in summer 1985 concluded that an antisatellite weapon had gone up. Radar tracked debris that had orbited the Earth before burning up in the atmosphere, and researchers quickly deduced that the metallic scrap had come from a satellite on which the weapon was tested. The illegal launches were the first such unannounced flights by the Soviet Union since `"testing of orbital thermonuclear weapons. (W Times, Jan 21/86; (#WSJ, Jan 21/86)
