NASA was scheduled to launch two Multiple Access Communications Satellites (MACSATs) later in May aboard a Navy owned Scout rocket. The MACSATs were designed for a global storeandforward message relay. (NASA Release 9064)
Contel Federal Systems transferred title of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System to NASA, effective July 1, 1990. Contel transferred the system 42 months earlier than called for, saving the Government $16 million. (NASA Release 9086)
An Ariane rocket carrying two Americanbuilt Japanese satellites exploded over the Atlantic Ocean shortly after liftoff from French Guiana; a fire in the rocket's propulsion system was suspected to be the cause of the explosion. Ariane had a record of 17 successful flights previous to this accident; it held more than 50 percent of the international market for commercial launches. (The European Space Agency later admitted that a cloth inadvertently left in the rocket had caused the failure by blocking water supplies to one of its first stage engines.) (FBIS Paris AFP in English, Apr 13/90; W Times, Feb 23/90; NY Times, Feb 23/90)
Soviet cosmonauts ended a 22week mission when their Soyus TM8 capsule touched down on the Kazakhstan Steppe, southeast of Moscow. The fifth mission involving a crew living aboard the 20ton Mir Space Station included dozens of scientific experiments and testing of a "space motorcycle," a oneman vehicle designed for servicing satellites. (FBIS Moscow, Tass (Eng trans) Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90; P Inq, Feb 20/90)
Martin Marietta Corporation successfully launched a Titan 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on this date that carried a replacement satellite into orbit for the Intelsat 6 stranded in March. The new communications satellite was to join 14 others in September and would transmit 3 television channels and 120,000 telephone calls simultaneously. (P Inq, Jun 24/90; W Post, Jun 24/90)
President George Bush said he would allow U.S. commercial satellites to be launched by Soviet rockets. The rockets would be fired from a projected site in Australia, an advantageous position for orbits, located just 12 degrees south of the equator. (FBIS Sov, Jul 9/90; NY Times, Jul 9/90)
A Chicago Tribune article reported on the progress of commercial space launch ventures that were born out of the Challenger disaster in 1986. McDonnell Douglas and Martin Marietta made their first successful launches of satellites in0*1989, and Orbital Sciences and General Dynamics were expected to follow this year. Hundreds of millions of dollars were invested by the corporations, and a backlog of missions was seen until 1995 when Japan, Russia, and China were predicted to compete with U.S. and European systems. The threat of so much competition was unnerving for the industry, but the promise of U.S. military contracts offered enough compensation for the continuation of their projects. (C Trib, Feb 19/90)
During January: NASA completed a facility to house the second ground station for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) system. Located at White Sands, New Mexico, near the existing terminal, the station was predicted to be fully operational by 1993. The equipment that the new terminal would house was to be technically superior to the communications network in the original building, but the two were to work together in a combination meant to reduce the likelihood for any loss of contact with the two TDRS satellites in orbit. (CSM, Jan 30/90)
The European Space Agency successfully sent up an Ariane 4 rocket from its launch site in French Guiana and its payload, a SPOT 2 observation satellite and six smaller satellites, that included four tiny U.S. spacecraft for education and science. It was the first 1990 launch for ESA, the thirtyfirst since 1979. All seven satellites were successfully deployed. (UPI, Jan 22/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
A Delta 2 rocket carried a $654 million navigation satellite, NAVSTAR, into orbit from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. This was the eighth launch of the Air Force's Delta 2 rocket, designed for heavier payloads than the original Delta. It was number 7 of a planned 21 satellite constellations that were to help ground units, ships, and aircraft locate their precise positions. (UPI, Mar 26/90)
On this date, China put its fifth relay satellite into space on a Long March 3 rocket sent up from the Xichang center in western China and announced that it was ready to launch foreign satellites. China had scheduled launches for Hong Kong and Australian companies who wanted to send up three Americanbuilt satellites beginning in April of 1990. (Beijing Xinhua domestic service in Chinese, Feb 20/90; W Times, Feb 5/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, which successfully carried a NAVSTAR satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was the eighth in a planned series of 21 that promised to give military units their locations to within 50 feet. (W Post, Aug 3/90)
A NASA official announced that Mark Showalter, at the Ames Research Center in California, had discovered another moon orbiting Jupiter. He found it while doing analysis of images taken in 19801981 by Voyager 2. The smallest of the planet's known satellites was dubbed 1981S13. (B Sun, Jul 25/90; W Post, Jul 25/90; NASA Release 90103)
A Delta rocket carried a British television broadcasting satellite, Marcopolo 2, and put it into orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The only problem for the ninth U.S. commercial launch of a payload into orbit was a twohour delay0*caused by thunderstorms in the area. (AP, Aug 18/90)
A report from a panel convened by the National Research Council and released to the White House recommended smaller and simpler satellites to monitor the Earth's climate, as opposed to the $30 billion, six large satellites being planned by NASA. The expense of the Earth Observing System (EOS) could take funds away from other important studies and future budgets. It could result in a delay in launching the EOS spacecraft, the report warned. Noting that at least one large platform was necessary for a number of scientific instruments to be grouped together, the panel recommended that three of the large satellites be replaced by smaller ones. (NY Times, Aug 22/90; W post, Aug 22/90)
Astronauts who retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility in early January said, in a press briefing, that the satellite was in worse shape than engineers had expected after its nearly 6year orbit. The conclusion was that materials used for the planned Space Station would require greater scrutiny. (W Times, Jan 31/90)
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, issued a call for proposals for design of a Satellite Servicer System flight demonstrator to show the ability to maintain satellites in polar and high inclination orbits. The onorbit flight demonstration would exercise rendezvous and docking, as well as orbital replacement unit exchange and fluid transfer. (NASA Release 9012)
A Delta rocket was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, successfully carrying an International Maritime Satellite Organization communications satellite into orbit. The satellite was intended to expand international telephone and facsimile services aboard ships, planes, trains, and other vehicles. (W Post, Oct 31/90) During October: Photographs sent back from the Magellan spacecraft since September 15 were ten times sharper than any seen before. The images "revealed a whole new planet" and "almost everywhere you look on Venus you see volcanic features," said scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California. (CSM, Oct 25/90)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS38, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite, probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would be assigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagon planned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the future. The satellite was deployed the following day. Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a continuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the 7mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the 3mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had not been used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixth time the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since the Challenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (NY Times, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; W Post, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
An Ariane rocket carrying both a French and a German TV satellite was successfully launched from French Guiana. The rocket was identical to the one that exploded shortly after liftoff last February 22. (W Post, Jul 25/90; WSJ, Jul 25/90)
NASA's Langley Research Center at Langley Field, Hampton, Virginia, and Honeywell's Space System Group, successfully concluded a joint flight research project that involved study of Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites for improved automated landing in spacecraft and aircraft. Fifteen GPS satellites were in orbit at the time of the test, and the group hoped to add nine more by 1993. Meanwhile, NASA and the Technical and Administrative Services Corporation signed a 2year agreement for the exchange of information associated with closed environment systems related to food production both on Earth and in space. The hydroponic technology sharing involved no exchange of funds. (NASA Release 90155, 90148)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS41, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida after a 5month dry spell; the fleet was grounded during much of this period because of hydrogen'!0*leaks. Ulysses, the craft's 814pound nuclear powered payload, was released later that afternoon, and a threestage solidfuel rocket began the craft on its long trip to Jupiter. Ulysses was to sling shot Jupiter in order to achieve polar orbit about 120 million miles from the Sun in May 1994. In order to escape an Earth orbit, the $750 million joint mission between NASA and the European Space Agency reached 34,130 mph, the greatest velocity yet required by an interplanetary probe for the task. The scientific mission also included a controlled fire to see how flames behave in weightlessness and release of the craft's 50foot robotic arm, which had a special material attached to estimate effects of deterioration on the Intelsat satellite, launched earlier this year into a low and useless orbit. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 10, ending a fourday, practically flawless mission. (W Post, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90; NY Times, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90)
The United States and the Soviet Union signed an agreement in which NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) would fly on a Soviet Meteor3 spacecraft sometime in 1991. A TOMS instrument had monitored ozone concentrations from a Nimbus7 satellite since 1978, focusing on the southern hemisphere and the development of the Antarctic ozone hole. This satellite, however, had already performed well beyond its designed lifetime, and the TOMS/Meteor3 mission was slated to replace it. Another TOMS satellite was scheduled to be aboard a U.S. spacecraft in 1993; two or three years subsequent to that mission another TOMS was scheduled for a Japanese ADEOS satellite. (NASA Release 90105)
A satellite launched by Martin Marietta from Cape Canaveral, Florida, failed to reach a useful orbit because of a wiring problem that did not allow separation from the Titan 3 rocket's second stage. Ground engineers successfully took the craft to a higher, but still useless, orbit, so that it would not be as likely to reenter the atmosphere. One plan offered by Orbital Sciences Corporation in Virginia was to attach a rocket' 0*to the satellite via the Space Shuttle so it could obtain the necessary 23,000 mile orbit. Martin Marietta, which had only two remaining contracts, believed it was in jeopardy of not getting any more contracts because of the incident. (WSJ, Mar 15/90; W Post, Mar 17/90; NY Times, Mar 16/90)
Shuttle program director Robert Crippen said that a Space Shuttle rescue of the errant satellite sent up earlier this month by Martin Marietta appeared possible. He could not say whether the Intelsat communications satellite would be lifted into a higher orbit or if the Shuttle would bring it back to Earth, but noted that either approach would require about one year for planning. (W Post, March 24/90)
After three delays, NASA and General Dynamics Corporation launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $189 million satellite to study the Earth's magnetic and electrical fields. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects0*Satellite (CRRES), a joint effort by NASA and the Department of Defense, carried 24 canisters containing chemicals that were to be released in fall 1990 and become ionized by the sun's rays. Visible clouds would then spread along magnetic field lines, allowing scientists to see how electrical fields interact with normally invisible charged particles. The CRRES releases were to be augmented by chemicals released from 10 sounding rockets launched from Puerto Rico and the Marshall Islands. (P Inq, Jul 26/90; NY Times, Jul 26/90; NASA Release 9097; 9098)
The official Soviet Tass News Agency reported that their most advanced rocket, a Zenit booster, had blown up seconds after liftoff and destroyed much of the launch pad in the Kazakhstan Republic. The payload, said Western analysts, was likely a recon naissance satellite. The rocket had earlier been promoted for sale in the West and had been used to fly some versions of the Soviet Space Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 12/90)
NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta II rocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craft was to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth's night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release
The military reconnaissance satellite launched from Atlantis in February malfunctioned and was slowly spinning from orbit, said White House intelligence officials. The satellite, "vital for START (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) verification," was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere in April. (W Times, Mar 19/90; W Post, Mar 19/90)
landing postponed for a day because of fog. The flight set a precedent both because of duration, 11 days, and because the aircraft was the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, a result of the captured cargo. The mission was without incident, save for a few minor problems involving a leaky dehumidifier, a smoke detector0*that went off unexplainably, a malfunction in one of the three Inertial Measurement Units (critical for reentry, but the Shuttle can land with only one functioning unit), and a small engine used by the automatic pilot for maintaining flight path that fired for no reason. The retrieved satellite remained in the Shuttle cargo bay and was scheduled to be flown to Kennedy Space Center in Florida atop a modified NASA jumbo jet later in the week. During reentry, two NASA experiments measured the aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics of the orbiter. One of the experiments, a Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing experiment, involved an infrared camera used to collect imagery from the left wing, an area that reached 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, a higher than usual temperature, on the STS28 flight. The second experiment involved the Shuttle Entry Air Data System, housed in Columbia's nose cap to gather "air data" to determine the orbiter's aerodynamic flight characteristics.(NY Times, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90; W Post, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90;C Trib, Jan 13/90;CSM, Jan 16/90; NASA Release 908)
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)
China launched a communications satellite, AsiaSat 1, from Sichuan Province for an Australian firm and became the first thirdworld country to enter the commercial satellite launching business. China promised to follow fair pricing practices after President George Bush lifted a sanction, brought on the country for human rights violations, that barred them from launching the U.S.built satellite. The launch still drastically undercut U.S. and Ariane fees. (FBIS China, China Daily, Apr 7/90; CSM, Apr 9/90; W Post, Apr 8/90)
NASA and Japan's Ministry of State for Science and Technology agreed on new areas of space cooperation during a meeting in Tokyo. NASA/Japan projects agreed upon were observation of the ozone layer from satellites, space environment monitoring (realtime solar wind data), Space Station solar terrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom, and space microgravity experiments aboard the Space Shuttle. Other areas discussed were the ongoing cooperation for building and utilization of the Space Station and joint projects in xray and infrared astronomy, cosmic ray research, the study of ocean dynamics, measurement of cloud height by satellite stereograph, reception of Japan's first marine observation satellite data, and satellite measurements of tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90106)
After five delays because of the Shuttle Commander's' 0*head cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather, Atlantis (STS36) lifted off under dark skies from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to deliver a 37,300pound classified military satellite into orbit. The postponements tacked on an additional $2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Truly reiterated NASA's policy that meeting launch schedules was secondary to safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its $500 million military payload the following day at an orbit inclined 62 degrees north of the equator, allowing it to fly over every major populated and industrialized center in the Soviet Union. An even higher inclination orbit would have been preferred. A polar orbit was considered ideal for a recon naissance satellite, but the Shuttle base at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, from where such an orbit could have been safely achieved, was not operational; the weight of the larger satellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle. Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California on March 4. No problems were reported during the brief 41/2 day mission, the Space Shuttle's 34th mission and the 6th mission dedicated solely to the military.W Post, Mar 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 5/90; Feb 28/90; NY Times, March 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; P Inq, Mar 5/90))
The Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico issued a report concerning an electric gun, the coil gun, that could thrust payloads into orbit. Hoping one day that the device would launch small satellites, Bill Cowan, director of the project, predicted that objects could be hurled into space at 2.8 miles per second at 1 percent of the cost of conventional rockets. The gun accelerates projectiles by pulling them through successive, interacting magnetic fields created by electric currents passing through coils of wire. According to Cowan, obstacles such as damage to the payloads and launchers themselves and the heat generated by projectiles rapidly propelled through the atmosphere would eventually be overcome. (NY Times, (Jan 30/90)
President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budget spending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satellite program to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Jan 29/90)
Orbital Sciences Corporation successfully launched its Pegasus rocket from a NASA B52 aircraft to boost a 422pound payload into polar orbit over the Pacific Ocean. The experimental rocket deployed a NASA scientific satellite and a Navy communications satellite, opening a new avenue for launching small payloads. The elimination of a costly ground booster, said company president David Thompson, provided a means by which payloads could be delivered inexpensively. (W Post, Apr 6/90; WSJ, Apr 6/90; NY Times, Apr 6/90; LA Times, Apr 6/90)
Japan successfully tested its new H2 rocket, which promised to lift large, sophisticated satellites. The rocket using an LE7 engine, similar to the hightechnology propulsion system used by the Space Shuttle, was slated for service in March 1992. (AP, Mar 6/90)
President George Bush announced his plans for a cooperative effort with the Soviet Union in the humanassisted exploration of space, including voyages to the Moon and Mars. On a related note, Japan agreed to open its doors to foreignmade satellites by lifting its ban on government agencies and businesses that required them to buy only Japanese spacecraft. The Japanese law was created in order to help Japan's fledgling H&space industry. (NY Times, Apr 3/90; Apr 4/90; W Times; Apr 4/90; WSJ, Apr 4/90)
NASA announced a recently revised 1990 schedule for Space Shuttle launches that called for 9 flights instead of the previously announced 10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged0*on a threeweek delay to launch the Hubble Telescope, originally planned for deployment March 26, because of an unsatisfactory leak check of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster. This delay threatened the highpriority Ulysses mission scheduled for October 5. The mission had to be sent up within an 18day time period in order to slingshot Jupiter and head back toward the Sun, where it would achieve polar orbit around the star. The new agenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows: Jan 9: Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval of another. Feb 22: Atlantis; classified military satellite. Apr 18: Discovery; the Hubble Telescope.
A Delta rocket carried two satellites into space from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to test laser technology planned for the Strategic Defense Initiative program. One satellite, the Relay Mirror Experiment, was to reflect a beam fired from a mountain top in Hawaii back to another nearby point on Earth using a mirror. The other satellite, the Low Power Atmospheric Compensation, was to correct laser strike distortions caused by dust, moisture, and gases. The media generally opined that success of the experiment might induce Congress not to slash the $4.5 billion that President George Bush had requested for further research into the project in budget year 1991. (W Times, Feb 15/90; NY Times, Feb 15/90)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, selected Stanford Telecom for negotiations leading to a fiveyear, $30 million contract to provide systems engineering support for the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite and the Advanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin Marietta Corporation received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Force for modifications to space launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release C90aa)
A German scientific satellite, ROSAT, scheduled for NASA launch on a Delta II rocket, in early summer, arrived at Cape0*Canaveral, Florida, on this date from the Federal Republic of Germany aboard a 747 cargo plane. The spacecraft was to perform "all sky" surveys with two xray imaging telescopes, after which it would focus on detailed xray sources. (NASA Release 9027)
NASA canceled a contract with TRW Corporation for the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, aka Space Tug, a spacecraft intended to lift satellites (specifically the Hubble Space Telescope and a proposed Xray telescope) into higher orbit. The reason given for the cancellation was recent budget pressure facing NASA. (WSJ, `"Jun 8/90; W Times, Jun 8/90; Sp News, Jun 1117/90; NASA Release
Scientists, after taking their first long look at the Long Duration Exposure Facility recovered by Space Shuttle Columbia in January, said the varied surfaces of the satellite showed signs of pits, scars, and discoloration in some areas while being strangely unscathed in others. The surfaces revealed no "showstoppers" however. The satellite was an experiment meant to test materials for use in building spacecraft and the Space Station. (W Post, Feb 13/86; NASA Release 9023)
For the first time, Soviet defense committee lawmakers visited the Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASA prepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classified satellite launch that, said sources, was to take reconnaissance photographs and intercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12day visit reflected a new openness in the Soviet Union, and the committee chairman, referring to the mission said, "We have no special secrets...I think you are wasting your money." (W Post, Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90)
NASA said it had received the go ahead from Intelsat to rescue the Intelsat 6 satellite put into a low orbit three months earlier. Plans called for lifting the satellite into a higher orbit sometime in 1992; sources said that the mission would probably be carried out during the inaugural flight of Shuttle Endeavor. (B Sun, Jun 14/90; W Times, Jun 14/90)
Orbital Communications Corporation requested Federal approval for deploying a global satellite system for data transmission, 20 small satellites that would mostly be used for emergency services. Orbital planned to deploy them, beginning in April with its Pegasus rocket, launched from a B52 aircraft. (W Times, Mar 6/90; NASA Release N9018)
A hydrogen leak similar to the one that scrubbed Columbia's mission late in May was discovered in the Space Shuttle Atlantis as it was being readied on the launch pad. Engineers determined that Atlantis would need to return to the hanger where it could be separated from its external fuel tank for repairs. Officials said that the flight, originally scheduled for midJuly, would be delayed at least several weeks and noted that the entire fleet was grounded until the problem could be ascertained. Finding the cause of the leak had proven difficult. If the final analysis pointed to a design flaw, grounding might have been stretched to months or even years. (NASA Release 9089; W Post, Jun 30/90; NY Times, Jun 30/90; WSJ, July 2/90; CSM, Jul During June: NASA awarded a $1.3 million contract to Martin Marietta Corporation to study design concepts for a space based "service station." The system would service satellites beyond the range of the Space Shuttle, provide them with fuel as well as replace certain components. (W Times, Jun 7/90)
NASA said that it would rescue the uninsured communications satellite that Martin Marietta Corporation boosted into a useless orbit last March 14. The cost was set at $1 million to either retrieve it or attach rockets, that would send it into a higher orbit, in 1991 or 1992. Intelsat said that it would consider the cost at its next board of governors meeting. W Times, May 16/90)
The Air Force decided in September to convert the Space Launch Complex6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California for Space Shuttle liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets. The launch pad had been idle since the Challenger accident in 1986. (NY Times, Sep 30/90) Oct 1: The High Resolution Imager, an instrument for the study of cosmic Xrays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched last June, sent back its first light pictures to a ground station near Munich. The cooperative program between the United States, West Germany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited several international scientists. The pictures sent back represented a neutron star 3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova that occurred in this galaxy 320 years ago and 10,000 light years away, and a cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2156. (NASA Release 90133)
Government officials said that the mirrors attached to the Nation's next generation of weather satellites used to reflect images from Earth's atmosphere into internal sensors would warp from the Sun's heat, according to recent tests. NASA formed a team of nine experts from Ford and ITT, makers of the spacecraft, to correct the problem, in time to meet the 1992 launch date. A single Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite was in orbit at the time. Officials were worried that, if it failed, the Nation would have to rely on planes, radar units, and other satellites that were not capable of giving the comprehensive overview needed, for example, to follow storms.0*There were normally two satellites of this type in orbit, but one was destroyed in 1986 when a Delta rocket malfunctioned. Solutions for the GOESNEXT flawed mirrors ranged from repairing them, which would cause a sixmonth delay, to remanufacturing, and causing a delay of more than one year. (NY Times, Aug 8/90; W Post, Aug 9/90; W Times, Aug 9/90)
NASA launched the first of 10 expected Shuttle flights in 1990 (flight STS32) from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a 10day mission to orbit a Navy communications satellite and to retrieve another. The liftoff, originally scheduled for December 18, had been delayed three times because of problems with the renovated launch pad and once because of low clouds. The Navy satellite was deployed January 10. On January 12, the spacecraft closed in on and retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), an 11ton satellite, into the cargo bay, using a 50foot robotic arm. The LDEF was sent up with Space Shuttle Challenger in April 1984 to provide vital information on the design of spacecraft and NASA's Space Station, as well as other experiments. The orbiting laboratory was scheduled to be recovered 10 months after its deployment, but the nearly 5year postponement caused by scheduling problems and the Challenger accident resulted in a decaying orbit that was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere by March of 1990. The 57 experiments aboard the 30footlong cylindrical satellite included an array of potential space building materials being tested for reactions to radiation, extreme temperature changes, and collisions with space matter. Also tested for prolonged space exposure were optical fibers, pure crystals for use in electronics, and a student experiment involving tomato seeds. Interstellar gases and cosmic radiation were also trapped in an attempt to find clues into the formation of the Milky Way and the evolution of heavier elements. For the remainder of the mission, astronauts carried out other scientific and engineering work. Columbia landed on a concrete runway early in the morning on
The Air Force launched a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $65 million NAVSTAR Global Positioning System satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was 10th in a series of 21 that the United States hoped to have `"in orbit by 1992. (W Post, Nov 27/90; USA Today, Nov 27/90)
A Titan 4 rocket blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a classified payload outside experts believed was a $180 million advanced missile warning satellite. It was the third launch of the Titan 4 and followed a 2month delay caused by undisclosed technical problems. The satellite, they added, would likely observe Iraq. The Space Shuttle Atlantis, which occupied a nearby launch pad for liftoff on the November 15, also had a (#classified cargo aboard thought to be for the same purpose. (W Post, Nov 13/90; W Times, Nov 13/90)
