The crew of Shuttle Discovery prepared for a 38-hour "space ballet" with a satellite that will study Discovery's exhaust plumes. With two recorders not working, the astronauts turned to other instruments. The satellite launch was delayed to allow the crew to complete as many observations as possible of Earth's aurora before the coolant for the telescope ran out. (B Sun, Apr 30/91; W Times, Apr 30/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; USA Today, Apr 30/91; LA Times, Apr 30/91; AP, 30 Apr 91; UPI, 30 Apr/91)
The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) had discovered a new, distant object that astronomers described as the most luminous object ever seen in the universe. Findings were published in the British science journal Nature, indicating it was a massive dust cloud that radiated 99 percent of its light in  the infrared part of the spectrum. Astronomers speculated it might be a massive galaxy in the process of formation or a quasar in a massive galaxy. (NASA Release 91-98; P Inq, Jun 29/91)
NASA announced that its newest Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, launched from Atlantis on August 2, 1991, was operational. This expanded the communications capability required by the increasing number of scientific spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-164; Business Wire, Oct 9/91)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch on September 12, would deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) 350 miles above Earth. The UARS is to study humankind's effect on the planet's atmosphere and its shielding ozone layer and is the first major flight element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 91-136)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
Whereas NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York plans to announce that 1990 was the hottest year ever recorded, NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, says 1990 was only the fourth hottest year since 1979. The difference is accounted for by the fact that Goddard uses ground-based thermometers to record local heat while Marshall uses satellites, which broadly measure atmospheric temperature world-wide. In addition to the global temperature analysis, the World Resources Institute released two related studies. One was by Richard Heim of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Global Climate Laboratory. (WSJ, Jan 8/91; W Post, Jan 10/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; LA Times, Jan 10/91; CSM, Jan 16/91; NY Times Magazine, Feb 3/91)
Ivan Bekey, a NASA space power expert, was quoted by the New York Times in connection with an article on solar power from space. Bekey said that power beaming was not a problem. Rather, the difficulty was getting a large enough satellite into orbit. Currently large satellites ran between 20,000 to 30,000 pounds whereas a satellite to enable developing solar power would need to be some 100 times larger than that. Another possibility would be to mine the silicon for the solar cells and the aluminum for the structure from the moon. Those materials might make up 90 percent of the mass, meaning less weight would need to be launched from Earth. Bekey foresaw that developing power from space would be 20 or 30 years away. (NY Times, Dec 25/91)
NASA solicited proposals for establishing additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These centers were to specialize in the commercialization of advanced satellite communications technologies and other space-based telecommunications technologies. NASA's current CCDS specialize as follows: materials processing, 5; life sciences, 3; remote sensing, 2; automation and robotics, 2; space propulsion, 1; space structures and materials, 1; and space power, 2. (NASA Release 91-58)
The rocket-launching site at Poker Flat, Alaska, is near the North Pole, has a high success rate for suborbital, scientific launches, and lacks military red tape, being university owned. These factors caused commercial ventures to inquire about possible commercial satellite launches into polar orbits from Poker Flat. Glenn Olds, Commissioner of the state Department of Commerce and Economic Development, believed a launch might occur in 1993. (AP, Apr 29/91)
AP quoted President Bush's science adviser, D. Allan Bromley, as saying that declassification of Star Wars technology would enable NASA to begin a $30 billion study of Earth's environment earlier and cheaper. Bromley added that the Defense Department and the Department of Energy would allow the use of some of their inventions for non-military purposes. The most important was a technology that allowed pointing an instrument from space with greater accuracy to a given spot on Earth and holding it, as well as a technique to fly individual satellites, bring them together, and lock them into formation so several satellites can look at the same spot on Earth. (AP, Oct 22/91)
According to Florida Today, a group of Florida universities hoped to attract a five-year, $5 million NASA grant to set up a commercial space development center. The center would focus on the commercial potential of advanced satellite communicatios technology. (Fla Today, Jun 16/91)
A $40 million communications satellite was launched by a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The satellite was owned by GTE Spacenet Corporation of McLean, Virginia. The satellite was scheduled to take over the work of the present Westar spacecraft in June and increase GTE's transponder capacity for relaying information. (AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; CSM, Apr 15/91)
Hughes Aircraft Company said its Space and Communications Group had signed a $300 million contract to build three communications satellites for Alpha Lyracom, a private global communications satellite operator. The first satellite was scheduled for launch in May 1994 and is to serve the Pacific Ocean region. (WSJ, Nov 5/91)
NASA announced information about the flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis scheduled for launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center. The Shuttle was to deploy NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) into orbit to update the satellite tracking network. Details of the TDRS, its size, capacities, and capabilities, were provided. (NASA Release 91-97)
The media reported the launch of the Soviet Meteor-3 weather satellite carrying the NASA-built Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS). The Meteor was to view the hole in the ozone over Antarctica in September and October; the United States and the Soviet Union were to share ozone information gained. (AP, Aug 15/91; UPI, Aug 15/91; P Inq, Aug 16/91; W Post, Aug 16/91; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
NASA announced that based on satellite observations of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, researchers from NASA and Geo Eco Arc Research in La Canada, California, had located a "nearly perfect" semicircular ring of sink holes forming a crater more than 125 miles in diameter. The scientists believed that this evidence of an impact crater formed by a comet or asteroid might have caused the extinction of dinosaurs and other species about 65 million years ago. The findings were being published in Nature magazine. (NASA Release 91-71; UPI, May 9/91: LA Times, May 10/91; San Francisco Examiner, May 10/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, May 11/91; LA Times, May 27/91; W Times, May 31/91)
The Los Angeles Times quoted National Hurricane Center director Robert C. Sheets as being concerned about the "precarious situation" with regard to hurricane forecasting. The GOES-7, the only U.S. weather satellite in orbit, was nearing the end of its five-year life expectancy and no replacement was available in the near future. Among possibilities were buying a satellite from Japanese or European makers. (LA Times, Jul 16/91)
NASA announced adjustments to the February 1991 Mixed Fleet Manifest as a result of the cracks discovered on Space Shuttle Discovery. Space Shuttle Atlantis was to fly in April; after repairs, Discovery (STS-39 mission) was to fly in May as was STS-40/Spacelab Life Sciences Mission aboard Columbia. The Tracking Data Relay Satellite Mission originally scheduled to fly on Discovery in July was to be on Atlantis in August. The Defense Support Program mission remained on Atlantis but was moved from August to December with the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. The International Microgravity Laboratory mission planned for December 1991 would become the first flight in 1992. The mixed cargo flight of the Tethered Satellite System and the European Space Agency's European Retrievable Carrier, originally scheduled for February 1992 on Discovery, would move to August 1992 on Atlantis. Other mid-1992 flights would remain as scheduled earlier. (NASA release 91-44; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91)
Jerry Ross and Jay Apt fixed a stuck satellite antenna in NASA's first unscheduled repair in space, showing the value of the human element in space flight. Thereafter they remained outside for three more hours to test equipment. A further spacewalk was scheduled before return to Earth. (USA Today, Apr 8/91; B Sun, Apr 8/91; AP, Apr 8/91; UPI, Apr 8/91; C Trin, Apr 8/91; CSM, Apr 9/91; W Post, Apr 9/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 9/91; Birmingham News, Apr 12/91)
Scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico developed a new technique of "clustering" to speed the analysis of satellite images. The technique was being adapted for use in crop forecasting, land-use studies, pollution monitoring, and mineral and oil prospecting. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
According to the Washington Times, Eosat, based in Lanham, Maryland, a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Company and General Electric Company, defeated its competitor and gained the contract for distributing images from the new Soviet Almaz satellite. (W Times, Aug 9/91)
Discovery astronauts captured amazing aurora observations and continued to try to fix the two faulty recorders. After releasing the retrievable SPAS-2 satellite, using Discovery's 50-foot robot arm, the astronauts had difficulties getting the satellite oriented properly to observe the Shuttle. Discovery was to play the role of an enemy missile, repeatedly firing one of its two orbital maneuvering system rockets as instruments on the SPAS-2 recorded visible light, infrared, and ultraviolet emissions. (W Times, May 1/91; P Inq, May 1/91; AP, May 1/91; UPI, May 1/91; LA Times, May 1/91)
According to UPI, an Atlas-2 rocket built by General Dynamics Corporation was seriously damaged during a fueling test at the launch pad on August 25. As a result, the rocket's launch, which was to ferry a Defense Satellite Communications System satellite into orbit for the Pentagon, was postponed till November. (UPI, Sep 4/91)
Later in the 1990s, NASA will launch the Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle (STEP) to compare the inertial and gravitational mass of two objects suspended in orbit. The launch relates to an international effort to study gravity and proposals for locating the National Science Foundation's $211 million Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory. (W Post, Mar 17/91)
According to the New York Times, the Space Studies Board of the National Research Council recommended that NASA move quickly to develop and deploy a system of Earth-monitoring satellites with the intention of studying climate. The proposed Earth Observing System called for six large, heavily instrumented orbiting platforms and smaller supplemental satellites, to cost $30 billion over the next 30 years. (NYT, Jul 14/91)
A Journal of Commerce editorial analyzed the factors relating to NASA and the Federal Communications Commission's licensing of a private communications consortium joint venture to develop a mobile satellite to provide clear voice communications in remote U.S. areas. In early 1991, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia challenged the FCC's authority to form the joint venture and license it, with the result that Congress cut NASA's proposed $56 million contribution to the project. The companies feel cheated and the editorial advised that NASA should not be involved. (Journal of Commerce, Jun 21/91)
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) chief scientist William Kinard of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, revealed that 200 experimenters in nine countries were analyzing the data gathered by the LDEF satellite that Space Shuttle Columbia rescued in 1990. The plan was to retrieve LDEF after 11 months, but delays and loss of Challenger stranded LDEF for five years and nine months. Nevertheless experiments were conducted and interesting findings were being discovered. (CSM, Feb 8/91)
According to the Wall Street Journal, Telesat Canada planned to file a $240 million insurance claim because of the failure of its Anik E2 communications satellite launched in April to deploy one of its two antennae. (WSJ, May 24/91)
An editorial commended NASA for considering a plan to decrease the risk of space experiments by using a larger number of small satellites, with smaller numbers of instruments. This would increase flexibility in the space program, making it more efficient and possibly cheaper. (SF Chron, Aug 16/91)
NASA's next Shuttle mission is to be that of Atlantis, scheduled for launch in July to release a giant Tracking and Data Relay Satellite intended to link Shuttles and other low-orbiting spacecraft with the ground. Conrad Nagel, the NASA manager responsible for the launch preparation, raised the possibility that Atlantis might be launched earlier than July 25. (Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 15/91)
NASA announced that November 19 had been set for the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis, which would carry a full load of military and scientific experiments during its 10-day mission. Of major importance would be its deployment of the latest in a series of Defense Support Program reconnaissance satellites (NASA Launch Advisory; AP, Nov 7/91; UPI, Nov 8/91)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
According to the New York Times, Japan was reassessing its decision that preserving good trade relations with the United States was more important than quickly developing a competitive space industry. Because its own heavy-lift rocket program ran into endless problems and delays, Japan turned to foreign companies to launch its satellites. But the two satellite accidents, of which the most recent was the loss of the Atlas Centaur rocket launched from Cape Canaveral by General Dynamics Corporation earlier in 1991, caused considerable Japanese concern. The loss had major impact on Japan's high-definition television projects, which were developing rapidly.(NY Times, May 22/91)
According to the Press Trust of India, quoting the Indian Space Research Organization, India's second remote-sensing satellite, launched on August 29 by a Soviet rocket from the Baikonur cosmodrome, sent back its first pictures August 30. (AP. Aug 30/91)
NASA Combined Release and Radiation Effects satellite released a barium canister to gain data about the magnetosphere and more reliable predictions of magnetic disturbances in space. (AP, Feb 17/91; W Times, Feb 18/91)
Washington Technology carried two articles on NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS). The first discussed the possibility of the EOS instrument payload being divided among three launch vehicles while still maintaining its "simultaneity." The second quoted NASA officials Lennard Fisk and Shelby Tilford as addressing the EOS Engineering Review Panel in La Jolla, California. They said NASA had devised a restructured plan to remove several of the EOS satellite sensors and replace them with "ballast" of thousands of pounds of lead to maintain payload balance. (Washington Technology, Aug 8/91)
According to the media, engineers waited out the storm at Cape Canaveral and then hauled Shuttle Atlantis to its launch pad. The Shuttle was scheduled to launch a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite to replace the Indian Ocean relay station. (UPI, Jun 25/91; NY Times, Jun 26/91; W Times, June 26/91; USA Today, Jun 26/91; C Trin, Jun 26/91)
Steve Piacente, Washington correspondent for the Charleston Post-Courier, wrote "Weather Service Modernization: No Goes" describing problems of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA with launching new weather satellites. Lack of effective supervision of contractors and poor engineering workmanship were among the shortcomings. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
NASA announced the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite was scheduled to be launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on May 28, 1992. The delay in the originally scheduled launch time was caused by the need for Modular Antenna Pointing System acceptance testing, which was completed, and software/hardware verification, which remained to be completed. (NASA Release 91-207)
According to AP, two congressmen, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, and Sherwood Boehlert, Republican of New York, urged that the United States "borrow" or buy a GMS-5 weather satellite being built by the U.S. firm Hughes for Japan. This would allow NASA time to fix the problems with the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-Next. In connection with GOES, Washington Technology reported in some detail on the "troubled history" of the weather satellite and its contractors and congressional criticism of the program. The Christian Science Monitor reported on lessons learned from GOES-Next, including not to cut corners in developing sophisticated technology and the importance of sharing weather data globally. (AP, Aug 7/91; Washington Technology, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 20/91; H Post, Aug 21/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to Discovery's maneuvers as it conducted missile-detecting experiments for the Pentagon. The scientific satellite, which it launched previously, captured with infrared sensors and television cameras engine exhaust plumes and plumes from smaller steering jets. (B Sun, May 2/91; W Post, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; USA Today, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91 AP, May 2/91; UPI, May 2/91; CSM, May 3/91)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle, research physicist Michael S. Briggs reported finding a second huge source of gamma rays in the Milky Way. The Soviet satellite Granat and a gamma detector aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory were to be used to observe the new source. (LA Times, May 30/91)
Thirteen European countries--Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland--met to discuss European Space Agency plans that were threatened by Germany's lack of funds. The German research budget was short $930 million because of an economic slowdown and the huge costs of German unification. The space agency's German Ariane rocket boosted at least 17 satellites into space and according to Germany's ZDF television network, was assured of funds. The question of funds for other projects, for which Germany and France were major funders, remained unclear. (AP, Nov 18/91; Science and Technology, Nov 25/91)
Representative Howard Wolpe wrote in a space trade journal concerning the GOES-NEXT weather satellites. He commended Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher's statement that although GOES-NEXT would not be launched on schedule, it would meet original specifications. He continued to be concerned about a possible five-year gap without a weather detection system and stated that firm commitments of assistance must be obtained from Europe and Japan. He also criticized NASA for lacking a planned prototype instrument for GOES and for its ineffective cost controls. (SP News, Oct 14-20/91)
NASA announced that July 23 would be the launch date for Space Shuttle Atlantis, which was to deploy the fifth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. (NASA STS-43 Launch Advisory)
An Atlas-2 rocket boosted an $85 million European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) 2 communications satellite into orbit from Cape Canaveral. The satellite was the third in a series of French-built relay stations designed to route television and radio telephone signals across Europe. (UPI, Dec 7/91)
Astronauts on Space Shuttle Discovery aimed a research satellite at rocket fuel spewed in space, then captured the satellite and put it back in the Shuttle's cargo bay. (W Post, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91; LA Times, May 3/91; AP, May 3/91; UPI, May 3/91)
The Soviet Union launched a large new space satellite, Almaz-1, using a giant Proton booster rocket. Tass said Almaz-1 was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. The radar satellite would survey territory of the Soviet Union and other countries "in the interest of geology, cartography, ecology, and agriculture." The Almaz-1 was the first Soviet satellite to provide commercial services for the American market under long-term contracts. One of its principal customers was to be the US Defense Mapping Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed images of the Earth. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; LA Times, Apr 2/91)
The upper stage of a commercial Atlas rocket made by General Dynamics Corporation carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation failed after liftoff from Cape Canaveral. Ron Maehl of General Electric Aerospace Group, which made the satellite, refused to state the cost for the spacecraft and the launch, saying only that the rocket cost slightly more than the satellite. The accident was described as a major setback for General Dynamics whose Atlas program lost $300 million in 1990. Details of the stages of the Atlas-Centaur rocket and its intended use to replace the satellite destroyed in the explosion of a European Ariane rocket in February 1990 were given. (NY Times, Apr 19/91; B Sun, Apr 19/91; WSJ, Apr 19/91; UPI, Apr 19/91; AP, Apr 19/91; NY Times, Apr 20/91; W Post, Apr 20/91; P Inq, Apr 20/91)
NASA announced that the German Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) began a new phase of operation on February 8. It started pointed observations of x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high energy phenomena. The US ROSAT Science Data Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, will process and distribute ROSAT pointed data and provide facilities for the scientific analysis of the data. Britain is also cooperating in this venture, which involved the original ROSAT launching from Cape Canaveral, Florida on June 1, 1990 on a Delta expendable launch vehicle. (NASA Release 91-23)
NASA announced it would resume active space physics experiments by conducting several chemical releases in July and August with the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite. Barium vapor releases in the Caribbean area were involved. (NASA Release 91-107)
In an article in the Science section, Time discussed the theory that a giant comet that struck the earth was responsible for killing off dinosaurs. In this connection, the findings of a team of scientists led by Charles Duller at NASA's Ames Research Center were mentioned. The team discovered from satellite photos of Yucatan the semicircle that might indicate a huge buried crater of an asteroid. (Time, Jul 1/91)
NASA announced that the first demonstration of digital radio broadcasting via satellite to a mobile vehicle, would occur December 2-6 in Washington, D.C. The presentation represented a joint effort of NASA and the U.S. Information Agency's Voice of America. (NASA Release 91-196)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement between the United States and Canada to participate in a five-year RADARSAT Earth-observation satellite mission. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was one of the United States signers. RADARSAT was scheduled for launch in June 1994 using an expendable launch vehicle provided by NASA. RADARSAT would collect valuable economic and scientific data on ice and ocean surveillance and natural resource management, including surveillance of natural disasters. (NASA Release 91-34)
Navy Commander Ken Reightler, a Marylander, was scheduled to fly on September 19 on the Shuttle Discovery. A Naval Academy graduate and a test pilot, Reightler will be a pilot on the five-day mission that was to deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. (B Sun, Apr 4/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the National Weather Service's one weather satellite was nearing the end of its life. However, NASA's next generation of satellites, one of which was to replace it, were three years behind schedule and $500 million over budget. The atmospheric sensor of the new model reportedly tested poorly, but NASA planned to launch it nevertheless. AP quoted Joan A. Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as saying that meanwhile there were contingency plans to use both NOAA and Defense Department polar orbiting satellites and a European weather satellite to watch hurricanes in the Atlantic and Caribbean.(P Inq, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91)
Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science announced that Japan had successfully launched a solar flare observation satellite, designed to analyze X-rays and gamma rays from solar flares. (DPA, Aug 30/91)
The first release of barium vapor, creating a green cloud, by the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite occurred the evening of January 12, NASA announced. The second release consisted of lithium vapor the night of January 13, causing a red cloud. (P Inq, Jan 14/91; USA Today, Jan 14/91; NY Times, Jan 14/91; AP, Jan 13/91; UPI, Jan 12/91; W Post, Jan 13/91)
According to AP, the House subcommittee on Science, Space, and Technology planned to examine NASA's "midlife crisis," referring to the agency's "management failures" and "loss of leadership." The report mentioned NASA's recent series of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, the GOES weather satellite, the postponements in the Space Shuttle launch, and the Galileo space probe's jammed antenna. (AP, Jul 31/91)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was slowly hauled to its launch pad for a scheduled November 19 blastoff, according to UPI. NASA announced its mission was to deploy a Defense Support Program satellite designed to detect nuclear detonations, missile launches, and space launches from a geosynchronous orbit. A number of other experiments are to be performed during the 10-day flight. (NASA Release 91-176; UPI, Oct 24/91)
NASA satellite observations indicated that Earth's protective ozone layer was thinning twice as fast as previously believed. The Environmental Protection Agency made the announcement. Richard S. Stolarski, a research scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, found a 4 percent to 5 percent average decrease over the 11-year period he studied. During the winter, the depletion was 8 percent to 9 percent of the layer. Several scientists have stressed the importance of the public developing "good sun habits" in relation to the ozone depletion and reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).(B Sun, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; WSJ, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; CSM, Apr 9/91)
NASA announced that the second mission of the Pegasus air-launched space booster was scheduled for July 17. Pegasus was to be launched from below the wing of a NASA B-52 aircraft based at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Pegasus was to carry seven small Defense Department satellites for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and put them into low Earth orbit. (NASA Release N91-49)
According to the Los Angeles Times, the Soviet space program was facing a difficult future. The main elements of the Soviet space program were concentrated in three republics: Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. Rockets were built primarily in Ukraine, control centers and instrument manufacturing plants were mainly in Russia, and the principal launch facility, the Baikonur Cosmodrome, was in Kazakhstan. Marcia S. Smith, the Soviet space expert on the staff of the Congressional Research Service, said those three republics agreed in early October they could operate by themselves. However, the economic situation became worse, causing increasing criticism. Nevertheless, communications satellites were essential to produce foreign investments and maintain a link with the outside world. Space research had technological spinoffs in areas such as computers, transportation, communications, and propulsion. Therefore, U.S. experts did not believe the former Soviet states would allow the space program to die. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
Daniel DeVito, manager of the Central Data Handling Facility (CDHF) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, commented on the way the use of CDHF in the forthcoming NASA Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite mission might lead to similar systems on larger NASA projects. CDHF was a new concept that both the International Solar Terrestrial Physics project and the Earth Observing System mission were looking at to handle data more efficiently and distribute data to scientists through a multiple network. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
The Los Angeles Times covered the fifth annual Conference on Small Satellites, held at Utah State University. Most of the scientists and engineers attending favored NASA using smaller satellites for specific goals rather than larger spacecraft, which they believed to be NASA's trend. (LA Times, Sep 2/91)
Stanley G. Rosen, retired director of long-range planning for the US Air Force Space Division in El Segundo, California, and vice president for public policy of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said the Persian Gulf War demonstrated the need for radar satellites. Such satellites could penetrate clouds and battlefield smoke as well as monitoring all troop movements and could possibly detect Scud missile launchers. (LA Times, Feb 18/91)
NASA announced that the Ohio State University's Center for Mapping, Columbus, one of 16 NASA Centers for the Commercial Development of Space, had developed a system that would reduce the amount of time and money needed to gather information on highway conditions. The system uses both positioning data from the Defense Department's Navstar Global Positioning Satellite Systems and images taken from a pair of video cameras mounted in a standard van. The system would help locate roads needing repair and other hazardous conditions, including the location of fatal accidents. The 18-month project, called the Global Positioning System for Transportation Planning, involved the Federal Highway Administration, 38 state transportation departments, and the Canadian province of Alberta. The states had contributed $565,000 to the project, and NASA had given $280,000. The system also is ideal for mapping and the mobile unit enables digitizing to be done immediately. (NASA Release 91-16)
The media discussed plans for NASA's next Shuttle flight, that of Discovery in September to deploy a satellite to study the ozone layer in Earth's upper atmosphere. Discovery was moved to the launch pad, and various systems were connected to prepare for a practice countdown. (UPI, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91)
NASA announced that September 12 was set for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery and its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. The announcement followed completion of the Flight Readiness Review. (NASA Launch Advisory, Aug 28/91; CSM, Aug 28/91; UPI, Aug 28/91; DPA, Aug 28/91; P Inq, Aug 29/91; W Times, Aug 29/91; NY Times, Aug 29/91; USA Today, Aug 29/91; LA Times, Aug 29/91; AP, Aug 29/91)
The media reported that the National Space Council decided that the new Landsat satellite to study environmental changes on earth and military movements, Landsat VII, would be funded by NASA and the Defense Department. Landsat VII was to resemble Landsat VI, which was scheduled for launch in late 1992. NASA Administrator Richard Truly testified at a congressional hearing on the subject November 26. (WSJ, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; W Times, Nov 27/91)
NASA announced that early results from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) confirmed the link between the presence of chlorine monoxide and the depletion of ozone in Earth's upper atmosphere. The UARS was launched by Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12, 1991. (NASA Release 91-199)
According to the press, Senate budget leaders expressed concern over NASA's ability to launch the GOES-NEXT weather satellite in time to meet weather monitoring needs. They urged that the National Weather Service buy a $100 million backup satellite, possibly obtaining one from Japan. NASA Administrator Richard Truly said NASA accepted responsibility for the delays and cost overruns in the construction of the new satellites. (W Post, Jul 11/91; NY Times, Jul 11/91; C Trin, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91)
Ariane 44L, the most powerful rocket of the Ariane series of Arianespace, the commercial branch of the European Space Agency, blasted into space the night of January 15 from the northeast coast of French Guiana in South America. The rocket carried two European communications satellite: Italsat I, the first experimental communications satellite of the Italian Space Agency, and Eutelsat II-F2, the second communications satellite of the European satellite organization. (W Times, Jan 16/91)
UPI reported the practice countdown of the crew of Shuttle Atlantis for its flight July 23. NASA announced that Atlantis would put NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite into orbit on its mission in order to update the satellite tracking network. (UPI, Jul 3/91; unnumbered NASA General Release, undated)
According to UPI, a French Ariane rocket successfully boosted the first in a new series of advanced European environmental remote sensing satellites into orbit from the European Space Agency's jungle complex on South America's northern coast. The satellite, with a three-year life, had a radar system and other equipment to study Earth's oceans, ice packs, and land areas in great detail. (UPI, Jul 16/91; P Inq, Jul 18/91)
Hughes Communications Galaxy is suing NASA because it refused to launch Hughes' satellites from the Space Shuttle after the Challenger accident. Edward Frankle, NASA general counsel, said the contract foresaw that Hughes might not get the service it signed up for. (B Sun, Mar 23/91; AP, Mar 25/91; W Times, Mar 26/91; W Post, Mar 26/91; P Inq, Mar 26/91; AP, Mar 26/91)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with Columbia Communications Corporation, Honolulu, to delay for up to six months the start of operations under Columbia's lease of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) C-Band capacity. NASA leased to Columbia the C-Band transponders on two geostationary TDRSS satellites to serve commercial international telecommunications customers in the Atlantic and Pacific coastal regions. (NASA Release 91-181)
NASA announced that the next Shuttle launch, scheduled for late February, would be delayed until early March in order to replace three thrusters used to steer the ship in orbit. During the eight-day flight, the 44 thrusters would be used to maneuver the ship into unusual positions. The ship's re-entry engines also would be fired so a satellite temporarily placed in orbit could observe the rocket exhaust plumes. The aim was better identification of the plumes of missiles aimed against the United States in future wars. NASA also displayed the Gamma Ray Observatory scheduled to be carried into orbit in early April. (P Inq, Jan 30/91; B Sun, Jan 30/91; USA Today, Jan 30/91; AP, Jan 30/91; NY Times, Jan 31/91)
General Thomas S. Moorman, Jr., commander of Air Force Space Command at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado, said orbiting satellites were integral to mid-air and ground operations in the Persian Gulf War. He spoke at a conference at Tufts University on "The United States Air Force: Aerospace Challenges and Missions in the 1990s." (CSM, Apr 12/91)
President Bush barred the export to China of parts for a domestic communications satellite, known as Dong Fang Hong 3, citing concerns about possible proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Bush approved export of components for two Western projects, an Australian communications satellite and a Swedish weather satellite, to be launched from China, for which the United States was assured of strict safeguards. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
The United Nations (U.N.) reported that the world's ozone layer, particularly over the Antarctic, was thinner than ever and the "hole" over the Antarctic was increasing. However, U.N. scientist Ruman Bojkov said the U.S. Space Shuttle Challenger had not significantly contributed to the situation. Readings were taken by NASA satellites and ground-based spectrometers and the data analyzed by international scientists convened by the U.N. Environment Program and the World Meteorological Organization. Subsequently Environmental Protection Agency Administrator William K. Reilly said "The problem is more serious than we believed." (UPI, Oct 22/91; P Inq, Oct 23/91; W Post, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; WSJ, Oct 23/91; CSM, Oct 23/91; W Times, Oct 23/91; B Sun, Oct 23/91; LA Times, Oct 23/91)
The U.S. Space Surveillance Network, inside Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado, originally designed to serve as an early warning system against missile attacks, was described. The organization now mainly is engaged in tracking 7,000 pieces of orbiting space debris, to which some 240 new pieces were added each year. Efforts were being made internationally to develop new technologies to track space debris. In all, more than 100 spacecraft fragmented while in orbit, including at least 12 satellites deliberately destroyed by the United States and the Soviet Union during weapons testing. (P Inq, Dec 26/91)
The Christian Science Monitor discussed the cases of Ulysses, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), and Hipparcos, an ESA satellite. Ulysses, which was designed to study the environment over the north and south poles of the sun, developed a wobble that threatened its usefulness, but the problem was resolved. Hipparcos was designed to measure the positions, motions, and distances of more than 100,000 stars. It also developed orbit problems but to date measured more than 1 million stars. (CSM, Feb 13/91)
UPI quoted the publication Aviation Week and Space Technology as saying that a huge Soviet SL-16 Zenit rocket carrying a spy satellite exploded shortly after launch on August 30. (UPI, Sep 7/91)
The media reported on hearings of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology regarding the U.S. weather satellite. The General Accounting Office (GAO) found that the program for a new satellite, GOES-Next, was more than three years behind schedule and costs more than doubled because of mismanagement by NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and poor workmanship by contractors. The GAO report considered the problem originated when NASA neglected to have a critical engineering review of the feasibility of the program's objectives at the beginning of the project. (UPI, Jul 25/91; AP, Jul 25/91;  NY Times, Jul 26/91)
NASA announced that David Reasoner, Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would chair the May 28 meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. At the session, results of the CRRES artificial Earth auroras experiment would be discussed. (NASA Release 91-77)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems awarded Hercules Aerospace of Magna, Utah, a contract to continue production of graphite epoxy solid rocket motors (GEMS) for the Delta II expendable launch vehicle. (PR newswire, Mar 28/91)
An experimental rocket motor being tested for the Air Force Titan 4 rocket exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California. No one was injured in the explosion. The Titan 4, the largest unmanned rocket in the US fleet, was scheduled to replace NASA's manned Shuttle in flying photo reconnaissance spy satellites and other heavy military payloads. (UPI, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91)
NASA announced its Mixed Fleet Manifest for the Space Shuttle and expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) for the next three years. Of the 26 Space Shuttle flights, 18 would be for NASA payloads or joint NASA/international payloads. The Shuttle was to focus on a variety of space science activities supporting life sciences, materials science, and astrophysics investigations. The remaining flights would consist of two international Spacelab missions, two flights of the commercially provided Spacehab module, the retrieval and reboost of a stranded commercial communications satellite, and three Department of Defense (DOD) missions. Seven Space Shuttle launches were planned for 1991, eight in 1992, and 11 in 1993.
UPI reported that General Dynamics concluded from its investigation that a piece of debris sucked into a pump apparently triggered an engine failure April 18 that sent a commercial Atlas-1 rocket tumbling out of control. The rocket was carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation. (UPI, Jun 27/91)
NASA further announced the selection of two additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These were the Center for the Commercial Development of Space in Satellite and Hybrid Communication Networks, University of Maryland Systems Research Center, College Park, and the Space Communications Technology Center, Florida Atlantic University Research Corporation, Boca Raton. In an unrelated action, NASA and Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, agreed to discontinue the Center for Space Processing of Engineering Materials because of decline in research by metals producers. (NASA Release 91-166; B Sun, Oct 10/91)
NASA's launch of the UARS satellite to study the ozone layer was covered extensively by the media. The launch was slightly delayed by communications hitches between ground and the satellite and communications difficulties continued after the launch. Later reports, however, indicated controllers had succeeded in getting the faulty data receiver to work. On September 16 the Discovery temporarily had to move to a lower orbit to avoid possible collision with an old Soviet rocket. (NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91; P Inq, Sep 15/91; W Post, Sep 15/91; AP, Sep 15/91; UPI, Sep 15/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 16/91; USA Today, Sep 16/91; W Post, Sep 16/91; W Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91; P Inq, Sep 17/91)
NASA's Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Experiments Program Manager Dean Olmstead expressed NASA's pleasure that the U.S. Army had joined NASA to conduct various ACTS experiments. ACTS forms the center of NASA's satellite communications research and development efforts. (PR Newswire, Aug 20/91)
NASA announced its launching of the NOAA-D environmental satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The satellite was to collect meteorological and environmental data and ultimately would replace NOAA-10, which was nearing the end of its life. (NASA Release N91-36; W Times, May 15/91; USA Today, May 15/91)
UPI reported that the NOAA-D spacecraft developed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA was scheduled for launch on May 14. The satellite, which was to measure temperatures on Earth's surface, including oceans, and gathering data on solar radiation, might help scientists better predict floods and understand the causes of droughts. (UPI, May 10/91)
The Baltimore Sun commented at length on an article on galactic studies appearing in the April 20 issue of The Astrophysical Journal. The article described work done by a group of scientists using the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), a scientific satellite operated by NASA and the European Space Agency. The yearlong work required 60 observations with the IUE studying the cores of rare galaxies. (B Sun, May 19/91)
According to the New York Times, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration was completing arrangements to get exclusive use of the European weather satellite Meteosat-3. The purpose would be to move it further west to cover the United States more thoroughly if the U.S. weather satellite, GOES-7, were to fail. NASA was several years behind in the development of new U.S. weather satellites, the GOES-NEXT, originally scheduled to begin operating in 1989 but now probably late 1992 at the earliest. Subsequently, several newspapers reported arrangements made for the United States to borrow at least one and possibly more European weather satellites. (NY Times, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91)
A senior U.S. trade official, on condition of anonymity, stated that Japan had drafted a plan to subsidize the entry of several Japanese companies into the commercial satellite-building industry but abandoned the plan under U.S. pressure. Hiroshi Hirabayashi, economics minister at the Japanese Embassy in Washington, confirmed the existence of such a plan but said if implemented it would probably be limited to research satellites. (NY Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91)
A U.N.-sponsored study, the committee for which was co-chaired by Robert Watson, a NASA scientist, provided the first evidence of a summertime thinning of the Earth's protective ozone layer over parts of the Northern Hemisphere, including the United States. The findings were based on both ground and satellite data, according to Watson in a briefing. Evidence showed 3 percent of the summertime ozone layer and 6 percent of the wintertime ozone layer were lost over the middle-latitude regions during the 1980s; similar results were expected for the 1990s.
A spy satellite monitoring center, officially known as the Onizuka Air Force Base, near Sunnyvale, California, needed no longer to be considered top secret. The center controlled 80 Pentagon military and spy satellites but this responsibility was gradually being transferred to the Consolidated Space Operations Center at Falcon Air Force Base in Colorado. According to a government report, the transfer would not be complete until 1993. (LA Times, Dec 2/91)
The findings of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite have caused astronomers to question part of the Big Bang theory, according to a report by Dr. Will Saunders of Oxford University and his colleagues in the journal Nature. The cold dark matter model cannot explain the giant superstructures and companion supervoids found in galactic surveys. These structures appear too vast to have formed since the Big Bang. (NY Times, Jan 3/91; W Post, Jan 6/91; LA Times, Jan 4/91)
The Government Accounting Office issued a study criticizing NASA's system of testing spacecraft before launching. It called the system poorly organized with testing practices varying from one center to another because NASA lacked uniform policies. The study dealt with the Hubble Space Telescope and the weather satellites, as well as Space Shuttles. (AP, Sep 23/91; UPI, Sep 23/91; LA Times, Sep 23/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; WSJ, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite appeared to confirm aircraft and ground-based research about the chemical processes leading to ozone depletion. (NASA Release 91-155)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the NIMBUS-7 satellite, indicated that a 4,800-mile-long cloud of sulfur dioxide was spread across the tropical Northern Hemisphere from the major eruption of Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines. (NASA Release 91-96; UPI, Jun 26/91)
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) ordered an independent engineering review of NASA's plans for the Earth Observing System to study global climate change. An Administration official said OMB wanted an assessment of the advisability of large, complex satellites and of the specific sensors and launch plans. (AvWk, Feb 18/91)
A solar flare, a strong release of energy from a small area of the sun, created the most intense geomagnetic storm on Earth since 1989. Such events increase radiation levels near Earth and affect electrical power systems, satellites, space missions, and communications and navigation systems. (UPI, Mar 27/91)
The scheduled launch of Atlantis on August 1 was delayed by false alarm over a pressure valve and then by bad weather, the media reported. The launch was rescheduled for August 2. The astronauts' first task after takeoff was to launch the $120 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, which was done successfully. Various onboard experiments were begun, together with some medical research experiments designed to test the effects of weightlessness. (B Sun, Aug 2/91; USA Today, Aug 2/91; NY Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; UPI, Aug 2/91; P Inq, Aug 3/91; NY Times, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 3/91; AP, Aug 3/91; UPI, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 4/91; NY Times, Aug 4/91; UPI, Aug 4/91; C Trin, Aug 4/91; B Sun, Aug 5/91; W Times, Aug 5/91; USA Today, Aug 5/91; P Inq, Aug 5/91; C Trin, Aug 5/91; LA Times, Aug 5/91; AP, Aug 5/91; UPI, Aug 5/91)
The media reported engineers were studying a possible problem connected with a $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) to be launched by Shuttle Atlantis. The problem involved the motor that deployed a boom carrying a six-foot-wide antenna. The main TDRS antennas are folded for launch, but once the satellite is in orbit, the antenna booms rotate outward and the antennas open up like umbrellas. On June 24, NASA manager of the project Nicholas Chrissotimos, stated that the problem was resolved. (UPI, Jun 21/91; AP, Jun 22/91; C Trin, Jun 25/91)
The European organization EUTELSAT selected the Ariane launch vehicle of Arianespace, Inc. for the fifth telecommunications second generation satellite EUTELSAT II-F5. This satellite is a Spacebus 100 spacecraft developed by Aerospatiale and MBB in Germany, with a payload provided by Alcatel. The satellite would provide full coverage of the European continent, parts of North Africa and the Middle East. (PR newswire, Mar 27/91)
Extensive media coverage preceded the scheduled launching of Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12. The countdown was planned to begin on September 9, but the discovery of a leak in the orbital steering system might delay the mission. The flight was to be the first in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program and was to place into orbit the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). The UARS was to carry 10 scientific instruments, of which four would study the ozone layer. (AP, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 8/91; W Post, Sep 8/91; NY Times, Sep 8/91; P Inq, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 9/91; W Times, Sep 9/91; USA Today, Sep 9/91; C Trin, Sep 9/91; B Sun, Sep 10/91; NY Times, Sep 10/91; P Inq, Sep 10/91; W Times, Sep 10/91; LA Times, Sep 10/91; AP, Sep 10/91; UPI, Sep 10/91)
According to AP, a communications satellite needed to transmit long-distance telephone calls made in Alaska was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. (AP, May 29/91; W Post, May 30/91)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, feared it might be necessary to send a communications satellite to Jupiter to relay Galileo's discoveries to earth. It would take three years for such a satellite to reach Jupiter, assuming funding were available. However, the engineers still hoped to resolve the problem of the failure of Galileo's high-gain antenna to open properly. Six nearly identical antennas were used on NASA's primary communications satellites without encountering problems. (LA Times, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 28/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; NY Times, Apr 30/91)
The Washington Post reported on growing congressional hesitations about supporting NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program. Legislators recently realized the mission would cost almost as much as the Space Station although it would carry only robots, not people. The Senate recommended cutting $50 million from the administration's 1992 Earth Observing System (EOS) budget request. The EOS, which would involve a series of large, sophisticated satellites, is to be the centerpiece of the mission. The House cut $145 million from the proposed budget request. Meanwhile, a panel of aerospace experts is reviewing the EOS engineering design and posing difficult questions. (W Post, Aug 9/91)
NASA announced that researchers from its Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, would use satellite and airborne instruments to measure the surface elevation of polar glaciers. The program was designed to aid scientists determine ice buildup or melting resulting from global climate change. The program is to occur in Greenland between August 23 and September 16. (NASA Release 91-133)
Robert C. Cowen, a science writer for the Christian Science Monitor, wrote of a recent article in the journal Science by Compton J. Tucker and Wilbur W. Newcomb of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Technical University in Lubbock. They used American polar-orbiting weather satellites to show the shifting sands of the Sahara Desert. (B Sun, Aug 30/91)
Scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that the ozone hole over the South Pole did not appear to be improving. The ozone loss in 1990 equaled the previous low detected in 1987 in "depth, duration, and area." The findings were based on NASA's satellite observations of a complete cross section of the ozone layer. The findings complemented measurements at certain altitudes taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sounding balloons. (UPI, Feb 22/91)
According to AP, NASA and the Pentagon were undecided how much information they would give about the next Shuttle mission, the November launch of Atlantis, intended to release a satellite designed to spot an enemy missile attack. (AP, Sep 18/91)
Officials of the European Space Agency and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that scientific teams concerned with the Ulysses mission to the poles of the sun were preparing for physics investigations during Ulysses's forthcoming encounter with Jupiter. Ulysses was expected to reach Jupiter and its satellites on February 8, 1992, and make a two-week sweep past the planet. (NASA Release 91-82)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), through its Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped the distribution of nitrogen throughout our galaxy. The COBE team reported this information at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measurements are unencumbered by atmospheric and instrument emission and enable astronomers to understand better the processes occurring throughout the Milky Way. Scientists can measure the wavelength of emissions from ionized nitrogen atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of three instruments aboard COBE, NASA's first satellite primarily designed for cosmological studies. The data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
The Washington Post quoted John Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which includes the National Weather Service, as saying that "We can no longer assume that a NASA-built satellite will serve our needs." The statement referred to NASA's plans to launch GOES-NEXT, the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites. NASA tests indicated that two of the main instruments to be used on the satellites: an imager and a temperature-humidity sensor called a sounder, were defective. UPI indicated that Knauss announced the appointment of a task force to consider alternative courses of action regarding a weather satellite, such as leasing a Japanese or European satellite. (W Post, Jun 28/91; UPI, Jun 28/91; NY Times, Jun 29/91; Time, Jul 1/91)
An editorial raised the fairness issue with regard to NASA's anchor tenancy contracts to help the commercial space business. To date Spacehab, American Mobile Satellite Corporation, and Orbital Sciences Corporation have such contracts. The editorial advocated that other agencies, such as the Department of Justice in the case of mobile services and environmental and ocean agencies in the case of fish research, should reimburse NASA for these costs. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
The media reported an article in the journal Science, indicating that despite reports of global warming and African drought, the Sahara desert shrank markedly since 1984, following a substantial expansion over the preceding four years. Two NASA scientists, Compton J. Tucker and William W. Newcomb, at NASA's Laboratory for Terrestrial Physics in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Tech University's International Center for Arid and Semi-Arid Land Studies, conducted the research. Satellite measurements of vegetation on the ground were used to calculate the extent of the desert. (AP, Jul 18/91; NASA Release 91-114; W Post, Jul 21/91; P Inq, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91)
NASA announced that two additional releases, one of barium and one of lithium, would be made during February as part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CCRES). CCRES was a joint NASA-US Air Force program to study the Earth's magnetic fields and the effect of space radiation on spacecraft components. (NASA Release 91-22; AP, Feb 7/91)
On the night of November 19, NASA delayed the launch of Atlantis for at least five days because of the malfunction of a navigation unit in the satellite rocket that provided liftoff. (P Inq, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; W Post, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 20/91; LA Times, Nov 20/91; AP, Nov 20/91; UPI, Nov 20/91)
The Wall Street Journal discussed the January 1989 offer by Nikolai Ponomarev-Stepnoy, leader of a Soviet design team that built a top secret military spy satellite, the Topaz-2, to sell, for a few million dollars, the Topaz-2 with the satellite's lightweight nuclear reactor. Moscow had no money to develop the reactor for commercial use but the paper deplored the U.S. delay in taking up the offer. The above discussion followed up on a statement by the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Office, reported on December 11, that the office stopped its share of funding for a space-based nuclear reactor projected to cost $1.6 billion by 2002. The reactor program, called SP-100, was shared by NASA and the Department of Energy. Instead the Pentagon office was inclined to go with the Soviet-style process represented by the Topaz, for which it earmarked $15 million. (WSJ, Dec 11/91; WSJ, Dec 17/91)
According to UPI, an Orbital Sciences Corporation winged Pegasus rocket, carrying seven Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency "Microsat" research satellites, was launched on July 16 from a B-52 jet. However, controllers lost track of the payload after a possible malfunction. On July 18 Orbital Sciences heard signals from space and learned that the satellites were functioning but had entered a flawed orbit, limiting their lives to less than three years but sufficient to test a new military communications system. (UPI, Jul 17/91; USA Today, Jul 18/91; WSJ, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; W Post, Jul 19/91; USA Today, Jul 19/91; P Inq, Jul 19/91; W Times, Jul 19/91; LA Times, Jul 19/91)
NASA announced that the first flight of a NASA ozone instrument on a Soviet spacecraft would occur in August. NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) was to be flown on a Soviet Meteor-3 meteorological satellite to be launched August 15 from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Soviet Cylone rocket. (NASA Release 91-127; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
NASA announced that in January 1991, it would conduct experiments from an orbiting satellite to test the possibility of creating an artificial aurora. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) was to release clouds of barium and lithium vapor in the Earth's magnetosphere, the region above the atmosphere.
An article on interactive computer graphics and the virtual reality system they involve stated that NASA's Visualization for Planetary Exploration project might use such technology. It would enable the creation of environments of the moon and planets that would use data gathered by space probes and satellites to allow users to feel they were visiting those bodies. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
An unmanned $45 million Delta 2 rocket carrying a $110 million NATO communications satellite to replace an older military spacecraft was launched on January 7 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The rocket was built by McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company and was the 202d launch of a Delta. The satellite, which would enable political and military leaders in the NATO area to communicate with one another, was the first of two advanced NATO 4 satellites built by British Aerospace. (AP, Jan 7/91; NY Times, Jan 9/91)
NASA announced that as a result of the work of its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the arcjet thruster technology had been selected for station keeping use on AT&T's Telstar 4 communications satellites. Arcjet systems offer a significant improvement in propellant use over chemical and other electrically augmented thrusters, thus increasing the satellite's on-orbit lifetime or payload mass. (NASA Release 91-40)
NASA announced that its latest target in efforts to understand the global climate and predict future patterns are the cirrus clouds. In mid-November, atmospheric scientists from NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, to lead were researchers to Coffeyville, Kanasas, where ground, airborne, and satellite measurement platforms were to conduct intensive cirrus cloud investigation for 25 days. (NASA Release 91-187)
The Baltimore Sun discussed a cooperative program between NASA and the Italian Space Agency, which was to supply the satellite. The program involved a tethered satellite, a concept developed by engineers at Martin Marietta Corporation. Martin Marietta developed the boom that was to deploy the satellite, which would be connected to the Shuttle by a long "string" or cable. The first mission was to include an electrodynamics test in which the satellite and tether were to be used to generate electricity. (B Sun, Nov 28/91)
An ongoing NASA project released a lithium canister from a satellite, producing a red sphere. Rick Howard, one of 40 scientists working on the project, said the purpose was to try to inject an artificial lithium plasma cloud to see if precipitation can be increased. (AP, Feb. 12/91)
Joel S. Levine, a senior research scientist in the Atmospheric Sciences Division of NASA's Langley Research Center, commented on NASA's role in researching the contribution of fires to the "greenhouse effect." He indicated that the oil well fires in Kuwait could be the largest single contributor to this effect. However, forest fires and agricultural burning actually provided more carbon dioxide. NASA scientists studying the problem use satellite findings in their analyses. (Daily Press, Mar 10/91)
Orion Network Systems of Rockville, Maryland, has been gradually creating a private satellite communications network for businesses in the United States and Europe. It was awaiting approval for its financing from the Federal Communications Commission. The satellites were to be built by British Aerospace Limited and the launch was to be handled by General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services of San Diego, which would use Atlas rockets. (W Post, Feb 2/91)
According to Aviation Week and Space Technology, quoting the Earth Observing System (EOS) Engineering Review Panel, NASA's plans for EOS satellites A and B "should be completely reconfigured." The panel also stated that the EOS Data and Information System was incorrectly configured and lacked central control of data archiving and distribution. NASA released the report on September 23. The same issue of the magazine reported that NASA was discussing with Martin Marietta reintroducing the Titan 3 booster to launch the EOS spacecraft into polar orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, in the late 1990s. (AvWk, Sep 16/91; NASA Editor's Note N91-64)
According to UPI, reporting from Soviet television, a small satellite launched from Mir Space Station had not operated since it was lifted one week previously. (UPI, Jun 23/91)
A space policy analyst for a major aerospace company in California questioned the lack of activity concerning the Strategic Environmental Research Program (SERP). Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat from Georgia, sponsored the program in 1990 to bring vital data and skills from the Defense and Energy departments to bear on problems of environmental research and global warming. The proposal was to select some classified defense satellite data with potential usefulness in global change research, declassify them, and make them available to researchers in global warming. Congress authorized $200 million for SERP in the 1991 Defense Authorization Act, but nothing further was heard. (SP News, Mar 25/91)
At a news conference at Goddard Space Flight Center, researchers from NASA and from the Soviet Central Aerological Observatory near Moscow announced the success of the first U.S.-Soviet space effort in 16 years. The engineer's model of the first Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS--U.S. technology-transfer laws prohibited the launch of a state-of-the-art TOMS aboard a Soviet satellite) was launched aboard a Soviet satellite August 15, and was sending back "high-quality data", according to Soviet deputy director Vyacheslav Khattatov. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; NY Times, Nov 23/91)
In repositioning one of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites, TDRS-3, on October 22, it came near a Hughes Communications' Galaxy 1. On October 23 it disturbed GE Americom's Satcom 1R. The result was that cable television nationwide was disrupted. NASA Associate Administrator Charles T. Force said engineers suspected a hardware failure on TDRS caused the problem. (AvWk, Nov 4/91)
NASA issued a summary fact sheet on its earth science research programs. Past NASA satellite missions used various remote-sensing instruments to study parts of the Earth system. The Coastal Zone Color Scanner on Nimbus-7 observed the biological productivity of the oceans. The Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), on the same satellite, returned 12 years of data on global ozone levels and helped identify the Antarctic "ozone hole." In the 1990s, NASA was to study the interaction of all environmental factors air, water, land, and biological life, that make up the Earth system--to help decision makers understand global environmental trends and protect the planet.
NASA announced that Franco Malerba would be Prime Payload Specialist and Umberto Guidoni Backup Payload Specialist for the Tethered Satellite System mission on Space Shuttle Atlantis in the summer of 1992. This is a cooperative mission between NASA and Italy's space agency, Agenzia Spaziale Italiana. (NASA Release 91-154)
Several newspapers commented on the study by a panel of experts, headed by Edward A. Frieman of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, released by the Federation of American Scientists. The report recommended that NASA scrap plans for six huge scientific platforms to gather data for studies of global warming as part of the Earth Observation System. Instead, experts urged that NASA use smaller satellites that could provide critical data more quickly and more cheaply. (LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; Time, Sep 16/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91)
Paul Hays, scientist in charge for NASA of one of 10 instruments on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS), launched by Discovery on September 15, said the UARS discovered surprisingly violent, continent-size 200-mile-per-hour windstorms in a rarely studied part of the atmosphere known as the mesosphere. (AP, Dec 12/91; C Trin, Dec 13/91; P Inq, Dec 14/91; W Post, Dec 16/91; LA Times, Dec 16/91; NY Times, Dec 17/91)
Fred Gordon, spacecraft operations manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that NASA officially had retired the Dynamics Explorer-1 (DE-1) satellite on February 28, 1991, after nine years of collecting scientific data. The decision was based on an evaluation of the costs for DE-1's operations compared to the expected value of the science gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the program, the spacecraft's cameras could see an entire Auroral zone, and the quality and quantity of data produced by the two DE spacecraft far exceeded expectations. DE-2 ended operations February 19, 1983. (NASA Release 91-42)
NASA stated that an artificial aurora borealis lasting from five to 15 minutes would be created by its satellite's release of chemicals the evening of January 10. The faux aurora is part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project of NASA and the Air Force, probing the Earth's magnetic field. (W Post, Jan 11/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; AP, Jan 11/91)
NASA General Counsel Edward Frankle announced that Johnson Space Center's Leo Monford was NASA's Inventor of the Year. The award, to be presented March 28, was for a docking alignment system called Targeting and Reflective Alignment Concept, or TRAC. Used in combination with another of Monford's inventions, a Magnetic End Effector, it could change the shape of future robot arms, satellites, and Space Stations.
The media reported that the Air Force had launched an unmanned Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral July 3. The rocket contained a $65 million satellite that joined 10 advanced Global Positioning System spacecraft already circling the globe in order to assist military forces on the ground, at sea, and in the air to determine their location. (UPI, Jul 4/91; W Times, Jul 5/91)
The media covered extensively final preparations leading up to the evening launch of Discovery in its 13th flight, a record. Biographic data were given concerning members of the mission as well as descriptions of the satellite to be launched to gather ozone information. (B Sun, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 12/91; USA Today, Sep 12/91; P Inq, Sep 12/91; LA Times, Sep 12/91; AP, Sep 12/91; UPI, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91; B Sun, Sep 13/91; P Inq, Sep 13/91; W Post, Sep 13/91; WSJ, Sep 13/91; USA Today, Sep 13/91; W Times, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 13/91; AP, Sep 13/91; UPI, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 14/91)
An editorial in a space publication criticized NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for its handling of GOES meteorological satellites. The magazine maintained that the two agencies failed "in their effort to balance the risk of buying new technology with the need to provide assured satellite service." (SP News, Oct 7-13/91)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, awarded a $145 million contract to Loral Infrared and Imaging Systems, Lexington, Massachusetts to design and build the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS). This instrument would fly on NASA's first Earth Observation System (EOS) satellite flights in 1998. AIRS would be a global thermometer in space to study the effects of increased greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. The main goal of EOS-A satellites is to study the effects of potential global warming through long-term observations. AIRS would operate continuously for five years. (NASA Release 91-61; WSJ, Apr 23/91)
NASA announced that the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) would resume experiments after four successful chemical releases in the past week. The releases should aid in studying the way that charged particles interact with the Earth's magnetic and electric fields by creating artificial auroras. (NASA Release 91-9; Time, Jan 21/91)
