Reuter reported that Arianespace had signed a contract for the launching of an Israeli Amos-l telecommunications satellite by an Ariane rocket in 1995. (RTw, May 28/93)
NASA announced that a 12-member panel of experts from NASA and NOAA had been named to investigate the failure of the NOAA-13 meteorological satellite. (NASA Release 93-154)
A study by James W. Elkins of the National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration found that worldwide emissions of the two worst ozone-destroying chemicals were slowing sooner than researchers had expected, and the gradual repair of Earth's ozone layer could begin by 2000. This news came as NASA satellite data indicated that the stratospheric ozone layer that shields the Earth from cancer-causing ultraviolet radiation had dropped to its lowest levels ever. A NASA official said that even with the peak in emissions of chlorofluorocarbons by 2000, it would take about a century for the ozone layer to recover to what it was before ozone-destroying chemicals began to be widely used in the 1960s and 1970s. (AP, Aug 25/93; USA Today, Aug 26/93; W Post, Aug 26/93; NY Times, Aug 30/93)
An article in the Washington Post discussed the failed launch of the 14-story Atlas-Centaur rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida on March 25. The rocket partially lost power 24 seconds after liftoff and sent its military communications satellite into a useless orbit. This was the third problem-filled General Dynamics launch in two years. Future launches were placed on hold until completion of investigation of the failed launch. (W Post, Apr 6/93)
Satellite research supported by NASA found that far fewer trees had been cut in the Amazon rain forest than previously assumed. However, the same study also found that three times as many animal and plant species were being killed or were near extinction than previously had been estimated. (AP, June 6/25; W Post, June 25/93; RTw, June 24/93; NY Times, June 29/93)
Antarctic ozone levels have reached record lows, according to data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Climate Monitoring and Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record low levels were recorded at the South Pole Station, Antarctica, at the end of September and early October 1993 and confirmed by satellite measurements. (NASA Release 93-190; B Sun, Oct 16/93; AP, Oct 18/93; NY Times, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93)
French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said that European countries should attempt to cooperate on space projects because progress in technology was a way to assert themselves on the world stage. He made the comment after talking by satellite link with a French cosmonaut who was on a joint Franco-Russian mission.  (RTw, Jul 7/93)
Computers halted Shuttle Discovery's countdown only 19 seconds before launch when they sensed a problem with one of the spaceship's two booster rockets.  NASA said that the flight could not be rescheduled until sometime in the first week of August, after engineers had replaced a bad hydraulic power unit in the booster.  It was the second launch delay.  Five astronauts aimed to deploy an experimental communications satellite during the mission. (Rtw, Jul 24/93; AP, Jul 24/94; UPI, Jul 24/93; W Post, Jul 25/93; NY Times, Jul 25/93; W Times, Jul 25/93; USA Today, Jul 26/93)
Thirteen high school students from Laurel, Maryland, took control of a 400-pound, $20 million satellite as it beamed information for a solar particle study to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. To be on the safe side, a team of engineers stood by to make sure nothing untoward happened.
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chantilly, Virginia, unveiled the Orbcomm communications satellite, which was  designed to provide global personal communications service.  The company said it planned to initiate Orbcomm service in the United States by mid-1994 and planned worldwide service by 1995.  The Orbcomm system planned to provide low-cost, two-way data communications to users worldwide through a constellation of 26 small satellites. (W Times, Aug 26/93)
The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)
Space School, a method of teaching math and science that uses spaceage technology to beam educational "adventures" into classrooms across America, was scheduled to open August 30. Space School lessons, which were to be carried on a delivery system called "distance learning," would be broadcast from a studio in Spokane, Washington, beamed up to a satellite, down to a receiver, and transmitted to a television in the classroom. Space school was to be operated and partially financed by the Young Astronaut Council, a nonprofit organization started by the White House in 1894. (Parade, June 27/93)
NASA said that the U.S.-French Topex-Poseidon satellite had revealed that sea levels dropped 12 inches off the East Coast during the period between October 1992 to March 1993 as cold winter air chilled the Atlantic Ocean and made the water contract. The satellite also found that sea levels rose 12 inches in parts of the Southern Hemisphere, where warm summer air heated the oceans and made the water expand.
A 240-pound Array of Low-Energy X-ray Imaging sensors (ALEXIS) satellite was launched into orbit April 25 aboard an Air Force Pegasus rocket for the Los Alamos National Laboratory in Mew Mexico. Officials at the New Mexico laboratory had hoped to demonstrate that they could handle space missions faster, better, and cheaper than NASA. However, one of the satellite's four solar panels was damaged during the launch, and the satellite was deemed a loss.
Brazil was scheduled to begin a campaign in July  to fight the burning of the Amazon rain forest.  The months from July  to November make up the dry season in the Amazon, and clearing of the rain forest through burning largely occurs in that period.  NASA has agreed to monitor fires through its satellites and other equipment.  (Reuters, Jul 16/93)
NASA reported that the new joint U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite  had observed giant waves measuring up to 40 feet high in the North Atlantic on March 14. The satellite's mission was "to study the dynamics of the currents of the world's oceans by measuring the sea level using a radar altimeter." (W Post, Apr 5/93)
Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, George Smoot, an astrophysicist at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley, California, described his cosmic research work  Using the space-time ripples that were discovered a year ago, Smoot and his group want to explore backward in time toward the universe's origin and forward to the universe of today. In its investigation, the group uses one of the instruments on the Cosmic Background Explorer Satellite to study the microwave radiation that permeates the cosmos. Cosmologists now have what Smoot compares to "a baby photograph of the universe at about five hours into a human lifetime."  That snapshot contains enough information to allow investigators to work backward and forward in time. (CSM, Mar 3/93)
The Washington Times reported that a group of five investors, headed by retired Navy Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, had signed a joint venture agreement with Russia's Association for the Conversion of Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles. The group planed to use Russian missiles to put satellites into low orbits to transmit telephone calls or computer data or carry out scientific experiments. (W Times, May 4/93)
The Mars Observer failed to call Earth on August 25, when a five-day timer should have had it send an emergency signal, lessening hopes that the mission could be salvaged. Observer was the latest reminder of the growing problems of the U.S. space program.  The Observer failure added to a string of expensive space failures: the loss earlier in August of a $500-million spy satellite, then of a $67-million weather satellite, and a series of mishaps with NASA's orbiting observatories and other planetary probes.
The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.
NASA announced that the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and California wine growers would use aerial and satellite images to battle an insect problem encountered by California's wine industry. Sensitive electronic scanners on aircraft and satellites would help a group from government, industry, and several universities map and analyze root louse damage in northern California's wine growing region this summer. (NASA Release 93-55; UPI, Mar 31/93; SF Chron, Mar 31/93; P Inq, May 2/93)
NASA announced that flight tests with a NASA research aircraft last week had demonstrated the first precision automatic approaches and landings using Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) navigation satellite signals.  The procedures were carried out without using complex processing techniques. (NASA Release 93-165)
NASA announced that it had received a request from Russian physicians treating victims of the recent emergency in Moscow for medical assistance from U.S. clinicians.  The medical consultations were to use a previously established U.S./Russian satellite telemedicine program known as "Spacebridge to Moscow." NASA first became involved in satellite telemedicine programs in the 1970s when a NASA satellite was used for medical consultation and health care delivery to remote sites in Alaska. (NASA Release 93-183)
U.S. and European space officials announced that they had postponed a planned rocket firing intended to move the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) to a position where it could be retrieved by a Space Shuttle next month. An apparent gyroscope problem aboard the orbiting research satellite forced the postponement. (RTw, May 18/93)
NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory was to receive a scheduled boost to a higher orbit beginning on October 4, to prevent the spacecraft from reentering the Earth's atmosphere. The reboost was necessary to compensate for orbit decay, which is the result of solar activity slowly pushing the satellite toward Earth over a period of time, said NASA officials. (NASA Release 93-179)
NASA announced that April marked the 10th anniversary of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a space-based network developed to meet telecommunications needs of Space Shuttle, Space Station, and other low Earth-orbiting spacecraft missions. The TDRSS is equipped to support up to 24 user spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle, simultaneously. (NASA Release 93-60)
U.S. space pioneer William H. Pickering was the first recipient of the $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, the largest of its kind.  As director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Pickering prepared the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, for launch in just 83 days following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957. (W Post, Oct 7/93)
The 1993-94 season of NASA's Update for Teachers telecasts was scheduled to feature presentations on astronomy, life sciences, research, high-speed aeronautical research, and the environment and global change. The telecasts, a series of four, one-hour, live and interactive education television programs, were broadcast via satellite to schools in all 650 states, Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico between 3-4 p.m. Eastern time.  (NASA Release 93-150)
European space officials in Paris announced that Western Europe's Ariane rocket had deployed a U.S.-built television satellite on Wednesday after a launch from French Guiana. (RTw, May 11/93)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
NASA announced that it had successfully boosted its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory into a higher orbit around Earth, a move that would keep the 17-ton satellite from reentering the atmosphere. The reboost extended the mission life of the observatory by five years and prevented a reentry in which large parts from the spacecraft could have struck Earth, said officials at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, which managed the spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-224)
Over the next two decades, NASA planned to launch more than two dozen satellites for its "Mission to Planet Earth." These satellites were scheduled to collect information about clouds, ocean circulation, and ice and pollution in order to help scientists refine their predictions of global warning. (Newsweek, Sep 20/93)
NASA said that satellite controllers had lost contact with the NOAA-13 satellite on August 21, and preliminary indications were that the spacecraft's power system was not working.  NOAA was the newest in a series of polar-orbiting weather satellites. Designed to monitor the Earth's ocean and atmosphere, it collects meteorological and ocean data for direct transmission to users around the world and to central data processing centers. (NASA Release 93-151)
Government officials reported that a high-altitude weather satellite borrowed from Europe had been positioned to monitor the weather over the United States. It joined the GOES-7 U.S. weather satellite, which had been working alone since its companion satellite failed in 1989. The addition of the European satellite  restored the normal system of having two weather satellites in orbit, one each over the East and West Coasts. (NY Times, Feb 25/93)
NASA announced that scientists had found water molecules frozen in the surface ices of Jupiter's moon Io. According to Dr. Farid Salama, University of California, Berkeley, who led the project at NASA, "This is the first strong evidence of solid water on the surface of this satellite." (NASA Release 93-107; NY Times, June 15/93)
Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)
NASA announced that during the first six months of their mission scientists using the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanographic satellite had recorded the most accurate measurements to date of global sea level changes. Oceanographers would use the data to calibrate computer models that help forecast future climate changes. (NASA Release 93-122)
According to the Wall Street Journal, five aerospace companies were proposing to revive planning for a advanced new rocket to carry satellites and other commercial payloads into space. The companies had asked NASA to join in planning and researching the project; they anticipated that it would help the U.S. gain a greater share of the commercial launch business now dominated by Arianspace, a European joint venture. (WSJ, May 6/93)
NASA announced that the location of a third radiation belt of cosmic rays had been pinpointed several hundred miles above the Earth. A NASA satellite, orbiting 375 above the Earth, had mapped a portion of the new belt. (NASA Release 93-94; AP, May 25/93; B Sun, May 26/93)
Analysis of measurements from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE) satellite confirmed that Mount Pinatubo's eruption in the Philippines in June 1991 had resulted in a temporary cooling of the Earth that equated to a decrease in global surface temperature of approximately 1 degree Fahrenheit (0.5 degree Celsius). The data provided the first conclusive evidence of a significant change in global energy caused by a volcanic eruption. (NASA Release 93-41; P Inq, Mar 5/93; B Sun, Mar 5/93; NY Times, Mar 9/93)
The Danish industry ministry announced that Denmark was scheduled to take part in a scientific satellite project in cooperation with NASA in 1995. The project involved the launch of a small Danish satellite into orbit to study Earth's magnetic field. (RTw, June 21/93)
The magazine Science reported that some researchers were complaining that NASA was overselling its satellites' products. They cited as an example news stories that fueled excitement about images of what NASA called black holes. Referring to an image featured on the front page of a November issue of the New York Times, one expert said that labeling the pictured cloud of dust a black hole was largely wishful thinking on the part of the observers and the backers of the space telescope. Science noted that outside astronomers often criticized NASA press releases, charging that they were misleading. (Science, June 4/93)
As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use.
NASA selected Allied-Signal Technical Services Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at $40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The contract was to directly support Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The SLR technique measures the round-trip flight time of very short laser pulses from ground-based stations to retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release C93-n)
Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
After back-to-back failures, rocket-maker General Dynamics successfully launched a booster with a military communications satellite built to survive nuclear attack.  The 15-story Atlas blasted of from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (P Inq, Jul 20/93)
According to a report in Reuters, the Arianespace consortium continued to be the world leader in number of commercial satellite launches. Ariane filled the void when NASA stopped launching commercial payloads after the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded in January 1986. U.S. launchers, especially the General Dynamics Atlas series, which has the capacity to launch large payloads, were fighting for each launch contract. (RTw, Mar 14/93)
An official of Japan's Science and Technology Agency announced that it would spend $4.6 billion developing an unmanned Space Shuttle that would repair satellites, act as a space transporter, and serve as a laboratory for micro-gravity experiments. (Rtw, Jul 7/93)
A Delta 2 rocket successfully ejected a television-size satellite on 12 and 1/2 miles of cord. The experiment demonstrated that tethers could be used to deploy small payloads in space, NASA said. The tether, which was thin as a kite string, dangled the 57-pound box for 90 minutes at an altitude of 450 feet. (W Post, Mar 31/93; NY Times, Mar 31/93; P Inq, Mar 31/93)
According to officials at NASA, a bad lot of batteries made by Gates Aerospace Battery Company, might shut down several satellites, including the $3633 million Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) sooner than expected. To make sure that UARS would finish its minimum 18-month mission, NASA scientists had to adjust the satellite's hardware. Instead of gathering extra data from UARS for 10 to 12 years as expected, scientists now estimate that contact with the satellite would last only four or five years. (Science, Feb 12/93)
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology( MIT) and NASA reported that water that evaporates on the equator flows towards the Earth's poles in airborne "rivers" of vapor that can equal the volume in the Amazon. Reginald E. Newell of MIT said that researchers were trying to determine how and why these atmospheric rivers occurred and what role, if any, they played in cyclones and other phenomena. The rivers were discovered using data collected in 1984 and 1991 by NASA's Measurement of Atmospheric Pollution by Satellite program and analyzed by the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. (LA Times, Jan 22/93; B Sun, Jan 22/93; AP, Jan 22/93; W Post, Jan 25/93; NY Times, Jan 26/93)
WorldView Imaging of Livermore, California, received a government license to launch small, inexpensive spy satellites. Worldview claimed that it could take super-sharp photos from 250 feet up and sell the photos for about half the $4,000 charged by the government's Landsat and France's SPOT Image. Possible uses included traffic monitoring, urban planning, and corporate spying. (USA Today, Feb 12/93; NY Times, Feb 12/93)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched on a satellite-deployment mission after two months of delays.  The liftoff had been postponed five times for equipment failure, payload problems, and a meteor shower.  After a short delay caused by a minor communications problem, astronauts on board successfully deployed the $363 million Advanced Communication Technology Satellite (ACTS). The satellite could one day shrink the diameter of satellite dishes to one and one-half feet.
NASA was scheduled to launch an unmanned Delta rocket with a military navigation satellite and NASA's tagalong tether experiment. The 12 1/2-mile tether, which is just three-hundredth of an inch thick--is wound around a spool. One end of the cord is tied to a 57-pound aluminum box. Everything is mounted on the rocket's second stage. NASA planned to pop the box off the spent booster an hour after the launch. As it shoots away, the box should cause the tether to unwind. Instruments on board would record the speed and tension of the tether and send the data to earth. (AP, Mar 18/93)
Callers jammed switchboards at Cape Canaveral, Florida, reporting that a fiery object had lit up the night sky over the Southeast. People in Georgia, Alabama, North Carolina, and Tennessee reported seeing an object streak across the sky about 10 p.m. Tuesday. Some observers said the object hit the ground and exploded. NASA confirmed that it had launched a navigation satellite at that time, but the boosters fell into the Atlantic Ocean as planned, said Gary Peltier, a spokesman at Cape Canaveral. (AP, Feb 3/93; B Sun, Feb 4/93)
NASA announced that it had set July 17 as the launch date for the Space Shuttle Discovery's 17th flight.  The nine-day mission of STS-51 was to include deployment of an Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) and deployment and retrieval of the German-built ORFEUS-SPAS astrophysics free-
According to news reports, Russia was scheduled to launch an Israeli-made communications satellite in 1995. This was the first such agreement between the two countries. (AP, Apr 21/93)
French scientists, led by Dr. Jacques Laskar of the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris, writing in the journal Nature, and Dr. Jack Wisdom, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, writing in the journal Science, described the implications of chaos in the solar system. New computer simulations have revealed that over great spans of time, small gravitational disturbances from neighboring planets, combined with their own wobbly rotations, can cause significant fluctuations in the orbits and orientations of the planets, leading to, for example, great temperature fluctuations. Mars, for example, is still undergoing great variations. According to scientists, Earth may be spared such variations because of the stabilizing influence of the moon, the only large satellite in the inner solar system. (NY Times, Mar 2/93; Time, Mar 8/93)
A Pegasus rocket launched from a B-52 bomber flying eight miles above the Atlantic Ocean propelled a Brazilian environmental satellite into orbit. The Pegasus was dropped off the wing of the B-52, which was modified by NASA. After five seconds of free fall, the rocket motors were fired one by one and lifted the satellite into an orbit about 470 miles high.
Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18)
An article in New Scientist suggested that many failures in space are not the fault of electronics or software, but something more fundamental--the mechanics.  The article identified a number of space missions that had problems caused by mechanical failures. Examples include the mission involving the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca); Germany's TVSAT1, a direct broadcast satellite launched in November 1987; and the Hubble Telescope. (New Scientist, Oct 30/93)
Fourteen scientists, most of them from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that world ozone had dropped to its lowest levels since scientists began monitoring the protective layer. The drop might be a delayed effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The scientists emphasized that the findings did not mean that the Northern Hemisphere was experiencing an "ozone hole" like the one that forms over the South pole, and that the ozone hole did not pose a significant health threat. The new findings were based on observations by several Earth-orbiting satellites operated by NASA and NOAA and confirmed by ground-based ozone monitoring instruments. (NASA Release 93-74; AP, Apr 22/93, Apr 23/93; USA Today, Apr 23/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; WSJ, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93)
Western Europe's Ariane 42P rocket deployed an American communications satellite into space on June 24. The rocket, which was launched from French Guiana after a long series of delays, was owned by the Los Angeles based Hughes Space and Communications Company. (RTw, June 24/93)
In an interview in the Scientist, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the current NASA reorganization would make science more of a priority in NASA and involve the science community in correcting problems at NASA. He stated, "NASA is science and exploration, not infrastructure and bureaucracy." In response to a question about jobs, he noted that NASA was not a jobs program, but rather existed for "inspiration and hope, and a basic understanding of science." He said that he hoped to launch a small discovery satellite every year, while cutting back Space Shuttle flights from 12 or 13 to six a year. (The Scientist, Jan 11/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
Senator James M. Jeffords and a group of House members last month introduced an amendment to the Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 to prohibit the Department of Transportation from licensing a payload that would result in advertising from space.  The amendment was in response to a proposal by Space Marketing Inc. of Roswell, Georgia, to launch a mile-long inflatable billboard into space.  The company planned to stuff the billboard in a satellite; after the satellite reached orbit, it would open and the billboard would jump out like "a giant life raft."
NASA announced that NASA scientists had direct evidence that red supergiants--the largest stars known--end their existence in massive explosions known as supernovae. Until this week, astronomers could only speculate that these explosions represented the death of such stars. NASA's international Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite obtained the new evidence through observations of a new supernova on March 30. (NASA Release 93-63)
NASA and the seven Central America nations began a program to study, preserve, and protect the  region's rain forest by expanding the use of satellite data by Central American scientists. Under an agreement with the Central American Commission for Environment and Development, NASA would train and provide equipment to scientists from all the Central American countries. By using data from the Advanced Very High-Resolution Radiometers flying aboard several U.S. weather satellites, the scientists would be able to estimate the amount and type of vegetation cover and forest cover in the region and to conduct costal studies. (NASA Release 93-47)
NASA ground crews began final preparations to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite delivery mission.  The liftoff was scheduled for August 12.  Discovery was to carry two satellites.  Five astronauts were scheduled to put one satellite in orbit to conduct advanced communications experiments.  The other, a telescope, was to be let out of the cargo bay for several days of celestial observations, then captured and returned to Earth.  (Rtw, Aug 9/93; AP, Aug 9/93, Aug 10/93; W Post, Aug 10/93; UPI, Aug 8/93)
The Washington Times reported that a Russian communications satellite had been lost in a low orbit after the booster rocket apparently ran out of fuel. (W Times, May 29/93)
Martin Marietta Corporation, which in one three-week period in August, saw one of its rockets explode soon after launch and two of its satellites lose contact with Earth, announced on September 3 that it was undertaking an internal investigation of all phases of its space division. (W Post, Sep 4/93)
A $67 million weather satellite to track storms, floods, and environmental damage went into orbit aboard an Atlas-E-rocket.  It also was scheduled to be used to pinpoint the sites of plane crashes and shipwrecks.  The NOAA-13 satellite reached its 541-mile-high orbit on schedule.  The new satellite, which eventually was scheduled to replace the aging NOAA-11 satellite, was to circle Earth every 103 minutes and view the entire planet twice daily. (NY Times, Aug 10/93; RTw, Aug 10/93
A European Space Agency official said that a re-usable science satellite scheduled to be rescued during Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission next week would be mothballed after astronauts returned it to earth and experiments were removed from it. The satellite was scheduled to be flown four more times, but there was no budget for additional flights. (RTw, June 16/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
Intelsat and Martin Marietta reached a tentative settlement of lawsuits connected with a communications satellite that Space Shuttle astronauts rescued after it was stranded in low orbit. The lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 1990 launch of a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went into a low, useless orbit after a Martin Marietta rocket launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts attached a new rocket booster package to the satellite in May 1992, and the satellite then fired itself into its proper orbit. (W Times, June 12/93; W Post, June 12/93)
NASA announced that sea surface measurements taken by the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite have confirmed that conditions are ripe for development of an El Nino even in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean this winter. (NASA Release 93-205; USA Today, Nov 10/93)
NASA scientists reported that ozone-destroying forms of chlorine had  existed for much longer in the Arctic stratosphere this winter than last. Northern Hemisphere ozone abundance also was observed to be some 10 percent below that measured during the same period last year, with some areas 20 percent lower. NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) provided the information. (NASA Release 93-068; NY Times, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 14/93)
NASA announced that it had restructured the agreement under which Columbia leases the commercial C-band capacity on board two of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS)
At a public hearing on July 20, the National Transportation Safety Board described a scene of confusion in the mission control room during the launch of a Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia. Control room operators at a NASA command center in Wallops Island, Virginia, ordered the launch of the Pegasus from a B-52 bomber, then ordered the launch aborted, only to rescind that order seconds later. Federal safety officials want stricter controls over commercial satellite launches. (AP, Jul 21/93)
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
Motorola Inc. announced yesterday that it had contracted with a Russian firm, Khrunichev Enterprises, to launch 21 of the satellites needed for Motorola's proposed $3.37 billion Iridlum communications network. The Iridium project, scheduled to begin operating in 1998, required various government approvals and a definitive financing agreement before it could go forward. (B Sun, Feb 4/93;  WSJ, Feb 4/93; W Times, Feb 4/93; C Trib, Feb 4/93; UPI, Feb 21/93)
August marked the tenth anniversary of the first use of NASA's Tracking Data and Relay Satellite System (TDRSS).  The system consists of several satellites plus a ground station at White Sands, New Mexico. (Onset Magazine, Aug 2/93)
A two-ton chunk of a Chinese reconnaissance satellite launched earlier this month fell into the Pacific Ocean 1,000 miles west of Peru, the U.S. Space Command said. (USA Today, Oct. 28/93, Oct 29/93; P Inq, Oct 28/93, Oct 29/93; W Post, Oct 28/93, 29/93; NY Times, Oct 26/93)
After making a final series of engine maneuvers that brought it within reach of the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca), a free-flying platform of science experiments, the commander of Shuttle Endeavour plucked the satellite out of space and stowed it in the Shuttle's cargo hold for return to earth.
NASA reported that an explosive designed to free a satellite aboard Space Shuttle Discovery accidentally detonated while the Shuttle was in orbit last month, hurling shrapnel though the cargo compartment.  The five astronauts were never in any danger, a NASA official said. The damage would not delay Discovery's next flight in January. (RTw, Oct 7/93; AP, Oct 8/93; Fla Today, Oct 11/93, Oct 14/93)
NASA announced that June 3, 1993 had been set as the target date for the STS-57 mission of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The mission would be highlighted by the retrieval of the European observation satellite EURECA and the first flight of Spacehab, a commercial spacelab facility. (NASA Editors Note N93-28)
The Federal Aviation Administration authorized civilian pilots to use a satellite-based navigation system that would enable them to choose direct routes without relying on navigational aids on the ground. The system, the Global Positioning System, uses a network of 24 satellites orbiting 11,000 miles above the Earth. Each satellite sends out a continuous signal that can be computed by receivers to determine an exact position. (NY Times, June 10/93)
Florida Today reported that NASA was launching a new type of air-launched Pegasus rocket that activates only after being released from the wing of an aircraft. The winged vehicle, which was developed by Orbital Sciences Corporation, has a solid-fuel rocket that gives it the ability to put small satellites into orbit at a bargain price. Plans called for the Pegasus to carry a Brazilian remote sensing satellite. (Fl Today, Jan 4/93)
NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of the deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, are the principle data source providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms.  NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) were cooperating on a project to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning system. (NASA Release 93-213)
A Titan 4 rocket carrying an expensive military spy satellite system exploded minutes after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base.  This, the first failure of the four-year-old Titan 4 program, was a $2-billion accident, said John Pike, director of the space policy project at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, a liberal group that researches classified aerospace projects. Pike consistently has criticized U.S. spy satellites. The accident wiped out most of the savings Congress took from the intelligence budget during the year. (RTw, Aug 2/93; AP, Aug 3/93; USA Today, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; LA Times, Aug 3/93; W Times, Aug 3/93; NY Times, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93)
The New York Times reported that astronomers were worried about growing light pollution, which makes it very difficult for even the strong 200-inch telescope on Mount Palomar in California to pick up faint galaxies. Some cities, hoping that brighter lighting would deter crime, were installing white street lights as opposed to low-pressure sodium lamps, which are easily filtered from telescopes. In addition, a Georgia company announced plans to put a one-mile-reflective panel into space some time in 1996; the satellite, which would appear nearly as large as the moon, would add to the light pollution. (NY Times, May 9/93)
A $220 million Landsat 6 Earth Observation satellite was launched into the wrong orbit, and ground controllers were unable to make contact with the satellite, according to a mission spokeswoman for Earth Observation Satellite Company (ESAT). The satellite was supposed to go into orbit over the poles during a five-year mission studying the Earth's environment. An ESAT official said that the company hoped to get the satellite into the proper orbit by the end of the week.  (W Post, Oct 6/93; USA Today, AP, Oct 6/93)
New software, the New Spectral Imaging Processing System (NEWSIPS), was giving researchers a remarkably improved look at data from NASA's International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), the space agency's longest-running astronomical satellite in Earth orbit. (NASA Release 93-164)
NASA contracted with Stanford University to do additional work on the Gravity Probe-B experiment. The experiment tests predictions of the general theory of relativity. Gravity Probe-B determines how space and time are warped by the presence of the Earth and its rotation by measuring small changes in the spin of four gyroscopes in a satellite at 400 miles altitude in a Earth polar orbit. The first Shuttle test flight was scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release C93-b)
NASA reported that NASA's Shuttle Mission, STS-57, scheduled for launch in early June, would highlight the beginning of a new era in the commercial development of space. The Endeavour's six-person crew was scheduled to retrieve a European satellite and also was scheduled to use experiments designed by and for students, operate a payload that might improve crystal growth techniques, and demonstrate possible on-earth refueling techniques. (NASA Release 093-78)
NASA announced that new information on the El Nino ocean current would be discussed at a briefing on the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite mission on February 26. The satellite was launched in August 1992 to map circulation of the world's oceans and study the oceans' role in climate. (NASA Release N93-08)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)
The LA Times announced that Russian space officials had signed a contract in late April for the first commercial launch of a Western-built satellite by a Russian rocket. The agreement was signed with Inmarsat, a 67-country consortium that puts up satellites for mobile communications. (LA Times, May 11/93)
Europe's Arianespace Inc announced that it had signed a launch contract for two intelsat VIII satellites. The satellites were to be built by General Electric Corporation's Astro Space Division and launched in 1996 from a site in French Guiana. (W Times, Mar 5/93)
The AP reported that the nonprofit group SatelLife, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, last year had launched a low-orbiting satellite that "talks" to the Internet and coordinates the Healthnet message-relay service connected with the satellite. The service makes it possible for remote regions of the world to receive much-needed medical advice. (AP, May 24/93)
Shortly after Space Shuttle Endeavour's launch later this month, technicians and engineers from GTE Government Systems Corporation were to establish an almost continuous communications link with the Shuttle. The space link to earth would come through a system of tracking and data relay satellites (TDRS), which would be supplemented by a satellite carried by Endeavor. (Business Wire, Jan 5, 93).
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)
A satellite was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying a military satellite designed to improve the accuracy of radars that track planes, missiles, space junk, shuttles, and other spacecraft. (AP, June 26/93)
NASA announced that an American satellite had detected the most intense flash of gamma radiation observed in the two years of its operation. The burst, known as "the super bowl" event because it occurred on the day of this year's National championship game, appeared to produce 10 times more energy than any previously observed gamma-ray burst. The burst also led scientists to say that the bursts were not the product of merely hot "cooking objects, but of particles being accelerated to near the speed of light and being emitted in focused beams, or jets. The new findings suggested that the bursts originated far beyond the Milky Way galaxy. (NASA Release 93-72; Reuters, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; APn, Apr 4/23)
NASA reported that Space Shuttle Discovery's astronauts had retrieved the $6 million satellite, called the Spartan, that they had released into space two days previously. When the Shuttle came to within 35 of the satellite, astronaut Ellen Ochoa grabbed it with the arm of the Space Shuttle's robot and placed it in its cradle in the Shuttle bay. The Spartan spent about 50 hours as a free-flying satellite with two automated telescopes gathering data about the sun and the solar wind streaming from it. (AP, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 13/93; W Times, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93; W Post, Apr 14/93; B Sun, Apr 14/93; P Inq, Apr 14/93; UPI, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; USA Today, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93, Apr 15/93; C Trib, Apr 15/93)
At a recent meeting in St. Louis, astrophysicists discussed the mystery of blasts of gamma rays that appear every few days from somewhere, but never from the same place. After reviewing new satellite observations and discussing various theories, experts could not even determine where the gamma ray bursters, as they are called, were coming from.
