An Air Force Delta 2 rocket blasted into orbit carrying the final advanced satellite in the U.S. military's Global Positioning System, Navstar. Delta 2 also carried NASA's experiment to test a space tether 12.5 miles long to determine how long it survived in orbit among space junk. The tether could ultimately be used for various purposes such as generating electricity or changing spacecraft altitudes. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94; AP, Mar 10/94; NY Times, Mar 11/94; NY Times, Mar 15/94)
NASA announced that the 12-member panel investigating the failure of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)-13 meteorological satellite in August 1993 had concluded that the probable cause was a short circuit that prevented the solar array current from powering the spacecraft and recharging the batteries. The short circuit probably resulted from a 1.25 inch screw that extended too far below an aluminum plate and penetrated the insulation. The board made recommendations for future NOAA spacecraft; NASA supervised the design and construction of the weather satellites. (NASA Release 94-157; P Inq, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
A NASA B-52 successfully launched a standard Pegasus booster carrying an Advanced Photovoltaic and Electronic Experiments (APEX) spacecraft, which Orbital Sciences Corporation had developed for the U.S. Air Force. APEX was the first satellite developed using Orbital's standard satellite platform and represented the first Pegasus mission that maximized the payload and weight capability of the standard booster. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
China successfully launched a new telecommunications satellite, the Dongfanghong III, using a Long March 3A rocket from the Xichang base in Sichuan province, southwestern China. (AFP, Nov 30/94; Xinhua news agency, Nov 30/94)
The U.S. company Space Express Corporation planned to build a rocket launch site in northern Germany to send satellites into space, according to Stern magazine. Richard Coleman, head of the Washington, D.C.-based company, discussed the project with NASA. (UP, Apr 27/94)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Endeavour was to be launched in April to study Earth's global environment. The Space Radar Laboratory was to consist of the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Measurement of Air Pollution from Satellite. Of these instruments, the German Space Agency (DARA) and the Italian Space Agency (ASI) were to provide the X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar. An international team of 49 science investigators from 13 nations were to conduct the experiments. In addition, the mission was to include NASA's Get Away Special experiments that allow average persons a chance to perform experiments in space; it was also to be the first cooperative initiative with the National Institutes of Health using a special cell culture system. (NASA Release 94-38)
The Wide Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) spacecraft was designed to use recent advances in large format infrared technology to answer some key questions concerning the formation of stars. The project--the fifth in a series of NASA Small Explorer program missions--was being designed to observe starburst galaxies about 500 times fainter than those recorded at 25 microns by the Infrared Astronomical Satellite in 1983. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory worked with the Space Dynamics Laboratory at Utah State University to build the cryogenically cooled infrared telescope. The three-axis spacecraft, which would be provided by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center--would be the same design Goddard developed for the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite, a Small Explorer mission planned for 1995. The WIRE spacecraft was to be launched on an Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL, which was scheduled to be air-dropped from an L-1011 carrier aircraft. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)
NASA and Carnegie Mellon University scientists gave a preliminary test to an eight-legged robot name Dante II. They sent it down a gravel quarry to test the $1.8 million robot's satellite and fiber-optics links and software. On July 22 or soon thereafter they planned to send it down Mount Spurr, an active volcano, 80 miles west of Anchorage. Such robots would be useful in extreme terrains and climates. On July 28 a NASA scientist, Butler Hine, said that a communications problem resulting from a poor satellite link with the robot was delaying the robot's mission into the volcano. The robot took its first steps on July 29 and was scheduled to walk 12 hours a day. By late on July 31, the robot was about 150 feet from its goal, a field of volcanic vents on the bottom of the crater. As of August 2, the robot was sending back valuable scientific data from inside the crater, despite being hit by a falling rock. On August 3, Dante II began its steep walk out of the crater. The climb halted on August 4 because of a faulty power unit on the crater rim. Scientists fixed the electrical problem but on August 6 the robot fell on its side. Possible methods for retrieving the robot were under consideration. An attempt to airlift the robot by helicopter on August 9 failed when the cable snapped, dropping Dante II further down the crater. On August 13 two experienced climbers climbed into the crater and manually wrapped a sling around the robot and attached it to a line from the helicopter, which then pulled Dante II up. (AP, Jul 21/94; AP, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 27/94; Reuters, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Jul 30/94; AP, Jul 30/94; W Times, Jul 31/94; C Trib, Jul 31/94; NY Times, Aug 2/94; Reuters, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 4/94; USA Today, Aug 5/94; Reuters, Aug 6/94; USA Today, Aug 8/94; NY Times, Aug 9/94; USA Today, Aug 9/94; AP, Aug 9/94; Reuters, Aug 9/94; B Sun, Aug 10/94; W Post, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 10/94; Chronicle of Higher Education, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 13/94; Reuters, Aug 14/94; W Post, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 15/94; USA Today, Aug 15/94; CSM, Aug 15/94; Time, Aug 15/94; AvWk, Aug 15/94; Chemical and Engineering News, Aug 15/94; AP, Aug 22/94; LA Times, Aug 28/94)
Gregory Reck, Acting Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT), said that NASA had tasked an industry team with reviewing the direction of its research and development (R&D) efforts in space communications technologies. The group, which was to be composed of satellite manufacturers such as Hughes and Space Systems/Loral, ground station builders like Harris Corporation, and small aerospace firms like Orbital Sciences Corporation, was to identify future space-based systems, both in low-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, and how they might tie into the National Information Infrastructure. NASA's role in the activity was to be directed by Samuel Venneri, head of spacecraft and remote sensing in OACT. The consensus findings of the team were to be used in relation to NASA fiscal year budgets. According to the NASA officials, the key motivation behind the initiative was to minimize inroads by European and Japanese competitors into the 60 percent market share held by U.S. firms in satellite communications. (Defense Daily, Apr 7/94)
NASA was commended for raising the problem of debris mitigation in space to a high policy goal and for being in the process of drawing up a detailed rule book for its spacecraft designers, launchers, and operators to avoid creating debris. The commercial sector was the unknown in this regard, particularly with reference to communications satellites. The matter was a vital one because over the years several satellites were lost for unknown causes and may have been victims of "space junk." (NY Times, May 17/94)
NASA announced that the International Astronomical Union had approved the name Dactyl for the tiny moon discovered on August 28, 1993 in orbit around the asteroid Ida by NASA's Galileo mission. Dactyl was the first natural satellite of an asteroid ever discovered and photographed. The name derived from the Dactyli, a group of mythological beings who lived on Mount Ida, where the infant Zeus was hidden. (NASA Release, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; H Post, Sep 21/94)
The retrieval of the German Crista-Spas satellite by Atlantis during its recent mission proved the validity of the rendezvous approach that NASA now planned to use for all dockings with Russia's Mir Space Station. Technical details were given of the "plus R bar" approach. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
GOES-8, a sophisticated weather satellite, was the first of five advanced GOES-NEXT satellites scheduled to be deployed by 2003. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the GOES program but engineers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center oversaw development of the spacecraft. These engineers redesigned weather instruments used by polar-orbiting weather satellites that flew 500 miles high to operate instead at 22,300 miles high. The system had vast potential benefit for firefighters, farmers, marine and aviation navigators, and others through improving the accuracy of weather forecasting. (W Post, Mar 28/94)
Western Europe's 70th Ariane rocket sent a U.S. PanAmSat communications satellite worth more than $150 million plunging into the Atlantic Ocean off French Guiana after its third stage malfunctioned. This was the second Ariane rocket failure in 1994 and the seventh since Western Europe began launching the Ariane series in 1979. (Reuters, Dec 1/94)
The crew for the STS-66 mission aboard Atlantis in the Fall of 1994 was selected. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Donald R. McMonagle was to command the mission, called ATLAS-03. This third Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) would continue Spacelab studies of solar energy effects on the Earth's climate and environment. USAF Major Curtis L. Brown, Jr, was named pilot; Scott E. Parazynski, M.D., Joseph R. Tanner, and ESA astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy, mission specialists; and Ellen Ochoa, PhD., Payload Commander. Tasks included the CRISTA-SPAS Cryogenic Infrared Spectrometer Telescope for Atmosphere on the Shuttle Pallet Satellite, jointly with Germany. (NASA Release 94-4; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
On February 5 and 6, NASA astronauts tried unsuccessfully to put the Wake Shield Facility satellite in orbit. They encountered problems first with radio interference from the Shuttle and then with failures in the satellite's guidance and navigation system. (UPI, Feb 6/94; Reuters, Feb 6/94; NY Times, Feb 6/94; W Post, Feb 6/94; NY Times, Feb 7/94; W Post, Feb 7/94; USA Today, Feb 7/94; P Inq, Feb 7/94; B Sun, Feb 7/94; AP, Feb 7/94)
John Gibbons, White House science adviser, said that as a result of tight budgets the Government would combine the operations of civilian and military weather satellite systems: two belonging to the Defense Department and two belonging to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The combining should save as much as $300 million by the end of 1999. Under an interagency agreement, the Defense Department was to procure future weather satellites, the Commerce Department's Atmospheric Agency was to operate the system, and NASA was to conduct research on advanced technology to be incorporated into the new spacecraft. The program became a joint Defense Department-NASA project in 1993. NASA was to build and launch a Landsat 7 spacecraft to replace the aging Landsat 4 and 5 spacecraft. NASA also was to design a new generation of spacecraft to compete with foreign satellites that provide similar data. On May 11 John Morgan, Director of the European weather satellite operations (Eumetsat) said he would discuss with nations that participate in European satellite and space programs NOAA's invitation to join the combined weather satellite system. These agencies already cooperate with NOAA on developing a Joint Polar System. (AP, May 10/94; NY Times, May 11/94; W Post, May 11/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 12/94)
From Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Russia launched one of its Gorizont communications satellites for the U.S. firm Rimsat, putting it into orbit at about 22,300 miles above Earth. This was the second launch of a Russian spacecraft for Rimsat. The Gorizont went into orbit over Malaysia, with AllAsia Sat of Manila as its first customer. (UP, May 20/1994)
NASA announced that the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-8 had successfully completed basic engineering testing and was beginning to provide more precise data for improved weather forecasting. The older GOES-7 was to be shifted further west to cover storms approaching from the Pacific. (NASA Release N94-77; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 9/94)
An article on electronic navigation and the Global Positioning System (GPS) using 24 satellites described the advantages of GPS and its uses. The article reported that using GPS and a sophisticated flight computer aboard a 737 aircraft owned by NASA, more than 36 "hands-off" precision landings were completed at Wallops Island airfield in Virginia. (C Trib, Aug 7/94)
Scientists of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which managed the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanography satellite, had been studying data it developed. The findings from two years of monitoring the oceans, which were to be announced at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, indicated that the average sea level had risen about 0.12 inches a year from December 1992 to September 1994. Such a rise was an indicator of global change and supported theories than an increase in "greenhouse" gases was causing long-term global warming. (Pasadena Star News, Dec 7/94)
A dispute of possible long-term import with hundreds of millions of dollars at stake appeared to be brewing between NASA and the television industry over local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), pitting the satellite industry against proponents of this low-cost alternative to cable television. Further, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was approaching an auction of some airwaves for a new generation of wireless communications services. Charles Force, NASA Associate Administrator for space communications, stated that "It appears that there is a significant possibility for interference with LMDS from satellite uplinks; this was no secret to the FCC." He suggested a four-year delay in LMDS service to deal with interference in the disputed 27.5-to-30-gigahertz spectrum band. The FCC believed that LMDS can coexist with satellite use and was preparing to authorize nationwide deployment of LMDS. (LA Times, Jan 12/94)
China recently suffered a fire at its Xichang Long March launch facility, damaging a Fengyun II weather satellite and adjacent work areas. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
NASA officials indicated that details of scientific evidence supporting the theory that man-made chlorine was causing the ozone hole above Antarctica would be released on December 19. The evidence was based on three years of data from NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). UARS instruments had found chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in electronics and refrigeration systems in the stratosphere. The stratospheric ozone layer was responsible for protecting people, animals, and plants from too much ultraviolet sunlight. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; NASA Release 94-215; UP, Dec 19/94; Reuters, Dec 19/94; LA Times, Dec 20/94; NY Times, Dec 20/94; W Post, Dec 20/94; W Times, Dec 20/94; USA Today, Dec 20/94; WSJ, Dec 20/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94; H Chron, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 20/94; C Trib, Dec 20/94; AP, Dec 20/94)
NASA's last SCOUT (Solid Controlled Orbital Utility Test) launch vehicle was scheduled to blast off May 6 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Lompoc, California, the final of 118 space missions that began July 1, 1960. Called the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration spacecraft, the satellite is one in a series of military spacecraft being launched to develop sensors for ballistic missile devices. Since the mid-1960s, NASA gradually has gotten out of the unmanned rocket business, which was transferred to commercial manufacturers. (Fla Today, May 2/94; NASA Release 94-72; Fla Today, May 9/94; Reuters, May 9/94)
The Paris-based Euroconsult organization assessed world space markets through the year 2004. The European think tank studied U.S., Asian, and European space and communications companies, agencies, and analysts. It concluded that new communication programs would result in a $95 billion to $115 billion global market for satellites, ground stations, and launch services during the period and that U.S. industry was increasing its share of that market. (AvWk, Aug 29/94)
NASA announced that recent results from the Haystack Orbital Debris Radar measurements of orbital debris were good news for the International Space Station. The radar, which was operated for NASA by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, showed that the measured debris at low altitudes (250-400 miles) was below predicted levels. The improvement resulted in part from NASA's Orbital Debris Mitigation Program under which NASA informed other nations of the hazards resulting from third stage rocket explosions, which led Japan, China, and Russia to join NASA in modifying their launch vehicles and satellites. Other reasons were the decreased military space activities of Russia and the U.S. and the decrease in worldwide space launches. (NASA Release 94-136)
NASA announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had yielded data indicating that gamma-ray bursts show relative "time-dilation"--"a result of the General Theory of Relativity"--suggesting they occur not only near the Milky Way Galaxy but also far away, and thus indicating expansion of the universe. (NASA Release 94-10)
NASA announced that transmission of data from Galileo spacecraft indicated its observation of what was probably a satellite of the asteroid Ida, which would be the first moon of an asteroid ever sighted. The flyby of Ida occurred August 28, 1993. (NASA Release 94-34; AP, Mar 4/94)
Air Force Colonel Sanford Mangold told members of the House of Representatives Government Operations Committee of his dismissal for recommending the cancellation of the $27 billion military satellite program Milstar. He considered Milstar, intended to provide worldwide military communications during a nuclear war, to have "fundamental, insurmountable problems," including "unacceptable" costs of $1.4 billion for each satellite. (NY Times, Feb 3/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
The official newspaper, China Daily, quoted a spokesman for the China Aerospace Corporation as expressing confidence it would fulfill all launch services for overseas clients in 1994. China launched the Apstar-1 satellite made by U.S. Hughes Aircraft, from the Xichang Space Center in southwest China on July 21. An Australian satellite was scheduled to be launched in August. China sought a larger share of the commercial space market dominated by NASA, Europe's Arianespace, and Russian launchers. (UPI, Jul 30/94)
The projected testing of the SAFER (Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue) device during an Extravehicular Activity (EVA) by the astronauts in the September Discovery flight was discussed at some length. SAFER was developed by engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was designed to stabilize an astronaut, allowing the astronaut to fly back to safety should the astronaut drift too far from a structure during an untethered EVA. The 83-pound SAFER was intended to be attached to the bottom of an astronaut's spacesuit. Other objectives of the Discovery flight were to orbit the Langley Research Center's LITE (Lidar In-space Technology Experiment) payload, a laser-observation of the Earth, and to release and retrieve the Goddard Space Flight Center's Spartan 201 solar-wind research satellite. (AvWk, Sep 5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94)
Japan's new H-II rocket was aborted six seconds before liftoff when its main liquid fuel engine was ignited but the solid fuel booster rockets failed to ignite. Japan's National Space Development Agency said the problem appeared to be in a ground-control computer known as the countdown sequencer rather than in the rocket. On August 28 the H-II rocket was launched again. However, Japan's space agency said on August 31 that it was abandoning efforts to put into orbit an experimental satellite launched by the H-II rocket. (NY Times, Aug 19/94; O Sen Star, Aug 19/94; Reuters, Aug 28/94; NY Times, Aug 29/94; CSM, Sep 1/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin Chang-Diaz would be payload commander for the Space Shuttle mission scheduled for early 1996 in which the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) would be flown for the second time. Because of the preparation time required for this mission designed to orbit the TSS at the end of a 13-mile-long tether to test techniques for managing aircraft at great distances and to study the electrodynamic effects of moving a conductive tether through the Earth's magnetic field, the selection was made early. (NASA Release 94-142)
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)
An Air Force Titan 4 rocket was launched successfully from Cape Canaveral Air Station and deployed "in the desired orbit." The classified satellite was thought to have an electronic eavesdropping platform capable of tapping into military and civilian communications. (Reuters, Aug 27/94; W Post, Aug 28/94)
Turkey scheduled the launch of its first satellite aboard an Ariane-4 rocket from French Guyana. (B Sun, Jan 19/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
Retired Air Force Colonel Ken Munechika, former chief of Onizuka Air Force Base's Satellite Test Center, was designated the new chief of NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC). (Sunnyvale Sun, Jan 12/94)
On the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the first moonlanding mission, the Italian newspaper La Repubblica published an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. In it he complimented Italy for its good space knowhow, saying Italians were magicians in the area of space communication. He also mentioned ways in which Italy was cooperating with NASA such as the Italian astronaut who was to help complete the testing of the tethered satellite system and the Italian Space Agency's work with NASA on the Cassini Space Mission. He pointed out that above all NASA counted on Italy for the construction of logistic pressurization modules and that this construction would give Italian firms a technological capacity that would have an impact on all Italian industries. (La Repubblica, Oct 11/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced contract awards for two new "Smallsat" satellites to observe the Earth with unprecedented sensor technology. The awards went to two teams led by CTA of Rockville, Maryland, and TRW, Inc., of Redondo Beach, California. The teams were to build, launch, and operate the satellites--each no bigger than a console television set--for less than $60 million each. The satellites were to be developed, launched, and delivered on orbit in 24 months or less on a Pegasus launch vehicle. (NASA Release 94-94; AP, Jun 8/94; Reuters, Jun 8/94; NY Times, Jun 9/94; W Post, Jun 9/94; USA Today, Jun 9/94; WSJ, Jun 9/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; H Post, Jun 9/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94; W Post, Jun 14/94)
NASA announced the award of a supplemental agreement to Martin Marietta Astro Space of the Martin Marietta Corporation East Windsor, New Jersey. The agreement provided for two additional advanced meteorological satellite spacecraft through the Televisision Infrared Observation Satellite project contract at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-mm)
The Clinton Administration authorized NASA to be an advocate for satellites in the evolving National Information Infrastructure/Global Information Infrastructure (NII/GII), the so-called information superhighway. The Administration wanted to ensure that industry--satellite builders and operators and telecommunications users--was intimately involved in formulating satellites' role in the NII/GII. Industry in turn wanted NASA to provide research and development on "pre-competitive technologies." (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
An article highlighted the benefits satellite reporting could provide for various earthly activities. An example given was the way in which Frank Lamb, president of Eastern Oregon Farming Company and Cropix, Inc., who had a grant from NASA's Earth Observation Commercialization Applications Program, used satellite observations to check on the health of plants in his Oregon farm by determining the rate of photosynthesis. The images enabled a farmer to detect problems such as irrigation-equipment failure, drainage problems, and pest infestation. Satellite images were also used by the South Florida Water Management District to update its maps and identify illegal tampering of wetlands, as well as to create maps of Midwest flood areas for damage and rebuilding plans. (USA Today, Aug 9/94)
The French national space agency CNES proposed for government approval developing a series of small spacecraft to broaden science mission opportunities at lower cost. If approved in 1995, France would invite other European countries or the United States to participate. According to Pierre Contreras, head of the System Engineering Division at the CNES Toulouse Space Center, satellites weighing about 500 kilograms were contemplated. The first flight would be a radar altimeter spacecraft designed as a follow-on to the NASA/CNES TOPEX/Poseidon sea surface topography mission currently underway. The chairman of the European Space Agency's (ESA) Space Science Advisory Committee, Lodewijk Woltjer, said that all ESA members "like the idea of small missions because of their low costs, but for most of ESA's objectives small satellites are too small." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
A lengthy article on the Clinton Administration's science and technology policy dealt with these two fields and the President's goals in their regard. The government spent more than half of its research and development money on developing usable technologies. The remainder was divided almost evenly between applied research and basic research. However, the availability of funding was a serious problem. Funding increased significantly during the Cold War but scientific disasters such as the failure of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island electric power plant and the explosion of the Challenger Space Shuttle eroded public support and federal funding. The accomplishments of the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in consolidating the two weather satellite systems of the Defense Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration as well as the NSTC's initiative in coordinating space launch policy among NASA and the Defense, Commerce, and Transportation departments were commended. (Government Executive, Nov 94)
Orbital Sciences Corporation launched the Taurus rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, placing two military satellites into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 14/94; W Post, Mar 15/94)
The Hughes Network Systems telecommunication firm contracted with the Hawaiian corporation ITTI to install a high-speed satellite link dubbed "Teleport Asia" between the Eastern and Western hemispheres on the island of Oahu, with twin Earth stations facing toward Asia and North America. (W Times, Jan 19/94)
British astronomers reported in the journal Nature on finding new physical evidence of "ripples" in space, hot and cold spots confirming 1992 findings by NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) Satellite, that shed light on the origin of the universe. Rod Davies of the University of Manchester discussed studies done by radio telescope in the Canary Islands that revealed microwaves from when the universe was only 300,000 years old. Astrophysicist Joseph Silk of the University of California at Berkeley commented that the findings could offer the most intriguing possibility that the universe is open, i.e., would expand indefinitely. (W Post, Jan 27/94; USA Today, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
With aid from NASA, the University of Florida Medical School created a microcomputer, more than 14 years in the making, which enabled physicians to communicate via satellite or telephone. The computer held the latest information from 12 medical reference books and more than 1,000 medical journals and was updated quarterly. Both an electronic library and a record-keeping system were provided to doctors. System 2000 was originally designed to help ailing crew members on distant space stations diagnose their own illnesses. NASA's director of aerospace medicine and occupational health, Dr. Earl Ferguson, expected the use of telecommunications in health care delivery to "totally revolutionize the way we practice medicine." (Fla Today, Sep 11/94)
Dr. Robert Wingate of NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, as chairman of an investigation board appointed by Jeremiah Pearson, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, released a study of the cause of an anomaly on Shuttle Discovery--STS-51. During deployment of the ACTS communication satellite, commands for firing a single explosive cord caused the firing of both primary and backup cords, which ruptured a containment tube and released debris into the cargo bay. The study described the primary and contributing causes--a ten-year-old design flaw--and made recommendations for corrections. (NASA Note to Editors 94-8, USA Today, Jan 28/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
After 12 years of work, Orion Network Systems, a Rockville, Maryland, firm, launched its first satellite. Orion was the first company to apply in 1982 to the Federal Communications Commission to provide international satellite communications. Orion won FCC approval in 1987 and Intelsat approval in 1989 on condition that it not harm any existing Intelsat business. Orion formed a consortium, Orion Atlantic, which included British Aerospace, which built the satellite, and Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, which provided the Atlas rocket. (W Post, Nov 30/94)
NASA agreed to launch in January 1996 South Africa's first satellite, Sunsat, which was developed at Stellenbosch University near Cape Town. A four-member NASA team evaluated the Stellenbosch project and offered the university a free launch in return for minor additions of U.S. equipment. Stellenbosch project leader Garth Milne said the satellite would deliver high-resolution multispectral stereo images of the Earth and would carry amateur radio equipment that would allow children to talk to the satellite. NASA structural engineer Marisa Achee said NASA was keen to launch Sunsat because it could carry a U.S. Global Positioning System receiver and a laser reflector needed to monitor variations in the Earth's gravitational field. The university was scheduled to control the satellite during its four-year life. (Reuters, Jul 29/94)
The government announced that it would allow companies to market sophisticated spy satellite technology worldwide. U.S. firms could build and operate for-profit satellite systems powerful enough to take photographs from 22,300 miles above the Earth and show objects on the ground as small as one square yard. (NY Times, Mar 11/94; USA Today, Mar 11/94; W Post, Mar 11/94; WSJ, Mar 11/94)
The digital data representing the first direct image of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 slamming into Jupiter reached Earth from Galileo. The impact of the explosions was presumed to have created waves in the atmosphere, and these were being sought by the Infrared Telescope Facility that NASA operated atop Mauna Kea mountain in Hawaii. The explosions sent substantial amounts of helium hundreds of miles above the top of Jupiter, which was a surprise and which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Satellite detected. (NY Times, Aug 16/94)
NASA announced the members of the crew of the Space Shuttle mission for the fall of 1995 under the command of Brian Duffy. A Japanese National Space Development Agency specialist was included and one of the mission objectives was to retrieve a science satellite scheduled to be launched by a Japanese H-2 rocket in early 1995. The Shuttle would also retrieve another science satellite, the Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy (SPARTAN). In addition, two spacewalks would be conducted. (NASA Release 94-208)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
NASA announced that it would continue to study how the Earth's environment was changing and how human beings affected that change during the upcoming flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis. This, the third flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Also during the mission astronauts would deploy and retrieve a free-flying satellite designed to study the middle and lower thermospheres and would perform various experiments covering life sciences research and microgravity processing. The flight, commanded by Donald R. McMonagle, was scheduled for launch on November 3. (NASA Release 94-175)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
Former NASA astronaut and Space Shuttle commander Ronald J. Grabe assumed his new post as vice president of business development for the launch systems group of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC) in Sterling, Virginia. He explained that OSC's specialty was providing access to space for small satellites at reasonable cost. One of his priorities was to find new markets for OSC's Taurus and Pegasus rockets. OSC also was about to enter the communications field through its ORBCOMM satellite system. (W Post, May 23/94)
NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham at Kennedy Space Center said the tether launched by the Space Shuttle was working well. It could be used to move satellites around in different orbits in space. Originally about 12 miles long, atomic oxygen and tiny meteorites ate it so that it was now only about five miles long. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/94)
A study released by the Virginia-based Teal space consulting group said that since the space age began, 271 missions have failed or malfunctioned. Of the 271 missions, 108 were considered failures and of these, two-thirds or an estimated 71 were Soviet. The remaining 34 failures were American. The most failure-prone spacecraft over the period appeared to be the Soviet-made Cosmos satellite. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)
The crew of NASA's November Atlantis Shuttle mission were scheduled to test the feasibility of an unusual rendezvous procedure for the second docking with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. They would fly Atlantis on a "plus R bar" (the radius vector from the target's center of mass to the Earth's center) to rendezvous with and retrieve the Crista-Spas atmospheric research satellite on the ninth day of the planned 11-day mission. The new approach would save fuel and not require any braking. Crista-Spas was to be deployed from Atlantis's robot arm within about 20 hours of Atlantis's launch. (AvWk, Oct 17/94; SP News, Oct 24-30)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) authorized airlines to begin using military satellite signals for navigation. The military's Global Positioning System, consisting of 24 orbiting satellites, according to the airlines would save them millions of dollars by flying more efficient routes. It was unclear what the FAA would do with existing microwave landing systems. (WSJ, Feb 18/94; W Post, Feb 18/94; NY Times, Feb 18/94)
One of the results of the data produced by the U.S.-French TOPEX-Poseidon satellite, part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, was the mapping of ocean circulation, one of the least understood areas of climate research. Data had shown that the El Nino remnant wave was pushing the current northward off the coast of Japan, raising the temperature of the northwest Pacific. (W Post, Oct 3/94)
NASA announced the naming of Italian scientist Umberto Guidoni to the Columbia Space Shuttle mission in early 1996. He would be involved with experiments dealing with the Tethered Satellite System, with which he had previous experience. (NASA Release 94-169)
An article analyzed the role played by lasers in advancing atmospheric science. Reference was made to the end of the last Space Shuttle flight when NASA was gathering data simultaneously from different altitudes over the same spot on Earth with three laser systems--one on Discovery and two on research aircraft. A fourth, ground-based Lidar (light detection and ranging) at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, also gathered data concurrently. This combination should significantly advance technology toward the goal of a permanent, automated Lidar satellite. The article provided scientific details of the flights undertaken and Discovery's operation of Lite, the Lidar In-space Technology Experiment. (AvWk, Oct 3/94)
Officials at NASA, Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said mission designers were being discouraged from including Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) in future satellites. RTGs were plutonium-powered and were used most frequently on spacecraft traveling beyond Earth's orbit because solar panels became increasingly less efficient the farther they were from the sun. Scientists and engineers planning NASA's proposed Pluto Fast Flyby mission wanted to use an RTG, but thus far approval had been refused. The scientists were concerned that NASA was becoming anti-nuclear, but NASA officials and the White House denied there was a policy decision to end the use of RTGs. In late June, a Technology Challenge team headed by Dwight Duston, director of science and technology for the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, "unanimously recommended the use of an RTG without reservation" for the Pluto Fast Flyby. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94)
NASA announced that it had selected eight projects that could lead to new private sector applications of space-based and airborne sensing technologies. Named Earth Observations Commercial Applications (EOCAP) '94, the projects represented the fourth cycle in a continuing program designed to increase use of NASA-developed technology for gathering and analyzing valuable data about Earth and ocean resources through remote satellite or aircraft observations. (NASA Release 94-203)
NASA announced that the second mission of its Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS-2) was scheduled for launching from a U.S. Air Force Delta II rocket no sooner than March 9 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The project was designed to demonstrate an economical way of delivering smaller payloads, such as micro-satellites, to higher orbits. (NASA Release 94-35)
NASA announced that more than a decade after affecting climate on a global scale, residual signs of a powerful El Nino were still visible from space. Oceanographers using data from the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite were tracking the remnant wave of the 1982-83 El Nino as it moved across the Northwest Pacific Ocean, where some scientists theorized it might still be affecting weather in the region. TOPEX/Poseidon, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, used a radar altimeter to precisely measure sea-surface height. The study was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Launched August 10, 1992, the satellite had completed two years of its three-year prime mission. (NASA Release 94-162; W Post, Oct 3/94)
The matter of space science research--its cost and its usefulness--was discussed in a feature article. Such research developed more or less as an afterthought, but it had already proved valuable in such ways as making precise measurements of the thickness of clouds and dust to enable automated weather satellites. Assessing the legitimacy of the high costs involved was more difficult, but valuable scientific findings had resulted, such as changing ideas about how different levels of compression at the top and bottom of the lung affected the way the lung functioned and contradicting expectations about how the circulation of blood in the body worked. (Boston Globe, Sep 19/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) since 1987 had cooperated to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning System (FEWS). NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, were the principal data providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms. Using daily data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites, scientists measured the density of green vegetation every 10 days. When drought conditions were detected, an AID-FEWS team could begin to coordinate relief efforts, if needed. The same data also were used for locust control purposes. (Black Media News, Apr 94)
France's national space agency CNES launched a public relations campaign featuring its astronauts in order to improve strained relations between CNES and the inhabitants of French Guiana on South America's northeast coast, where the Ariane rocket series was launched. The Guiana space center gave France independent launch capacity for civilian and military satellites. (Reuters, Nov 19/94)
Charles Bigot, chairman of Arianespace, told a news conference that the company hoped to resume launches of Ariane missiles in two months' time. Following the failure of the December 1 launch, which sent an American PanAmsat-3 communications satellite to the bottom of the Atlantic, 21 corrective measures had been taken. French-based Arianespace had captured more that 60 percent of the world's satellite launch market and had orders to launch 37 satellites. (Reuters, Dec 22/94)
Dr. Edward Tagliaferri, a physicist and consultant for the Aerospace Corporation, an engineering firm in El Segundo, California, that helps the Air Force run its many satellite programs, was lead author of a report discussing declassified Air Force studies of meteors and their possible threat. The report is a chapter in a book edited by Dr. Tom Gehrels, a planetary astronomer at the University of Arizona, and published by the university. The potential threat is viewed in the light of occurrences such as the strike in Tunguska, Siberia, and the probable strike in Yucatan, Mexico. (NY Times, Jan 25/94)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)
The Italian Foreign Ministry announced that Italy and the United States would launch a spacecraft in October 1997 on a seven-year voyage to Saturn. The Cassini would leave a special probe, called Huygens, on the surface of Saturn's largest moon, Titan, to gather data on the atmosphere, magnetosphere, and chemical make-up of the rings of Saturn and the movements of its satellites. An agreement to conduct the mission, which was being developed by NASA and the Italian Space Agency, was signed by Italian Foreign Minister Antonio Martini and U.S. Ambassador to Italy, Reginald Bartholomew. (Reuters, Jul 21/94)
Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)
NASA scientist Michael Van Woert discussed plans for a satellite in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, which was to be a follow-on to the U.S./French topex/Poseidon then in orbit. The successor, to be launched in 1998, would be smaller and cost $200 million. However, NASA cannot find the $120 million for its share, which was to include building the spacecraft bus and integrating the instruments. The French space agency, CNES, offered to build the bus if NASA would help with integration and launch it, which should save the United States some $50 million. (AvWk, May 30/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the New York Medical College (NYMC) in Valhalla, New York, were using satellite remote sensing and computer technology to predict the risk of Lyme disease transmission. The NASA team, working with Dr. Durland Fish of NYMC and Westchester County Health Department investigators, found that the higher the proportion of vegetated residential area next to woods within a municipality, the higher the transmission risk. (NASA Release 94-123)
In a patent case, Hughes Aircraft Company won $114 million from the U.S. Government (represented by the Defense Department and NASA) as opposed to the $4.8 billion it sought. At issue were royalties due under a patent developed by former Hughes engineer Donald D. Williams in 1959 for a single rocket nozzle for satellites. (NY Times, Jun 18/94; P Inq, Jun 19/94; W Times, Jun 19/94; WSJ, Jun 20/94)
NASA announced the members of the mid-1995 Space Shuttle mission that was scheduled to carry a NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. The satellite was intended to provide for telecommunications needs essential to the success of Space Shuttle and low-Earth orbit spacecraft missions. The Space Shuttle was to be commanded by Terence T. Henricks. (NASA Release 94-141)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that Russia had launched the Kosmos-2290 military satellite from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. (W Times, Aug 30/94)
Systems Integration Group, TRW's Fairfax, Virginia-based subsidiary, was awarded a NASA contract for $173 million to manage a network of computerized ground stations receiving data from government satellites that observe the earth's environment and climate changes. (W Post, Jan 6/94)
Worldwide pollution was revealed among other things by the Measurement of Air Pollution by Satellite (MAPS) instrument, flown on Space Shuttle Endeavour, which showed atmospheric carbon monoxide levels. Not only can this pollution contribute to global warming but it also can make it more difficult for the atmosphere to cleanse itself. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
A Russian Military Space Forces official told Reuters that Russia planned a series of unmanned space launches to its orbiting Space Station Mir in May before a manned launch in June with a cosmonaut from Kazakhstan. The unmanned launches were to consist of a cargo spacecraft, a communications satellite in a joint program with the U.S. company Rimsat, and two military satellites. (Reuters, May 5/94)
NASA announced that a new satellite, the NOAA-J, a joint project of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to be launched on December 4 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The new satellite would circle the Earth every 102 minutes, passing over the North and South Poles on each orbit. The satellite would collect meteorological data and transmit them directly to users around the world to enhance local weather analysis and forecasting. (NASA Release 94-189)
Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth after making an additional orbit because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. In spite of its inability to release the Wake Shield Facility, that satellite was the site for growing high-grade semiconductor films while attached to Discovery. Discovery also conducted 12 experiments in Spacehab, a commercial laboratory, in the cargo bay. (NY Times, Feb 12/94; B Sun, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; AP, Feb 12/94)
Jean-Marc Artaud, program director for the Ariane-5 rocket for the French National Space Agency (CNES) in Guiana, discussed the launch that took place of a solid propellant booster that was part of the new generation rocket. The rocket was launched from a European Space Agency (ESA) center in the jungle of French Guiana on the northeast coast of South America in a test aimed at keeping the ESA in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the next century. (Reuters, Sep 30/94)
NASA announced that its Office of Space Communications, Headquarters, Washington, D.C., was initiating an opportunity for private industry to conduct experiments of future telecommunications technologies via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS). Called the Mobile Satcom TDRSS (MOST) Experiment Program, it was designed to enhance U.S. competitiveness in the global satellite telecommunications area. (NASA Release 94-43)
NASA announced the opening of a new, remote ground station in Tidbinbilla, Australia, called the Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO) Remote Terminal System. The station was to receive scientific data from the Compton GRO via a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite that was moved into position over the Indian Ocean. (NASA Release 94-42)
The Russian President made an edict in mid-November establishing the state's first experimental space center at Plesetsk. The edict divided the Plesetsk facility, with one part being retained by the strategic missile forces and the other transferred to Russia's military space forces without, however, increasing logistical support, staffing, or pay. In contrast to Baikonur, for which Russia annually paid Kazakhstan $116 million, the Plesetsk Space Center would give Russia its own launching site. From the Soviet era Plesetsk had nine launchpads and was the top secret site for launching more than half of all satellites. However, a critical state of electricity supply to industrial enterprises in Arkhangelsk Oblast had occurred, resulting from the payments crisis, which threatened a cut-off of electricity to Plesetsk and to Severodvinsk, where atomic submarines were built. (Izvestiya, Nov 17/94)
A solid-fuel booster for Ariane-5, the new rocket designed to keep Western Europe in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the 21st century, was tested successfully in the jungles of French Guiana, according to Jean-March Artaud, Ariane-5 program director for the CNES French national space agency in Guiana. (Reuters, Dec 16/94)
China's space agency said that the April 2 blast that killed one person and injured 20 would not delay the launching of three foreign communications satellites from the Xichang Satellite Launching Center in southwestern China. The three satellites were manufactured by Hughes Space and Communications Company for Hong Kong and Australian customers. (NY Times, Apr 27/94)
A German company set up a joint venture with China, called EurasSpace, to develop  state-of-the-art satellites. It expected to launch its first high-capacity data  transmission satellite, the Sinosat-1, in 1997 for the People's Bank of China. The satellite would be assembled and tested in China and boosted into orbit by a Chinese Long March rocket. (UP, Sep 21/94)
NASA unveiled its new Mission Control center in Houston with a flight simulation that pretended to rendezvous a Space Shuttle with a satellite. The demonstration went well and provided an opportunity to identify additional equipment needed, such as more display facility. The new center should be directing the Shuttle in orbit by the summer of 1995. (Federal Computer Week, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 21/94)
Ecologists Christopher Potter and Steven Klooster of NASA's Ames Research Center processed ten years of data to construct a map charting one month's exchange of the heat-trapping gas carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and the Earth's land plants and soils. This is a key process in determining the extent to which the release of this gas through burning fossil fuels and land-use changes might cause global climate warming, and this is the first time satellite data have been combined with computer simulation of soil processes. A 1990 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change gave estimates in billions of tons of carbon per year to try to answer the question of where missing amounts of extra human-released carbon dioxide go. Princeton University geochemist Jorge L. Sarmiento hypothesized a terrestrial sink, while Harvard University geochemist Steven Wofsy agreed with Potter that simulation also needed detailed studies of plant-soil processes. (CSM, Jan 19/94)
An Air Force Titan 4, the most powerful U.S. unmanned rocket, boosted a $1 billion military communications satellite (Milstar) into space. The satellite formed the initial link in a controversial $17.3 billion data relay network designed to provide secure communications during a nuclear conflict. (W Post, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94)
President Clinton, who was in Houston, spoke to the Discovery astronauts. Mission Control earlier had instructed them to abandon efforts to launch the Wake Shield Facility satellite. (UP, Feb 7/94; W Times, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 8/94; LA Times, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94)
Observations from Space Shuttles and other vehicles revealed a clearly visible line stretching for hundreds of miles across the Pacific Ocean. The dark green line, from one to several miles wide, was attributed by scientists to an abundance of microscopic plants that thrived where cold, nutrient-rich water from polar seas met warm equatorial currents. New observations of the interaction between these two currents were made from the NOAA-11 weather satellite and NASA's P-3 research aircraft flying 500 feet above the water. (NY Times, Oct 25/94; AP, Oct 31/94)
Shuttle Discovery launched three pairs of stainless steel spheres as part of a study of space debris in which ground stations were to track junk that could pose a collision hazard for spacecraft. On February 8 it left a small German satellite, Bremsat, in orbit to conduct six science experiments. (Reuters, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 10/94; AP, Feb 10/94)
