to jam. The U.S.- Italian satellite had cost US$443 million to produce. The satellite, extended on
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely after a successful nine-day mission. The Shuttle crew accomplished its primary task of capturing a Japanese satellite. The early-morning landing, in which the Shuttle returned to Earth under a shroud of darkness, was a rare occurrence.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks,” 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, “Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal,” news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour’s crew used the spacecraft’s 50-foot (15-meter) robotic arm to snare NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology Flyer (OAST-Flyer) satellite. The OAST- Flyer, valued at US$10 million, weighed 2,600 pounds (1,200 kilograms).(Associated Press, “Shuttle’s Astronauts Grab a 4-Ton Japanese Science Satellite from Its Orbit,” 17 January 1996; Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Dodges Military Satellite on Way To Retrieve Japanese Craft,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 1996; Michael Cabbage, “Satellite Stowed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1996.)
NASA formed an independent panel to review the failure of the tethered satellite experiment and the loss of the satellite. NASA selected Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of Dryden Flight Research Center, to chair the panel. The formation of such an investigative body in the wake of a costly loss conformed to standard practice under NASA’s Space Flight Operations Contingency Plan. In a NASA press release announcing the panel’s formation, Szalai stated, “given the public investment in the tethered satellite, it is important that we find out what went wrong.”(NASA, “NASA To Form Independent Review Panel,” news release 96-39, 26 February 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission,” 10 March 1996.)
NASA revealed that the joint U.S.-Italian team investigating the failure of the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS) had determined that the tether experiment conducted aboard Mission STS- 75 had revealed numerous fundamental flaws in space physics and plasma theories. The TSS experiment had ended with the tether breaking before reaching its full 13-mile (21-kilometer) length. The scientists concluded that a number of theoretical models, widely accepted for as long as 30 years, were incorrect and in need of revision. According to Noble Stone, a NASA scientist at MSFC, the team’s most significant finding was that tether current flows between the satellite and the orbiter were three times greater than theoretical models had predicted. Because the amount of power generated was directly proportionate to the current, the harnessed energy had the potential to furnish thrust for rebooting a space station, satellite, or shuttle in a decaying orbit. Stone suggested that tether systems might some day supplement solar arrays as sources of power for long-term space platforms.(NASA, “Early Findings from Tethered Satellite Mission Point to Revamping of Space Physics Theories,” news release 96-106, 23 May 1996; NASA Marshall Space Flight Center “Fall Science Meeting Highlights Tether Satellite Results,” http://spacescience.spaceref.com/newhome/headlines/ast15oct96_1.htm (accessed 27 October 2008).)
Shuttle Endeavour made a smooth sunrise landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bringing to its close a fruitful 10-day research mission. The Shuttle crew celebrated their record achievement of 21 hours flying in close proximity to the satellites they had released. NASA planned to move Endeavour to Palmdale, California, for refurbishing.(Stefanie Asin, “Welcome Back, Endeavour, Shuttle Lands at Kennedy Space Center After 10-Day Mission,” Houston Chronicle, 30 May 1996.)
Endeavour’s crew successfully tested a giant inflatable antenna, deploying the structure and gathering data during its orbit. Project Manager Steven Bard, a NASA scientist at JPL, called the successful test a giant step toward developing lightweight, cost-effective equipment for space research. The silver, inflatable antenna, about the size of a tennis court, cost US$14 million to develop. The Shuttle astronauts used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to launch the small satellite carrying the antenna. The crew situated Endeavour about 400 feet (122 meters) immediately above the antenna, to observe its behavior after deployment, but when the antenna made some unexpected tumbling rotations, the astronauts moved the Shuttle to a safer distance. After completing the test, the astronauts set off a series of small explosions to cut loose the antenna. Before the mission began, NASA officials had determined that deflating and recapturing the antenna would be too risky and costly to attempt.(William Harwood, “Inflatable Antenna Passes Test,” Washington Post, 21 May 1996; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Deploys Giant Antenna,” Washington Times, 21 May 1996.)
NASA announced that engineers from NASA and Lockheed Martin had completed successful tests on a prototype, lightweight, external fuel tank for the Shuttle. The tests measured the tank’s strength and reliability under conditions exceeding recommended flight certification. NASA’s External Tank Project Manager Parker V. Counts reported that the tests had demonstrated that the unique composition of the very lightweight tanks did not reduce their strength. NASA had awarded Lockheed Martin the contract to produce the lighter tanks, to enable the Shuttle to carry cargo to the high inclination orbit where the International Space Station (ISS) would reside. To build the tanks, NASA had used aluminum lithium, a material both lighter and stronger than the metal alloy used in previous tank construction. NASA had designed the tanks to weigh 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) less than the models used on earlier Shuttles.(NASA, “Shuttle Super Lightweight Fuel Tank Completes Tests,” news release 96-186, 11 September 1996. 129 NASA, “First Global Image of Total Atmospheric Ozone Obtained from NASA Instrument Aboard Japanese Satellite,” news release 96-188, 16 September 1996.)
NASA announced the recipients of the 1996 Software of the Year Award, honoring those individuals who had created software enhancing NASA’s mission and the U.S. aerospace industry. Linked Windows Interactive Data System, developed by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the Tetrahedral Unstructured Software System, developed by LARC, won the 1996 awards. The former system allowed scientists to examine geophysical and climatological data gathered from satellites, and the latter aided researchers in studying problems with “spacecraft, rotorcraft, automotive, turbomachinery, and medical analysis and design.”(NASA, “NASA Announces 1996 Software of the Year Award Recipients,” news release, 9 July 1996.)
The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 2A rocket, a satellite aimed at serving the burgeoning European television market. The satellite Hot Bird 2 cost US$100 million to develop and was powerful enough to beam television images throughout Europe and the Middle East. Eutelsat led a consortium of co-owner companies from the 45 different countries that co-own the satellite. Eutelsat assumed responsibility for operating Hot Bird 2, calling it “the most powerful commercial satellite launched to date.”(Todd Halverson, “Atlas Sends $100 Million Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 1996.)
NASA and the Italian Space Agency released the investigative report on the failed tethered satellite system (TSS) experiment conducted during Shuttle Columbia’s Mission STS-75 in February 1996. The 358-page report, produced by a board established to investigate the incident, concluded that a breach in the layer of insulation surrounding the tether conductor, possibly the result of contact with debris, led to the failure. According to the report, the breach in insulation allowed an electrical current to jump from a copper wire in the tether to an electrical ground, causing the breakage: “the tether failed as a result of arcing and burning of the tether, leading to a tensile failure after a significant portion of the tether had burned away.” The board noted that NASA scientists had already announced findings regarding tether current and voltage measurements, concluding that the unexpected breakage of Columbia’s tethered satellite did not indicate any fundamental problem with the concept of the TSS. Furthermore, the board recommended that during future experiments, scientists should take greater precautions to ensure that neither debris nor high-voltage arcing compromised the tether’s strength.(NASA, “Tethered Satellite Investigation Report Released,” news release 96-112, 4 June 1996; Reuters, “Damaged Insulation Ruined Test in Space,” 5 June 1996; Associated Press, “Study Finds Metal Debris Punctured Tether Pulled by Satellite,” 5 June 1996.)
NASA successfully launched its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, via an Orbital Sciences Pegasus XL launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A jet flying roughly 7 miles above the California coast released the rocket that was carrying the satellite, placing the TOMS-EP in a successful orbit. The McMurdo Sound Tracking Station in Antarctica acquired the satellite almost immediately and determined that the spacecraft was functioning properly. After it reached a circular orbit, the TOMS-EP was ready to conduct its scientific mission.(NASA, “Pegasus/TOMS Launch Successful from Vandenberg AFB,” news release, 2 July 1996; Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 July 1996.)
NASA spacecraft managers reported the failure of two scientific satellites. NASA had designed the Scientific Applications Satellite-B (SAC-B), launched three days earlier from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility, to survey solar flares and gamma-ray bursts. The project was a cooperative effort between NASA and Argentina. NASA scientists had intended the second satellite, HETE (High Energy Transient Experiment), to remain dormant until it detected sunlight, at which time it would deploy, transmitting signals. Scientists doubted this would ever occur, because the satellite had fallen into a tumbling pattern. Officials hypothesized that the satellites had not deployed properly and, therefore, had orbited uselessly, lacking electrical power. NASA valued both satellites at more than US$20 million. The launch failure was the third miscue in two years for the Pegasus rocket program. The Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, developed and ran the program.(John Mintz, “Orbital Sciences Fails in Another Launch,” Washington Post, 5 November 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Reports Failure of Scientific Satellites,” 7 November 1996; NASA, “SAC-B/HETE Spacecraft No Longer Operational,” news release 96-231, 7 November 1996.)
other spacecraft. NASA planned to fly the satellite for 22 hours. To retrieve the satellite, the
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavour’s launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavour’s flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay,” Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, “Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs,” 16 January 1996.)
Scientists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) received the first images from the United States’ Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), as the instrument orbited aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS). GSFC scientists noted the superior quality of the initial images. ADEOS continued a long line of satellites launched to aid scientists in observing total levels of ozone and volcanic sulfur dioxide. Because of data obtained from the TOMS instruments deployed by NASA, millions of Americans became aware of the ozone hole and began to use ozone as a household word. The latest TOMS instrument joined a series of instruments aboard ADEOS, including the Improved Limb Atmospheric Sounder, the Interferometric Monitor for Greenhouse Gases, and the Retroreflector in Space.
mission’s priorities was to place in flight the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS), which
crew intended to retract the tether until the satellite was about 2 miles (3 kilometers) from the
Arianespace, the commercial arm of the European Space Agency, suffered a major setback in its bid to maintain control of the satellite-launching market in the face of competition from U.S. companies. Only seconds after the launch of Ariane 5, a huge rocket intended to launch satellites, Arianespace had to blow up the rocket when it veered severely off course. Arianespace had spent 10 years and more than US$7 billion to develop the 674-foot (205-meter), 821-ton (750,000- kilogram or 750-tonne) vehicle. Also lost in the explosion were satellites valued at more than US$500 million. Arianespace had projected a launch reliability of 98.5 percent for the rocket, considering failure so unlikely that the company had guaranteed a free launch to customers if the launch failed. A spokesperson for Arianespace acknowledged the disappointment of the failed test, but promised that the company would continue as the world’s leader in launching satellites. Aerospace industry analysts predicted that U.S. companies such as Lockheed Martin would likely gain an increased foothold in the market because of the European company’s misfortune.(Kathleen Day, “Losing a Rocket and a Satellite Edge?” Washington Post, 5 June 1996; Craig Whitney, “Costly Failure: Space Launch Is Aborted,” New York Times, 5 June 1996.)
Scientists at the University of Texas at Dallas revealed their discovery of an ancient river channel buried beneath the Sahara Desert in Africa, publishing their findings in Science magazine. The discovery offered an answer to a question that had long perplexed the scientific community, why does the Nile River, as it flows through the world’s largest desert (in Sudan) make a huge, looping bend in its course? The Nile generally flows toward the north, except at the Great Bend’s turning, where the river flows toward the southwest for more than 200 miles (320 kilometers). After this detour, the Nile resumes its course toward the Mediterranean Sea. The researchers had used the images taken by the Spaceborne Imaging Radar C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR), which had flown with Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59 in 1994, to study the ancient structures in the Precambrian rock, guiding the river’s course. The SIR-C/X-SAR radar waves had penetrated the sand to reveal unseen structures, not visible without the satellite images. Diane L. Evans, SIR-C Project Manager at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), called the discovery “one of the most exciting discoveries from the SIRC/XSAR mission to date.” JPL was managing the program as a part of NASA’s Mission to Planet Earth initiative.(Robert J. Stern and Mohamed Gamal, “The Origin of the Great Bend of the Nile from SIR-C/X-SAR Imagery,” Science 274, no. 5293 (6 December 1996): 1696−1698; NASA, “Space Radar Unearths Secrets of the Ancient Nile,” news release 96-251, 6 December 1996.)
More than 200 experts met in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to plan the design and implementation of a new fleet of radar satellites. The group emphasized the recent geological discoveries made with data from radar satellites, especially from those satellites tracking the movements and shifts in Earth’s plates that have been impossible to track until recently. The U.S. Geological Survey and NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory sponsored the event. Geophysicist Howard A. Zebker described the satellites as a “great leap forward. It’s like suddenly having [x]-rays to see inside a body.”(William J. Broad, “Satellite Radar Unveils Subtle, Slow Wrinkling of the Planet’s Surface,” New York Times, 3 September 1996.)
NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planet’s surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, “U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars,” New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
With the push of a button at GSFC, NASA discontinued use of the International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite, which had been in orbit since 1978. When NASA sent a signal to the satellite to empty its fuel, the satellite effectively went to sleep, spinning off into space. Although NASA had originally designed the satellite to spend only three years in space, scientists continued to use it to gather data far beyond the spacecraft’s anticipated lifespan. NASA ended control of the satellite to save between US$1 and US$2 million annually in operating costs. GSFC had operated the satellite as part of a three-way agreement with the European Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom. More than 2,000 researchers from around the world had made observations from the satellite, research that had directly led to the publication of more than 3,200 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals.
The Communist Party of China acknowledged for the first time that a failed satellite launch occurring on 15 February 1996 had killed six people and injured 57 others. The Long March 3B rocket had exploded, destroying the 15 Intelsat satellite and damaging 80 homes. The secretive government of the People’s Republic of China had denied the major accident, announcing simply that a setback had occurred. However, foreign news sources had captured video footage of the launch rocket as it careened out of control and exploded in a highly populated area. The Chinese government ended the news blackout, which had prevented its own citizens from learning of the disaster, stating China’s intention to delay future launch plans.(Reuters, “China: Fiery Launch Killed 6, Injured 57,” 4 March 1996.)
Russia launched a satellite carrying two monkeys and a collection of insects, snails, and plants. The satellite Bion-11 launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome, 600 kilometers (373 miles) north of Moscow. The Russian Space Agency planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the animal “crew.”(Reuters, “Russia Launches Satellite with Monkeys, Insects,” 24 December 1996.)
NASA announced that the tethered satellite experiment had failed. The 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, attaching the 0.5-ton (450-kilogram or 0.45-tonne) satellite to Shuttle Columbia, broke unexpectedly just as the tether had nearly reached its full extension. Before the tether broke, the experiment to use an orbiting satellite to produce electricity had been proceeding smoothly. The astronauts had been in the process of extending the satellite from the Space Shuttle for more than 5 hours, when they noted a decrease in tension and realized that the tether and satellite had broken away. NASA Commander Andrew M. Allen responded to the break immediately, directing the Shuttle away from the satellite to prevent a collision. However, the satellite never came close to the Shuttle; it was more than 18 miles (29 kilometers) away only a few minutes after breaking free. NASA officials could not immediately identify the cause of the break. The astronauts aboard the Shuttle managed to record images of the satellite trailing away from the Shuttle. This footage, a black and white rendering of the tether disappearing into space, reached Flight Command Center in Houston, Texas, shortly after the event. “Those are some tether dynamics we did not want to see,” stated one Mission Control operative. NASA dismissed the idea of attempting to retrieve the satellite, explaining that, although it was technically possible, such a mission would be too dangerous and too costly in consumption of fuel.(NASA, “STS-75 Mission Control Status Report No. 10,” 26 February 1996; Steve Marshall, “Satellite Tether Snaps; Shuttle Safe,” USA Today, 26 February 1996; William Harwood, “Science Satellite Is Lost as Shuttle Tether Breaks,” Washington Post, 26 February 1996.)
