EarthWatch Inc. of Longmont, Colorado, launched into orbit Early Bird 1, the first private spy satellite. The launch, which took place in Russia, ended government domination of space spying. According to EarthWatch, Early Bird 1 had the capability to track objects on Earth as small as 10-feet (3-meters) long. The company also reported that “customers were lining up to buy images.” Customers for Early Bird 1 services included public interest groups, planning to track military movement and arms control measures, and foreign governments, without the resources to launch their own satellites. Because Early Bird 1 was an American-produced satellite, the U.S. federal government retained the right to switch it off during wartime, as well as the right to filter images sold to foreign customers. Experts predicted that the security and privacy questions surrounding the first private spy satellite would take years to sort out. However, they also surmised that Early Bird 1 was only the first in the wave of satellites that private industry would launch during the coming decade.(William J. Broad, “First Civilian Spy Satellite Soars into Space, Launched in Russia by a U.S. Company,” New York Times, 25 December 1997; Reuters, “1st Civilian Spy Satellite Launched in Russia,” 26 December 1997.)
NASA announced that it would join an international consortium of space agencies to support the launch of a Japanese satellite designed to create the largest astronomical instrument ever. The launch of the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) Space Observatory would create a radio telescope more than twice the diameter of the Earth, giving astronomers their sharpest view yet of the universe. Astronomers praised the Japanese-led launch as a significant advance for space research. VLBI satellites would allow radio astronomers to link together widely separated radio telescopes, so that they would function as a single instrument with extraordinarily sharp resolving power. The farther apart the telescopes, the greater would be the image’s resolution. NASA equated the power of the new tool with the ability to see a grain of rice in Tokyo from Los Angeles. Scientists hoped that the new tool would allow for further exploration of active galaxies with massive black holes. Researchers also hoped that the instrument would foster understanding of the mysterious quasars, which pour out tremendous amounts of energy and host or create black holes. Creating the enormous VLBI network involved 40 radio telescopes from 15 nations. Japan’s Institute of Space and Astronautical Science led the international consortium of science agencies, including NASA’s JPL, the U.S. National Science Foundation’s National Radio Astronomy Observatory, the Canadian Space Agency, the Australia Telescope National Facility, the European VLBI Network, and Europe’s Joint Institute for VLBI.(NASA, “Launch Will Create a Radio Telescope Larger than Earth,” news release 97-24, 7 February 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 25.)
For the first time, NASA turned over control of a satellite project to a group of non-NASA scientists, placing the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) under the control of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at Harvard University. Harvard scientists had designed and built the satellite, but in previous NASA-university collaborations, NASA had always maintained control over implementation projects that it had funded. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA hoped the move would embolden non-NASA scientists: “What we wanted to do is get the scientists closer to their spacecraft and close to their sources of data.” NASA intended the AXAF, which had cost US$1.4 billion to develop, to study black holes and collisions between stars and galaxies.(Jules Crittenden, “X-ray Tour of the Universe To Begin in Cambridge Lab,” Boston Herald, 13 September 1997; Peter J. Howe, “Putting the Universe into Focus,” Boston Globe, 13 September 1997.)
NASA announced the establishment of a National Microgravity Center, formed in conjunction with Case Western Reserve University and the Universities Space Research Association. NASA selected Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, to lead its research efforts in the project. Plans for the nation’s first center dedicated exclusively to microgravity research focused on five areas: 1) research and technology development; 2) science program outreach and development; 3) scientific support; 4) technology transfer to industry; and 5) public education initiatives. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the endeavor, stating, “The National Center for Microgravity Research on Fluids and Combustion represents a commitment to our goal to strengthen the partnership between NASA and our nation’s research community in universities and industry so that together we can increase the scientific and economic payoffs from NASA’s Microgravity Science Program.” NASA selected Simon Ostrach, a distinguished professor of engineering at Case Western University, as Director of the National Microgravity Center. As Director, Ostrach would be responsible for managing the Center’s staff of more than 30 people and for shaping an agenda of research that would take advantage of opportunities aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Establishes New National Microgravity Center,” news release 97-40, 13 March 1997. 225 Reuters, “Japan Unveils Experimental Docking Satellites,” 20 March 1997.)
At a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, scientists unveiled evidence of another cause, besides the Sun, of “killer electrons,” which travel at high velocity. When electrons travel from Jupiter’s massive magnetic field, their speed approaches the speed of light. Showers of high- velocity electrons cause many problems, including blackouts on Earth and damage to orbiting satellites and global positioning systems. Scientists had previously been unable to determine the source of the electrons causing the damage. Presenting the new information on the phenomenon of high-velocity electrons, the researchers declared that the ability to forecast “space weather,” including the patterns of high-velocity electrons, would become increasingly important during the coming age of the ISS.(Tim Friend, “Mystery Solved: Jupiter Is Source of Killer Electrons,” USA Today, 9 December 1997.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) unveiled its key contribution to the ISS, two satellites named after stars⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi, which Japan planned to launch aboard an H-2 rocket. The satellites would make it easier to perform unpiloted docking experiments on the ISS. Japan’s interest in robotic space research fueled the proposal, which complemented NASDA’s plan to build an unpiloted space shuttle to ferry Japan’s experiments to the ISS.
Lockheed Martin Corporation announced a joint satellite venture with the Moscow-based Intersputnik consortium. Financial analysts estimated the pact could produce more than US$1.5 billion in annual revenue, capitalizing on the increasing demand for satellite transmission services for telecommunication signaling. The agreement, which cemented ties between the U.S. corporation and Russian space interests, combined Lockheed’s capital resources with Intersputnik’s rights to prime satellite positions. Lockheed assumed responsibility for constructing and launching the satellites, whereas Intersputnik took the lead in marketing and sales. The Intersputnik group represented Russia and 21 other nations. The newly formed Lockheed Martin Intersputnik Ltd. Company planned to focus on providing services to South Asia and Eastern Europe⎯burgeoning markets with great potential for technological and economic growth.(Jeff Cole, “Lockheed To Unveil Intersputnik Satellite Venture,” Wall Street Journal, 2 June 1997; Associated Press, “Lockheed Planning Russia Venture,” 2 June 1997; Greg Schneider, “Lockheed To Link Ex-Soviet Markets,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 3 June 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Earth on Mission STS-87 with great fanfare, executing an unusual 180° roll 6 minutes into the 81⁄2-minute flight, a maneuver planned to put the Shuttle in radio contact with communication satellites. The launch itself took place at the “exact moment on the exact day as planned” for the sixth consecutive mission. The six-person crew included Takao Doi, a Japanese astronaut who planned to make his country’s first spacewalk; Kalpana Chawla, the first Indian-born woman to travel into space; Leonid K. Kadenyuk, the first Ukrainian to fly on a U.S. Shuttle; and U.S. astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Steven W. Lindsey, and Winston E. Scott. The crew planned to conduct a spacewalk to test instruments and procedures for the ISS. The Shuttle also carried the U.S. Microgravity Payload-4, which the astronauts planned to use to test the responses to conditions in space of a variety of materials and liquids.(NASA, “Solar and Microgravity Research Highlight Final Shuttle Mission of 1997,” news release J97037, November 1997; William Harwood, “Columbia Corkscrews into Orbit,” Washington Post, 20 November 1997; Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Blasts Off with Multinational Crew,” 19 November 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Executes Flip on Its Way into Orbit,” 16 November 1997.)
In the first study to observe directly a change in the growth cycles of a large swath of the Northern Hemisphere, scientists reported that spring was arriving a full week earlier in the Earth’s coldest regions than only a decade earlier. The report contributed to growing concern over the prospect of global warming. Using images obtained from NOAA satellites, a team of five scientists from Boston University demonstrated that plants budding in early spring had used 10 percent more carbon than previously, indicating the spring’s earlier onset. The scientific community reacted to the report with interest, although most scientists cautioned that understanding climate change would be a long and difficult process.(Joby Warrick, “Spring Sprouting Earlier than a Decade Ago,” Washington Post, 17 April 1997.)
NASA announced its plan to compensate for the failure of Japan’s Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS) with NASA’s weather instruments aboard, admitting that the loss of the spacecraft was “a real blow to NASA’s science program.” Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) had declared the ADEOS lost on 30 June 1997. NASA scientists had been using the satellite to gather data about weather patterns and climate change. NASA resolutely pledged to continue working with NASDA despite the setback, highlighting plans to send up a second scatterometer aboard ADEOS II in 1999. Michael B. Mann, Deputy Associate Administrator of the Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise, qualified the failure saying, “The collaboration between NASDA and NASA on this mission has been outstanding . . . space operations is a risky business; those of us involved in the business strive to limit the risk but sometimes mishaps do occur.”(NASA, “NASA’s Earth Science Program Adjusts to Loss of Data from Japanese ADEOS Satellite,” news release 97-149, 2 July 1997.)
The international scientific community observed the 40th anniversary of Sputnik’s successful launch. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union had sent into orbit Sputnik I, a small sphere-shaped satellite, setting off a space race that continued throughout the Cold War. Although the United States had initially responded to the Soviet Union’s achievement with fear and apprehension, NASA commemorated the event 40 years later with a celebratory symposium. The United States had launched NASA itself less than one year after the USSR’s Sputnik success, partly because of the American public’s distress over the Soviets beating the United States into space. The son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, Sergei N. Khrushchev, a prominent professor of International Studies at Brown University in Rhode Island, spoke at NASA’s Sputnik symposium. With the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had unveiled to the world’s scientists many of the developmental plans of the Sputnik program. However, the end of communism had also precipitated enormous budget shortfalls for the Russian Space Agency. Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev took the opportunity of Sputnik’s widely celebrated anniversary to complain publicly that Russia owed more than US$400 million in rent for Baikonur Cosmodrome⎯the site of Sputnik’s launch and of ongoing Russian space activity. When the Soviet confederation broke up, Russia had agreed to pay US$100 million annually for the right to continue using the launch facilities in Kazakhstan.(NASA, “Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite,” news release N97-64, 5 September 1997; Associated Press, “Plea for Rent Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 1997.)
NASA announced the selection of four industry partners to study and develop a new Earth- imaging radar system. The proposed LightSAR system would use advanced technologies to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of radar-based satellites, which gather scientific data and provide commercial remote sensing. Project Manager Steven Bard of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pointed out the unique team approach planned for the project. NASA intended to work with industry partners from the start, to assess the potential commercial market for LightSAR products and services and to share the cost of developing the expensive new technology with private companies. The four primary contractors selected were DBA Systems Inc., Lockheed Martin Astronautics, Research and Development Laboratories, and Vexcel Corporation.(NASA, “Teams Selected for Studies of Potential Partnership with NASA To Develop New Earth Imaging Radar System,” news release 97-35, 6 March 1997.)
NASA announced that Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space Company had won the contract to develop and deliver solar-imaging instruments for U.S. weather satellites. The US$54 million contract provided funding for the creation of a model instrument and two flight instruments. Scientists believed that the solar x-ray images captured by the instrument would improve the ability of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Air Force to forecast special weather events. The proposed imager also had applications for civilian companies dependent upon predicting weather patterns.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Selected To Build Solar X-ray Imaging,” news release C97-g, 18 June 1997; Grant Jerding, “NASA Brings Its X-ray Vision to the Universe,” USA Today, 17 June 1997.)
Data gathered by the U.S.-French satellite TOPEX/Poseidon confirmed theories that a “full- blown El Niño condition” existed in the Pacific. Scientists believe that an El Niño forms when steady, westward-blowing trade winds weaken or reverse direction, altering typical, atmospheric jet-stream patterns around the world. TOPEX/Poseidon measured sea-surface heights and atmospheric water vapor to confirm the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s earlier prediction. Based on previous El Niño events, scientists predicted heavy rainfall for the western United States, mild winters in the east, and extreme droughts in Australia, Africa, and Indonesia.(NASA, “Independent NASA Satellite Measurements Confirm El Niño Is Back and Strong,” news release 97-200, 15 September 1997.)
U.S. Senator D. Robert “Bob” Graham (D-FL) announced a plan to lease room aboard NASA Space Shuttles and the ISS to private entities, to offset the costs of space exploration. Graham announced his plan during a news conference at a new Cape Canaveral, Florida, air station dedicated to commercial launches. Congress had banned the use of the Shuttle for commercial purposes after the Challenger accident. Some space experts believed that Graham’s plan would take advantage of a strong commercial market for the retrieval of satellites from space. Graham’s plan joined a list of other initiatives of the mid-1990s, designed to merge government and private space interests to ease costs for the federal government.(Seth Borenstein, “Graham: Let’s Make Money in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 December 1997.)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force Space Command announced an agreement to collaborate on several projects of mutual interest. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained that the agreement was part of NASA’s ongoing mission to become a more efficient and cost-effective agency, and that sharing information would lead to “greater efficiencies in our respective missions.” Goldin and U.S. Air Force Space Commander General Howell M. Estes III signed the pact, establishing seven teams to explore areas of potential cooperation. The areas of research included the feasibility of launching defense satellites from the Shuttle; the use of the Shuttle for U.S. Air Force technology payloads; and development of a plan to meet the dual space needs of NASA and the U.S. Air Force. The two agencies also planned to examine ways they might share their common infrastructure and facilities.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Space Command Announce Cooperative Efforts,” news release 97-68, 16 April 1997.)
Following on the heels of Mars Pathfinder’s successful mission to map the surface of Mars, two researchers used sonar information and satellite images to create a highly detailed map of the global ocean floor, another largely unexplored area. David T. Sandwell of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Walter H. F. Smith of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration improved by 30 times the precision of the world’s most exact ocean maps. Their new map, revealing ridges and canyons never before delineated, helped explain ocean currents and tides across the world. The new mapping technology interested oil companies, looking for clues to the location of fossil fuel deposits, and fishermen seeking likely habitats of fish.(Robert Lee Hotz, “Map Dramatically Deepens Learning About Sea Floor,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earth’s ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASA’s trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, “one word for our mission would be diversity.” With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, “August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch,” news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study,” USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, “Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
The Pentagon announced that it had successfully tested its Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser (MIRACL), at White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The laser, constructed under President Ronald Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative, generated a beam that traveled more than 260 miles (418 kilometers) from Earth, hitting an orbiting satellite. According to Pentagon representative U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Robert Potter, if turned to its highest setting, MIRACL would have destroyed the satellite target. The test, which took place two years after the expiration of a 1985 congressional ban on tests of this type, was the first time the United States had tested a laser aimed at an orbiting satellite. Representatives of defense-related industries and scientists around the world debated the acceptability of such a test and the ethics of deploying the instrument. However, whether or not the test was justifiable, the successful hit had demonstrated the vulnerability of satellites to Earth-based weapons.(Associated Press, “Laser Test-Fired into Space Strikes Orbiting U.S. Satellite,” 21 October 1997.)
The unpiloted cargo spacecraft Progress M-33 failed in its planned docking with the Mir space station, forcing Russian space officials to decide whether to allow the cargo craft to burn up in the atmosphere or to try again to connect with Mir. The docking of Progress M-33, which only had some surplus fuel aboard, was not of critical importance to Mir, but Russian Space Agency scientists had planned to use the craft’s docked mass to adjust the trajectory of Mir. News of the failure of the Progress’s docking tempered Russia’s celebration of its first satellite launch from a new cosmodrome in Svobody, occurring on the same day. On 6 March, the saga ended, when Russian officials decided to let the Progress M-33 drift off to burn up in the atmosphere.(Reuters, “Russia May Try New Space Docking or Let Craft Burn,” 5 March 1997; Reuters, “Russian Space Launch Marred by Failed Docking,” 4 March 1996; Reuters, “Russia To Scrap Spacecraft after Docking Snag” 6 March 1997.)
A Russian Zenit-2 rocket carrying a military satellite exploded moments after taking off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to Russian space officials, the failure occurred 38 seconds after liftoff, when an engine inexplicably shut off. The Russian Space Agency suspended all further launches until an investigation could determine what had caused the explosion. NASA believed that the destroyed satellite was a spy satellite intended to replace in orbit one of Russia’s many outdated satellites. Russia had not insured the satellite, valued at US$17 million.(Richard C. Paddock, “Russian Rocket Bearing Military Satellite Fails,” Los Angeles Times, 21 May; Associated Press, “Russian Booster Fails, Explodes During Satellite Launch,” 20 May 1997.)
Two members of Columbia’s crew, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott and Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, conducted a spacewalk, successfully recapturing the unresponsive Spartan satellite released on 21 November. After the 3,000-pound (1,400-kilogram) satellite had failed to turn toward the Sun, Columbia’s robotic arm had bumped it away from the Shuttle. NASA officials had cancelled the mission’s originally planned spacewalk to rescue the US$10 million spacecraft. Astronauts Scott and Doi later received a telephone call from President William J. Clinton congratulating them on grabbing the satellite.(William Harwood, “Satellite Designed To Study Sun Fails,” Washington Post, 22 November 1997; Associated Press, “Columbia Crew Prepares Plan To Recover Spinning Satellite,” 24 November 1997; William Harwood, “Space Walkers Grab Satellite, Wrestle It Back onto Shuttle,” 25 November 1997; Reuters, “Spacewalking Astronauts Grab Errant Satellite,” 25 November 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Calls Shuttle Crew with Thanks,” 28 November 1997.)
NASA launched an unpiloted Delta rocket carrying the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE), a US$100 million solar-observatory satellite bound on a 1 million-mile (1.6 million-kilometer) journey. The launch took place one day later than expected because, on the original launch date, a commercial fishing boat had come within range of the launch danger zone. Scientists launched ACE toward an imaginary point 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth and 92 million miles (148 million kilometers) from the Sun, a point at which scientists believe that the gravity of the Earth and Sun balance each other. NASA planned for ACE to orbit for as long as five years, analyzing particles streaming from the Sun. In keeping with NASA’s focus on improved efficiency, NASA engineers collaborated with the Boeing Company to build ACE and launch the mission, at a cost of US$200 million⎯more than US$30 million under budget.(Associated Press, “After 1-Day Delay, NASA Launches Bargain-Priced Solar Observatory,” 25 August 1997; Associated Press, “Launch Delayed by Errant Shrimpers,” 25 August 1997.)
