Satellites survived the annual Leonid meteor storm with no major damage. Astronomers had predicted the storm would be the most intense in three decades, because Comet Tempel-Tuttle had swung closer to the Sun in February, as it does every 33 years, creating a greater-than- average amount of comet dust. Scientists had feared that particles traveling at 43 miles (69 kilometers) per second could shred satellites’ solar arrays, damage sensitive instruments, or cause circuits to short.
Steve Fossett’s Solo Spirit balloon, carrying NASA’s prototype Aerobot Science Payload, landed prematurely when it experienced equipment problems. NASA had been testing the Aerobot Science Payload prototype for use on balloons in outer space, to collect information from other planets’ atmospheres. On this trip, Aerobot returned accurate data on position, balloon velocity, vertical wind velocity, temperature, and humidity, but experienced problems with a pressure sensor and a satellite communications link.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Balloon Trip Helps Martian Studies,” 11 January 1998.)
Russia’s first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russia’s largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a “revolution,” because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, “Delta Lifts Russian Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia,” 23 November 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would “play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States.” With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could “detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone.” The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, “Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, “U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket,” 9 May 1998.)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, “Orbital’s Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecraft’s First Signals Indicate Early Success,” 2 April 1998.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite, out of contact with ground controllers since 25 June, responded to signals sent by NASA’s Deep Space Tracking Network antennas in Canberra, Australia. Although the signals contained no data, SOHO transmitted a series of short radio bursts, indicating to space scientists that the craft was still able to receive ground commands and, therefore, that they might still have a chance of salvaging it.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Contacted,” news release 98-145, 4 August 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Contact Re-established with Wayward Satellite,” 4 August 1998.)
After two delays, one because of mechanical problems, the other because of strong winds, a Japanese H-2 rocket blasted off from Tanegashima Space Center, carrying a US$370 million communications satellite intended to conduct a three-year series of communications and broadcast tests. However, an engine breakdown prevented the satellite from entering a geostationary orbit; instead, the launch left the satellite floating in space, useless for its intended mission. Engineers were looking for ways to rescue the mission.(Mari Yamaguchi for Associated Press, “Japan-Satellite,” 21 February 1998.)
On NASA’s 40th anniversary, President of the Space Frontier Foundation Richard N. Tumlinson and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about space exploration and the possibility of privatizing space ventures. Tumlinson’s organization advocated limiting NASA’s role to supporting technology and research programs. He proposed commercializing the Shuttle fleet and privatizing NASA field centers, to reduce the costs of space exploration and eventual colonization. Goldin advocated reducing costs as well, but did not respond to Tumlinson’s proposals. He also outlined new technologies that NASA was developing, to cut the cost of rockets and satellites. Goldin remarked that NASA “would form partnerships with industry for ‘cutting-edge research development’,” also emphasizing NASA’s support of government loans to fuel the growth of the space industry in the United States.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 2 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “NASA Urged To Sell Shuttles,” 1 October 1998.)
NASA announced that astronomers had located the “wayward” SOHO satellite after losing radio contact on 24 June, when a programming error on the ground caused its solar panels to switch positions. Two U.S. radio telescopes had located the satellite rotating slowly near its original position, approximately 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth. Engineers had calculated its exact location after NASA’s Deep Space Network in Goldstone, California, “intercepted the echo of a radio signal transmitted by the giant radio telescope of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center in Arecibo, Puerto Rico.” The spacecraft’s slow rotation on its axis indicated that it had incurred only minor damage and that its solar panels would soon face the Sun again.(Agence France-Presse, “U.S.-European Satellite Located by Engineers,” 28 July 1998.)
NASA announced that Colorado State University would lead a US$145 million study of clouds, to better understand global warming and to “dramatically improve” weather forecasts. The five- year project would use a satellite named CloudSat to capture three-dimensional global images of clouds.
NASA partially cancelled the Clark satellite program, keeping only the US$13 million launch vehicle service portion of the contract with Lockheed Martin. As reasons for the cancellation, NASA cited cost overruns, an uncertain launch schedule, and questions concerning the effectiveness of Clark’s instruments in orbit, because its primary instrument had been “sitting on the ground two years longer than planned.” The intended mission of the program was to take black-and-white stereo images, showing detail as small as 10 feet (3 meters) across, for NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise (formerly the Office of Mission to Planet Earth), as well as for commercial customers. NASA had paired the Clark satellite with the Lewis satellite. However, after its August 1997 launch, the Lewis satellite had gone into a spin, which controllers were unable to repair. Consequently, the Lewis satellite plunged into the atmosphere where it burned up.(NASA, “NASA Terminates Clark Earth Science Mission,” news release, 25 February 1998; Justin Ray, “NASA Cans Clark, an Imaging Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 February 1998.)
A West European Ariane 4LP rocket blasted off from French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites, Brasilsat-3 and Inmarsat-3. Twenty-one minutes after takeoff, the first satellite, belonging to Brazil, separated from the rocket. Five minutes later, the second satellite, a 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne) worldwide mobile communications satellite, separated from the rocket. The launch successfully placed both satellites in orbit.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “European Ariane Rocket Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit,” 5 February 1998.)
Boeing successfully launched, from a California launch site, five satellites for the Iridium World Communications network, aboard a Delta II rocket. The Delta II launched two weeks after the “disastrous maiden flight” of the new Delta III rocket, which had exploded during liftoff. Officials announced on 5 September that a problem with the rocket’s control system had caused the explosion, but that they had not yet determined the exact chain of events. The five satellites launched aboard the Delta II rocket replaced satellites that had malfunctioned and could not be included in the Iridium telecommunications constellation.(Justin Ray, “Delta 2 Lifts Five Satellites into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 1998.)
This date marked Mir’s 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Mir,” 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion,” 20 February 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown “his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer.” As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program,” 26 March 1998.)
NASA announced that experts from the ESA and Matra Marconi Space, the prime contractor for the SOHO spacecraft, had met at GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to assess the situation of the noncommunicating spacecraft and to analyze the satellite’s status in the event that ground controllers reestablished contact with it. Participants at the meeting named as cochairs of a joint inquiry board to investigate the incident, Professor Massimo Trella, the ESA’s Inspector General, and Michael A. Greenfield, Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters.(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Inquiry Board Co-Chairs Named,” news release 98- 118, 30 June 1998.)
Pentagon officials announced that, on 12 August, a split-second power outage had caused a Titan IV rocket to explode while launching a secret spy satellite into space. A battery powering the guidance system had failed, interrupting the flow of electricity for a fraction of a second. After the restoration of battery power, the guidance control system had sent a command causing the rocket to pitch down and to the right, while traveling at 675 miles (1,100 kilometers) per hour at 17,000 feet (5,200 meters). The rocket had begun to break up, and the malfunction had triggered the automatic destruct system. In addition, when it had begun to explode, range safety officers had sent the rocket destruct commands, to ensure it would not threaten the coastal population.(Todd Halversen, “Titan 4 Blast Blamed on Brief Battery Power Outage,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 September 1998.)
NASA announced the discovery of a fast-spinning pulsar, providing evidence of an evolutionary link between strong-field, slower-spinning, energetic pulsars and weak-field, millisecond pulsars. Frank Marshall, William W. Zhang, and Eric V. Gotthelf of GSFC found the pulsar by examining x-ray emissions that NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer spacecraft had recorded in 1996. Observations of the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics spacecraft, a satellite jointly owned by Japan and the United States, confirmed the discovery. The scientists reported that the pulsar was spinning at a rate of 60 times per second, and that it could have been spinning as fast as 150 times per second when it formed 4,000 years ago. An astrophysicist at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Los Alamos National Laboratory remarked, “this is the fastest high-energy pulsar of its type we know about.” The research team reported that the pulsar is “likely associated with the remnant of a supernova (N157B) that exploded in the Large Magellanic Cloud about 4,000 years ago.” Comparing the pulsar found in N157B to the high- energy pulsar in the Crab Nebula, the scientists reported that the central source of x-ray light from N157B is this fast-spinning pulsar associated with a supernova remnant, proving the hypothesis that the weaker the magnetic field, the faster the pulsar spins at birth.(NASA, “Fast-Spinning Pulsar Discovery Provides Evolutionary Link,” news release 98-14, 26 January 1998.)
An international team of researchers announced that observations of U.S. satellites orbiting Earth had proven one of physicist Albert Einstein’s theories correct. In his general theory of relativity, Einstein had predicted that a spinning body could curve space, because the “spin of a body must change the geometry of the universe by generating space-time curvature.” Einstein had called the phenomenon frame dragging, but scientists came to refer to it as the Lense-Thirring effect, naming it for two Austrian physicists who wrote that rotating celestial bodies, such as the Sun, “create a force that pulls space toward them.” Ignazio Ciufolini, a physicist at Sapienza University of Rome, and his colleagues used lasers to measure changes in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellite I, or LAGEOS, a NASA spacecraft, and LAGEOS II, a satellite belonging to NASA and the Italian Space Agency. The research team observed changes that they could not account for by the laws of gravity or tidal forces, concluding that the Lense-Thirring effect exists. The satellites, launched in 1976 and 1992, were passive satellites dedicated exclusively to laser ranging. In this process, scientists had send laser pulses to the satellite from ranging stations on Earth, measuring the round-trip travel time of the pulses. The research team had analyzed data collected over a four-year period beginning in 1993.(NASA, “Earth Dragging Space and Time as It Rotates,” news release 98-51, 27 March 1998; Reuters, “Einstein Proved Right Yet Again,” 26 March 1998.)
The joint committee of NASA and the European Space Agency investigating the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) incident issued a preliminary report. The committee found that several errors had led to the loss of the satellite’s signal. First, Mission Control had “unknowingly activated” two preprogrammed sequences, which lacked commands to reorient the spacecraft properly. The resulting anomalies had caused SOHO to enter into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR). A “rapid decision” to turn off one of the craft’s gyroscopes had ultimately triggered two more ESRs, sending the spacecraft “flailing out of control.” Controllers also discovered that “undetected failures,” which had occurred sometime earlier in the year, “had taken out three of the four batteries.”(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Investigation Board Focuses on Most Likely Causes,” news release 98-125, 16 July 1998; James Glanz, “Chain of Errors Hurled Probe into Spin,” Science 281, no. 5376 (24 July 1998): 499; United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 28 July 1998.)
NASA’s Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft captured a video of a “short-lived but extremely bright explosion in the atmosphere of the sun.” The explosion was 55,000 miles (89,000 kilometers) long, 200 miles (322 kilometers) wide, and traveled at a rate of 2 million miles (3.2 million kilometers) per hour. The explosions overlapped each other and “snapped,” releasing “vast amounts of energy” as solar flares. Solar flares cause magnetic disturbances that disrupt satellites and power supplies if directed at Earth. In April, NASA had launched the TRACE spacecraft, with a telescope 10 times more powerful than any other telescope focused on the Sun. The telescope studied the transitional region of the Sun’s atmosphere, between the relatively cool surface of the lower atmosphere, with temperatures of 6,000°C (11,000°F), and the corona or upper atmosphere, where temperatures reach 1.7 million°C (35 million°F). The telescope was able to photograph ultraviolet light and to show temperature variations using false colors.(Mark Prigg, “Photos Reveal Sun’s Power,” Sunday Times (London), 7 June 1998; Leonard Novarro for Reuters, “Solar Flare May Disrupt Worldwide Communication,” 8 June 1998.)
The PanAmSat-owned Galaxy IV, a five-year old communications satellite, “lost its bearings” so that its antennas were not directed toward Earth, causing the “worst outage in 37 years since communications satellites first entered service.” Most of the 45 million pagers in the United States were unable to function during the outage, which “severed electronic links vital to thousands of retailers, news organizations, and broadcasters.” PanAmSat officials said that an attitude-control mechanism failed for an unknown reason and a backup processor failed to turn on, causing the satellite to rotate. At that point, hundreds of thousands of satellite dishes in the United States lost contact with Galaxy IV.(Mike Mills, “Satellite Glitch Cuts Off Data Flow,” Washington Post, 21 May 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
A US$35,000 study commissioned by the Florida Space Business Roundtable revealed that commercial satellite companies did not favor Cape Canaveral as a launch site. The Florida Space Business Roundtable presented its findings at the Florida Space Launch Symposium in Melbourne, Florida. In the survey, executives from satellite manufacturing companies rated spaceports, evaluating them in 11 categories, such as their launch base facilities, flight scheduling, governmental red tape, and on-site technical services. The executives’ favorite launch site was Vandenberg Air Force Base in central California, and they selected Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China as the worst place to launch. Florida’s spaceports did well in two categories, but business executives considered red tape at those facilities a problem.(Todd Halvorson, “Survey: Brevard Launch Sites Fail To Measure Up—Space Coast Falls Short for Commercial Liftoffs,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 February 1998.)
The Chinese Long March 2C rocket launched two U.S. satellites into orbit, from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in Shanxi province in northern China. The satellites were part of a mobile telecommunications system that Motorola Corporation had developed for the Iridium World Communications network scheduled to begin commercial service on 23 September 1998. The Iridium contract had “boosted China’s launching industry,” which had been “struggling to recover from a string of launch disasters in 1995 and 1996.”(Associated Press, “China Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit,” 3 May 1998.)
PanAmSat Corporation announced the impairment of a critical subsystem of its Galaxy VII spacecraft. A spokesperson for the company said that engineers had not yet determined whether the problem was the same as that which caused the failure of the Galaxy IV spacecraft on 19 May. Both the primary and backup systems keeping the Galaxy IV correctly pointed toward Earth-bound controllers had failed, but although the Galaxy VII had lost its primary system, its backup system had continued to function properly. Hughes Electronics Corporation’s Space and Communications Company, the manufacturer of the two satellites, was investigating the failures. Both satellites were HS601 models, the world’s “best-selling large communications satellite,” with customers including the U.S. Navy, NASA, the government of Mexico, and communications companies throughout the world.(Robert Covington for Reuters, “Second PanAmSat Satellite Encounters Problems,” 2 July 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States’ first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States’ 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life,” 31 January 1998.)
After a one-day delay to correct a software problem, Mars Climate Orbiter launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Delta II rocket. NASA had scheduled the 1,400-pound (635-kilogram) robotic craft, paired with Mars Polar Lander, to launch on 3 January 1999. Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, the second pair headed to study Mars following Mars Pathfinder and Mars Global Surveyor, were part of NASA’s “long-term strategy for Mars exploration,” calling for small robotic craft “to leave Earth two at a time,” about every two years. According to NASA’s plan, Climate Orbiter’s first task would be to provide a two-way communications relay between ground controllers and Polar Lander after Lander’s arrival and during its planned 60–90 day mission. Thereafter, Orbiter would generate weather maps and profile the Martian atmosphere for a full Martian year, or 687 days.(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Probe To Examine Climate; NASA Launch Is First of Two Designed To Shed Light on Potential for Life,” Washington Post, 12 December 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martin–built Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASA’s Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Rocket Explosion,” 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, “Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite,” Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
Controllers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), “activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun.” Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHO’s mission was to track “major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space.” The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Sun’s atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted,” news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears It’s Lost,” USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
At a NASA news conference, astronomers discussed the discovery of the largest explosion ever sighted in space. The journal Nature published three papers about the event, detected on 14 December 1997. The explosion, a gamma-ray burst (GRB) designated GRB971214, had occurred 12 billion years ago and had “apparently outshone all the rest of the universe” for about 40 seconds. The Italian-Dutch orbiting gamma-ray observatory BeppoSAX had measured the sharp pulse of gamma rays and “pinpointed the position of the rays’ source.” The United States’ Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had also detected the gamma-ray pulse, and scientific institutions around the world had monitored the after-effects of the explosion. Twelve hours afterward, John R. Thorstensen of Dartmouth College had used a 94-inch-diameter (49- centimeter-diameter) telescope at Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona to detect a visible afterglow, which lasted for about two weeks. After the glow had faded, the scientists had discovered a faint galaxy in the same location. A team of American, Italian, and Indian astronomers, led by two California Institute of Technology scientists, used the Keck II Telescope in Hawaii to measure the distance from Earth to the source of the burst. No theorists were able to explain the explosion, and no existing models explaining GRBs could explain the amount of energy emitted from GRB971214. The scientists suggested the possibility that a superdense neutron star had ripped apart as it disappeared into a neighboring black hole, or that a violent merger of two black holes had caused the burst.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Astronomers Detect Immense Explosion 2d Only to Big Bang,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; NASA, “Most Powerful Explosion since the Big Bang Challenges Gamma Ray Burst Theories,” news release 98-75, 6 May 1998.)
Ghassem R. Asrar, NASA Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about budget concerns and delays associated with the Earth Observing System program. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) had called the hearing to discuss numerous delays in NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise missions. Asrar explained the reasons for the delays, indicating that NASA would work with Raytheon Systems to deliver a scaled-back data system within budget, in time to support two delayed missions. Subcommittee member, Representative David Weldon Jr. (R- FL), “questioned the legitimacy of NASA’s ownership of the Earth Science program,” suggesting that a different agency, such as the National Academy of Sciences or the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), should manage the program. Weldon also questioned whether scientists would be able to make use of the vast amount of data they expected the program to generate. Robert S. Winokur, NOAA’s Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, assured subcommittee members that scientists would be able to use the information. Winokur was responsible for coordinating NOAA’s joint efforts with NASA to archive and retrieve environmental data.(Brian Berger, “Earth Science Faces Hurdles: NASA To Forfeit Data Capabilities To Put Key Program on Track,” Space News, 14–20 September 1998.)
Hughes Global Services Inc. announced the success of its salvage mission to a stranded Asia Satellite Telecommunications Company Ltd. communications satellite. The 3.8-ton (3,500- kilogram or 3.5-tonne) AsiaSat 3 had remained stranded in a useless orbit since its December 1997 launch. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had received US$200 million from insurers. The insurers had told Hughes Global Services to find a new customer, if the salvage mission was successful. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had originally intended AsiaSat 3 to provide television and telephone service in Asia, but the Russian-built launcher had malfunctioned, and the satellite’s orbit had gone awry, rendering it useless. Hughes Global Services had taken possession of the satellite, implementing a “seemingly improbable” mission to salvage the spacecraft. Hughes had sent the satellite around the Moon twice, using the Moon’s gravity to help correct the satellite’s orbit around the Earth, and declared the salvage mission a success, even though the satellite was not stationary, which would limit the number of customers who might lease or buy it.(Andrew Pollack for Associated Press, “Rescue Effort Puts a Satellite in Viable Orbit,” New York Times, 19 June 1998; Associated Press, “US Satellites,” 19 June 1998.)
Officials from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported that they had placed GOES-8, the weather satellite responsible for monitoring the East Coast, in a “safe hold shutdown,” after it had developed problems with its attitude sensors. GOES-10 was then required to watch the entire country, although it could provide images only every 30 minutes, instead of every 15 minutes, as it did when each of the two satellites was able to monitor half of the United States. NASA officials were especially concerned about monitoring East Coast weather, because of worry that winds from Hurricane Mitch, located over the coast of Central America, could interfere with the upcoming launch of the Space Shuttle carrying veteran astronaut, U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr.(Randolph E. Schmid for Associated Press, “East Weather Satellite Shuts Down,” 28 October 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.’s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, “Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science,” news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, “Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive ‘Drizzle’,” USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
A month after its launch, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) began activating the weather satellite, Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-10 (GOES- 10), a backup to the failing GOES-9 satellite. The momentum wheels on GOES-9, similar to a gyroscope, which maintain the satellite’s stability, were “showing signs of impending failure.” GOES-9 was responsible for monitoring weather on the west coast of the United States. GOES- 10, placed in storage mode above the center of the country, would need about 30 days, moving approximately 1o of longitude each day, to move to the west coast location. GOES-10’s well- timed placement in storage mode would ensure data continuity, saving NOAA a 12- to 15-month wait for a time slot for launch, following the imminent failure of GOES-9.(Associated Press, “Failing Weather Satellite Replaced,” 10 July 1998.)
The investigation board of engineers and officials from NASA and the European Space Agency released their final report, determining how controllers had lost communication with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite on 24 June. The board’s findings, presented at a joint news conference held in Washington, DC, and Paris, concluded that no anomalies existed on the spacecraft; the loss of SOHO “was a direct result of operational errors, a failure to monitor the status of the spacecraft adequately, and the use of insufficiently tested rescue procedures.” However, the board emphasized that no single cause or particular person was responsible for the incident.(Warren E. Leary, “Satellite To Study Sun Is Reviving from Dead,” New York Times, 4 September 1998.)
The newly developed Delta III rocket exploded during liftoff, destroying the Galaxy X communications satellite it was carrying into orbit. The launch was the maiden flight of Boeing’s newest version of the Delta rocket, designed to carry 8,400 pounds (3,800 kilograms), twice the payload of the previous version.(Seth Schiesel, “New Type of Rocket To Carry Satellites Explodes in Liftoff,” New York Times, 27 August 1998. 574 NASA, “International Candidates Join 1998 Astronaut Class,” news release 98-155, 27 August 1998.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was “a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula,” the site of a gas cloud generating enough water “to fill the Earth’s oceans 60 times a day.” The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting “large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula.” The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time “the vital role that water plays in star formation,” may “provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Michael Werner of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, “that water is prevalent in space” and “plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth,” 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, “Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, “Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
The Iridium World Communications system global, digital wireless communications network completed a series of deployment missions, with the launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California of five Iridium satellites aboard a Boeing Delta II launch vehicle. The successful launch had completed the entire Iridium constellation “in just twelve months.” The world’s first global, wireless telephone company scheduled its commercial service to begin four months following this last launch, once it had completed integrating and testing the Iridium system.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Delta II Rocket Places Iridium Satellites into Orbit,” 17 May 1998.)
A modified L-1011 jetliner flying at 40,000 feet (12,000 meters) dropped a Pegasus XL rocket carrying the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS), designed to study the formation of stars and planets. The launch marked the beginning of a two-year, US$64 million mission to learn more about the “composition of interstellar clouds and monitor how they cool as they collapse to form stars and planets.” The 397-pound (179-kilogram) SWAS would study water, molecular oxygen, atomic carbon, and isotopic carbon monoxide, by means of submillimeter wave radiation, which scientists cannot observe from the ground. NASA’s GSFC managed the mission.(Associated Press, “NASA Launches Probe To Study Stars,” 5 December 1998; CNN.com, “NASA Launches Satellite To Study Star Formation,” http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9812/05/swas.launch/ (accessed 27 October 2008).)
NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration awarded a US$423 million contract to Hughes Space and Communications of El Segundo, California, to manufacture and launch up to four weather-monitoring Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). The basic contract covered the manufacture and launch of two spacecraft. Separate fixed-price options for two additional spacecraft would cost US$190 million and US$185 million. The spacecraft would carry instruments to provide regular measurements of the Earth’s atmosphere, cloud cover, and land surfaces. Two spacecraft would also carry the Solar X-ray Imager and Space Environment Monitor instruments. These four spacecraft, known as GOES-N, -O, -P, and -Q were to continue, enhancing the services of the current GOES-I through -M series, a “mainstay of modern weather forecasting.” The GOES series provided meteorologists and hydrologists with “visible and infrared images of weather systems, and precise atmospheric soundings.” The positions of the spacecraft in orbit would allow scientists to monitor storms when they were first forming in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.(NASA, “Hughes Selected To Build Weather Satellites,” contract announcement release C98-B, 28 January 1998. 404 Robyn Suriano, “Atlas Launches on Fourth Try: Classified Craft Likely To Serve as Orbital Switchboard,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 January 1998.)
An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagon’s National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 11⁄2 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellites⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi⎯in outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment “an impressive feat.” NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japan’s Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating “a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi,” associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, “Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) launched into orbit, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, a new weather satellite, the NOAA-K, aboard a 34- year old converted Titan II nuclear missile. The satellite was an Advanced Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS-N) weather satellite, able to see inside clouds, a feature that scientists expected would greatly increase our knowledge of how hurricanes develop and move. The TIROS-N was the latest model of TIROS satellite in four generations. Lockheed Martin had last built a TIROS satellite for NASA and NOAA in 1960. After the launch of the TIROS-N, the satellite would undergo a series of tests by NASA, followed by a round of tests by NOAA, before becoming fully available in time for next year’s hurricane season.(Justin Ray, “New NOAA Weather Satellite Will Keep a Better Eye on Hurricanes,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 1998; Business Wire, “Nation’s Newest Advanced Weather Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully,” 14 May 1998.)
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would “compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches,” while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, “Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur.” Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, “Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project,” Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Ghassem R. Asrar as the new Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise. Before this appointment, Asrar had served as Chief Scientist for the Earth Observing System in the Office of Earth Science Enterprise at NASA Headquarters. He led an international team in developing scientific priorities and measurements “to be obtained from a series of advanced Earth-orbiting satellites that promise fundamental new insights into the connections between Earth’s land, oceans, atmosphere, ice, and life.”(NASA, “Asrar Named Associate Administrator for Earth Science,” news release 98-19, 2 February 1998.)
After experiencing two disastrous launch failures in 1996 and 1997, the European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched its French-made Ariane 5 rocket and recoverable space capsule from Korou, French Guiana. The 1.6 million-pound (800-ton, 726,000-kilogram, or 726-tonne) rocket carried a 2.6-tonne (2.9-ton, 5,700-pound, or 2,600-kilogram) mock-up of a telecommunications satellite and a 2.8-tonne (3.1-ton, 6,200-pound, or 2,800-kilogram) recoverable capsule. With the successful recovery of the capsule from the Pacific Ocean, France became the fourth country to develop such technology, following the United States, Russia, and China. French scientists had designed the Ariane 5 rocket to carry payloads of 5.9−6.8 tonnes (6.5−7.5 tons, 13,000−15,000 pounds, or 5,900−6,800 kilograms) into geostationary orbit, using twice the power of the Ariane 4; to provide launches for low-altitude orbits and interplanetary space probes; and to lift the cargo vehicle that would be the ESA’s contribution to the ISS.(John-Thor Dahlburg, “Third Try’s the Charm for European Rocket,” Los Angeles Times, 22 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Ariane Capsule Test Called a Success,” 21 October 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
Hughes Electronics Corporation concluded its investigation into the 19 May failure of PanAmSat’s Galaxy IV satellite and the similar problems that later had affected two other satellites. Metallic crystals growing in space, “less than the width of a human hair,” had caused tin-plated electrical switches to short, disabling navigational devices that kept the satellites oriented toward Earth-based controllers. However, the investigation had failed to uncover the source of the failure of Galaxy IV’s backup system, which led to the widespread blackout on 19 May.(Aaron Pressman for Reuters, “Tiny Crystals Waylaid Satellites, Hughes Says,” 11 August 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery successfully retrieved the Spartan spacecraft, thus completing a priority project of the nine-day mission. The crew had deployed the satellite on 1 November, to record observations of the Sun’s outer atmosphere and the solar wind. Spartan had lagged 40 miles (64 kilometers) behind the Shuttle, in free flight, as it recorded the data. The flight was the last in a series of four flights begun in 1993 to “gather observations at different points in the [S]un’s 11-year cycle of magnetic activity.” NASA had originally scheduled the mission for November 1997, but astronauts had “failed to send a crucial command” before releasing the satellite, so Spartan had gathered no data. The crew had also tested an experimental laser range-finding device mounted in the Shuttle, aiming at targets on Spartan.(Washington Times, “Glenn Reports No Space Sickness as Discovery Releases Sun Gazer,” 2 November 1998; Washington Times, “Astronauts Snag Sun Observer To Complete a Primary Mission: Glenn, 77, Undergoes More Tests of His Response to Space,” 4 November 1998; New York Times, “Shuttle Easily Regains Satellite, and Photos,” 4 November 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
