Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch,” 29 April 1999.)
Officials at NASA’s Langley Research Center (LARC) officially opened the Center’s new Experimental Test Range (ETR), described as an “electromagnetic wind tunnel.” LARC engineers had designed the ETR to determine how low-frequency electromagnetic radiation affects aircraft, to help the military improve stealth technology. The ETR also would assist in testing technologies to enable airline passengers to watch television signals from satellites or to help Internet users make wireless connections. The first military customer that had signed up to use the ETR, the U.S. Army’s National Ground Intelligence Center, planned to use models of enemy targets in the test chamber, to see how they appeared on radar screens.(Jeff Long for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Hampton, Va., NASA Research Center Tests Plane Design with Wind Tunnel,” 17 November 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States’ strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the mission’s duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite,” news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, “Delta Rocket Soars into Space,” Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
An international team of scientists published findings based on research using data from NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. The team had sought to locate the origin of solar wind, which interacts with Earth’s magnetic field, creating auroral displays like the Northern Lights, as well as disrupting satellites and communications equipment. The SOHO team believed that the solar wind originated from honeycomb-shaped areas called convection cells, located beneath the coronal holes. Using data from the spectrometer, the scientists had measured for the first time the structure and motion of gases inside the coronal holes. The team reported that, in some places above coronal holes, magnetic field lines do not loop back to the Sun’s surface, but rather, the magnetic lines shoot upward without returning to the Sun, thereby originating the solar wind.(Donald Hassler et al., “Solar Wind Outflow and the Chromospheric Magnetic Network,” Science 283, no. 5403 (5 February 1999): 810; United Press International, “Source of Solar Wind Believed Found,” 4 February.)
A Boeing Delta III rocket, carrying an Orion satellite for Loral Space and Communications, malfunctioned shortly after launch, leaving the satellite in the wrong orbit. In the inaugural launch in August 1998 of a Boeing Delta III, a rocket designed to carry twice the payload of the Delta II, the rocket had exploded in midair. In this second attempt at flight, the rocket had survived the initial launch, but malfunctioned when the second stage failed to ignite properly, leaving Orion in an orbit lower than planned. Engineers were uncertain whether it would be possible to boost the satellite using on-board fuel and thrusters.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “New Boeing Rocket Malfunctions, Satellite Enters Wrong Orbit,” 5 May 1999.)
In its third consecutive failure, the second loss within one month, the U.S. Air Force launch of a Titan IV rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, placed a geosynchronous military communications satellite, the USA 143, also known as Milstar 2, in a useless low-Earth orbit. (Associated Press, “Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead,” 12 May 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robot’s components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASA’s ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiment’s success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts’ hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine “housekeeping chores,” such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions,” news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force officially declared the US$1.2 billion launch of a communications satellite on 30 April a “mission failure.” A malfunction in the upper stage booster of the Titan IVB rocket had stranded the Milstar satellite in the wrong orbit. The Air Force established an investigation into the failure, which was its “third costly space failure in nine months.”(Reuters, “U.S. Air Force Investigates Costly Satellite Loss,” 4 May 1999.)
The Russian Defense Ministry launched Raduga-1, an early-warning-system satellite for detecting missile launches, aboard a Proton-K booster rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Ground controllers lost communication with the satellite minutes after its launch, and just as it reached its preliminary orbit, both the satellite and the second stage of the rocket crashed in a remote region of Kazakhstan. Russian space officials initially stated that the satellite had crashed in an uninhabited area, but a Russian television network reported that a large piece of the Proton rocket had fallen onto farmland in the Karaganda region of Kazakhstan, nearly hitting a house. Nobody was injured in the crash.(United Press International, “Russian Satellite Crashes into Kazakhstan,” 6 July 1999. 737 Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Halts Russian Space Launches,” 6 July 1999.)
Mario Dario Grossi, radio physicist and engineer, died at the age of 74 in Boston, Massachusetts. Grossi developed the concept of tethered satellites and the hardware to make them possible. Together with a colleague, Grossi had conducted most of his work at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Grossi had first approached NASA with his concept in 1972, and in 1982 NASA had issued a contract to build a system. In July 1992, NASA had tested the tether in space when astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-46 “reeled out a half-ton [450- kilogram or 0.45-tonne] satellite of the Italian Space Agency dangling on a spaghetti-thin cord 12 miles [19 kilometers] long.” The successful test had provided data that would assist engineers in applying the tether satellite technology to build space stations or in “operating instrument- laden satellites far from the [S]huttle.”(Wolfgang Saxon, “M. Grossi, 74; Created Tether for Satellites,” New York Times, 18 January 1999.)
NASA announced that the WIRE Mishap Investigation Board had concluded that NASA’s Wide- Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) satellite had failed after its 4 March 1999 launch, “because of an incorrectly designed electronics box.” The premature firing of explosive devices⎯the pyrotechnics⎯had caused the instrument’s telescope cover to eject too early in the mission, thus exposing the instrument’s frozen hydrogen to the Sun. The frozen hydrogen was necessary to cool the telescope’s infrared detectors. The satellite had lost the frozen hydrogen within 48 hours of its launch, rendering the instrument incapable of carrying out its scientific mission. Darrell R. Branscome, Deputy Associate Administrator (Enterprise Development) for NASA’s Office of Space Flight and chairperson of the eight-member investigation team, emphasized that there had been no component failure, but “simply a case of a design error that allowed power to get to the explosive charges before it should have.” The board’s report also concluded that engineers had failed to identify the design errors in the circuitry controlling the pyrotechnical functions. Unlike the other systems in the satellite, the electronics box design had received no peer review.(NASA, “Investigation Finds Design Errors Caused WIRE Spacecraft Failure,” news release 99-74, 25 June 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-074.txt (accessed 11 February 2008).)
A Taurus rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying satellites for NASA and the Korean Aerospace Institute, as well as 36 capsules holding 7 ounces of cremated remains for Celestis Inc., a Houston-based company that arranged to send human remains to space. NASA’s 253-pound (114.8-kilogram) Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (EOS ACRIM III), expected to return data for a minimum of five years, was deployed to measure sunlight reaching Earth’s atmosphere, oceans, and land, data needed for scientists to study whether slight changes in solar output affected global warming and cooling. ACRIM III was the third in a series of long- term, solar-monitoring tolls that NASA’s JPL had built. ACRIM III’s data would expand the database begun with the ACRIM I mission in 1980, aboard the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft, and continued with the ACRIM II mission in 1991, aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. ACRIM I was the first instrument to demonstrate clearly that the total radiant energy from the Sun is not a constant. The Korean satellite, built by TRW Inc. for a three-year mission, carried three instruments for creating digital elevation maps of Korea, studying the biology of the ocean, and performing physics experiments on the effects of radiation on electronics. The Celestis mission carried 36 capsules of human remains, which would orbit for 45 years before burning up in Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Item 1⎯ACRIMSAT Launch⎯HQ,” NASA Daily News Summary, 21 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/media/1999/m99-262.txt (accessed 13 March 2008); Associated Press, “NASA Satellite, Korea Probe Rocket into Space,” 21 December 1999.)
A European Ariane 4 rocket launched, carrying two communication satellites from French Guiana. The rocket placed into orbit an Arabsat 3A satellite, providing television broadcasting and telephone communications to the Middle East, North Africa, and Southern Europe, as well as the Skynet 4E satellite, a British armed forces strategic and tactical communications satellite. Both craft would move into geostationary orbits.(BBC News, “Ariane Blasts Off Successfully,” 27 February 1999.)
Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from California’s Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Force’s Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, “collecting data on the Earth’s global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs,” as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmark’s Orsted and South Africa’s SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries’ space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earth’s magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, “Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit,” 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earth’s landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments’ measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earth’s radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, “NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission,” 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, “Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
NASA announced that its new orbiting SeaWinds radar instrument, flying aboard the QuikSCAT satellite, was successfully tracking Iceberg B10A, which had broken off the Thwaites glacier of Antarctica in 1992, drifting into a shipping lane. Earlier in 1999, Iceberg B10A had disappeared when conventional methods of tracking sea-surface ice⎯ships’ radar, shipping reports, optical images from satellites, and microwave sensor data⎯were unable to track it. David G. Long of the SeaWinds science team at Utah’s Brigham Young University remarked that, although “a ship was dispatched to the iceberg’s last known position, we were unable to find it until we started receiving data from the SeaWinds instrument in July.” During its first pass over Antarctica, SeaWinds had spotted the iceberg, and the National Ice Center in Suitland, Maryland, had confirmed that the iceberg was B10A. Scientists had continued to track it as it moved through the Drake Passage and headed northeast between Tierra del Fuego, at the southern tip of South America, and the Antarctic Peninsula. At that time, the National Ice Center had issued an iceberg navigation warning to Argentina.(NASA, “New NASA Ocean Radar Watches for Breakup of Giant Iceberg,” news release 99-102, 3 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-102.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
A Russian rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, carrying a scientific satellite into orbit. It was the second launch from the facility since Kazakhstan partially lifted the launch ban imposed following the crash of a Proton-K rocket on 5 July.(Washington Times, “Russian Satellite Launched in Kazakhstan,” 18 July 1999. 210)
The Russian Space Agency signed a cooperative agreement with Russian arms exporter Rosvooruzheniye, “intended to raise Russia’s earnings on the world market and help it develop space hardware.” Russia had earned only US$800 million, compared to the United States’ US$50 billion, in commercial satellite launches during 1998. Rosvooruzheniye hoped the deal would help Russia break into the international space markets.(CNN.com, “Russia’s Space Agency, Arms Exporter Sign Cooperation Deal,” 25 February 1999.)
Pending the outcome of an investigation into the crash of a Russian Proton rocket the previous day, the Kazakhstan government banned Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, causing a potentially significant disruption to Russia’s commercial satellite launch program. Kazakhstan’s foreign ministry informed the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that launches from the facility would cease until investigators had identified the causes of the crash and evaluated the damage sustained. The ministry did not indicate how long the ban would remain in effect. Kazakhstan investigators collected soil and water samples to test for possible hazardous material dispersed in the crash.
NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected Ball Aerospace of Boulder, Colorado, and Aerojet General Corporation of Azusa, California, to study the next-generation, spaceborne, microwave, atmospheric instrument for weather-forecasting and climate-change research, awarding each company a one-year, US$4 million, fixed-price contract through Goddard Space Flight Center. The new instrument, the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), was one-third the size and weight of existing microwave-sounding instruments on board the Polar- Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and the Earth Observing System-PM spacecraft. The application of new technologies, particularly in microwave electronics, had made the significantly smaller size of the ATMS possible. NASA intended to fly the first ATMS unit on the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environment Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) mission, a joint effort between NASA and the NPOESS Program Office. NPOESS, a tri-agency program consisting of parts of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, merged civilian and military polar-orbiting weather satellite systems into a single system.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Ball and Aerojet—General Picked To Study New Weather Sensor,” news release 99-117, 12 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-117.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)
A team of astrophysicists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced that they had found the first direct evidence of a black hole pulling in matter. Using the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics, an x-ray satellite belonging to Japan and the United States and launched in 1993, the team observed superheated gas in the accretion disc of the black hole. Previously, scientists had only “seen” the phenomenon by observing these accretion discs, or “the swirling matter circling around as it is being pulled into the black hole.” However, this time, the Goddard team had observed a “strange feature” buried in the x-rays that the gas emitted. Energy had been redshifted, an occurrence described as an “astronomical Doppler effect,” because, just as the compression of sound waves, for example, causes the sound of a siren to rise and fall as it passes an observer, light stretches as it speeds away from Earth. The team observed light that was being stretched⎯redshifted⎯moving at about 6.5 million miles (10.5 million kilometers) per hour, toward a black hole in galaxy NGC 3516.(Reuters, “Evidence of Super Gravity Reported: Backs Black Hole Astronomy Theory,” Washington Times, 17 August 1999.)
Europe’s new 746-ton (677,000-kilogram or 677-tonne) Ariane 5 rocket launched smoothly on its first mission, carrying the European Space Agency’s 3.7-ton (3,400-kilogram or 3.4-tonne) X- ray Multi-Mirror (XMM) scientific satellite into orbit. In what France called an industry milestone and “hailed as proof of Europe’s superiority in the commercial launch market,” the powerful rocket lifted off at the opening of its launch window from Europe’s facility in Kourou, French Guiana, depositing the satellite in orbit exactly on schedule, 29 minutes later. Jean-Marie Luton, chairperson of Arianespace, the France-based commercial space company that dominated the world’s commercial satellite-launching market, remarked that, although the United States remained its most serious competitor and China was catching up quickly, “Europeans were still one step ahead.” Arianespace intended the Ariane 5, twice as heavy and twice as powerful as the Ariane 4, to carry 10- to 12-ton (9,100- to 10,900-kilogram or 9.1- to 10.9-tonne) payloads by 2005, transporting space-exploration modules and serving the ISS. The XMM satellite was the largest scientific satellite ever built in Europe, equipped with three powerful telescopes, with 58 mirrors each, and “capable of observing everything from supernovas to the remains of exploded stars.”(Jean-Marie Godard for Associated Press, “Mission Accomplished for Powerful New European Launcher,” 10 December 1998.)
Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services’ maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martin–built Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russia’s new Dnepr rocket, Europe’s Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporation’s Pegasus.(United Press International, “Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year,” 23 November 1999.)
NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) aboard the three-stage Pegasus-XL rocket. Orbital Sciences Corporation’s L-1011 jet carried the rocket to an altitude of 40,000 feet (12,200 meters) before releasing it. Shortly after WIRE’s release into orbit, it encountered difficulties maintaining its stability, and NASA immediately began to investigate the malfunction. The satellite’s scientific instrument was a “cryogenically cooled telescope designed to shed light on the history of star formation in the universe,” as part of NASA’s Origins program. The 12.5-inch-aperture (31.8-centimeter-aperture) telescope aboard WIRE had no moving parts and was enclosed in a cooling system to keep its mirrors below -436°F (-260°C), to prevent its own heat emission from overwhelming the light it would detect from space.(Associated Press, “NASA’s Star-Gazing Wire Satellite Successfully Launched,” 4 March 1999; Associated Press, “Satellite Launch,” 5 March 1999.)
U.S. Air Force officials announced that, despite initial media reports of a successful launch, the previous day’s launch of the USA 142 aboard a Titan IVB rocket had failed. The USA 142, also called the DSP 19, an American geosynchronous military satellite, had launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The failed launch had placed the Defense Support Program satellite in a useless orbit after an attached rocket engine failed. This was the first launch attempt since the explosion of a Titan IVA in August 1998. Engineers had designed the Titan IVB, an improved version of the Titan IV, to survive the electrical malfunction that had led to its predecessor’s demise. Because of a policy of secrecy concerning military spy satellites, the U.S. Air Force had delayed informing its public affairs office about the launch failure. Although senior Air Force officials knew of the loss of the satellite, they were unable to make the event public until they were certain that the failure had not entailed the release of classified information. The Air Force had designed the satellite, a highly sensitive, 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne), infrared telescope, to detect missile launches and nuclear detonations.(Robyn Suriano, “Air Force Says Security Questions Delayed Announcement,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 April 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Oleksandr Serdiuk, head of the International Relations Department of Ukraine’s Space Agency, announced that Ukraine and Brazil had signed an agreement the previous week, allowing Ukraine to use Brazil’s Alcântara space complex to launch a new generation of Cyclone-4 booster rockets, medium-weight rockets capable of putting 4 tons (3,600 kilograms or 3.6 tonnes) of payload into a geostationary orbit. In 1992, when the USSR dissolved, Ukraine had retained part of the former Soviet Union’s space program, using several former Soviet factories to build rockets and selling rocket space to commercial satellite companies. Before the agreement with Brazil, Ukraine had only used launchpads in other former Soviet countries. However, Ukraine wanted to take advantage of the location of the Alcântara space complex near the equator, where spacecraft reach orbit more easily and commercial launches a
Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the company’s spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried “a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade.” Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the craft’s enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earth’s surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earth’s surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, “New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.’s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, “Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, “Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash,” 14 July 1999.)
A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstar’s launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, “Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. “Pete” Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence’s Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failures⎯an explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999⎯had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers “at least [US]$3 billion.” Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake “got through,” despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his company’s workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, “Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
President of the Aerospace Industries Association John W. Douglass testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space that the nation needed an “enlightened” national space program, combining “public and private investment in synergistic ways.” Douglass stated that the government needed to “remove barriers to the growth of commercial space.” He said that the most critical action needed for the industry’s growth was renewal of the indemnification provisions of the Commercial Space Launch Act, because without such provisions, U.S. companies are unable to compete with the government-backed programs of foreign competitors. Douglass also testified that U.S. launch ranges lacked modern facilities, causing launch delays. Such delays “wreak havoc” in the commercial world, because launch sites require more time to reconfigure a launch than convenient for commercial enterprises. He cited the export licensing process as a serious problem, because it was causing the U.S. commercial space industry to lose market share in both satellite and launch services. Additionally, Douglass called the “dramatic drop” in funding for aerospace research and development over the last two decades a “serious structural problem,” which the United States should correct, to remain competitive in the world market.(“AIA Urges Congress To Remove Barriers to Commercial Space Industry,” Aerospace News, 20 May 1999.)
NASA’s Inspector General Roberta L. Gross published findings and recommendations on behalf of NASA’s Office of Inspector General, regarding Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr.’s proposed Triana satellite project, named for Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Christopher Columbus’s 1492 voyage who had first spotted North America. The Triana project would call on NASA to provide “continuous, satellite-generated images of the Earth for posting on the Internet.” Gross suggested that it was “ill-advised for the financially strapped [A]gency to fund a new system to collect pictures of Earth when many images” were already widely available. Gross said the Triana project would cost four times as much as the Vice President’s US$50 million estimate, noting that NASA had already spent US$41 million on the project, even though Congress had not yet endorsed it. She criticized NASA for “pressing forward with the project without fully assessing the scientific value of photographing the Earth.” NASA had scheduled the satellite for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in December 2000.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “Assessment of the Triana Mission” (final report no. G-99-013, Washington, DC, 10 September 1999), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-99-013.pdf (accessed 3 March 2008); Steve Lash, “Gore’s Pet Project Not Worth Its Cost, NASA Auditor Says,” Houston Chronicle, 17 September 1999. 784 Greg Schneider, “AlliedSignal Technical Gets a New President; Adamson Is Former Astronaut, Shuttle Executive, Engineer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 21 September 1999; NASA Johnson Space Center, “Biographical Data: James C. Adamson,” http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/adamson-jc.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Astronomers captured for the first time optical images of a gamma-ray burst (GRB) as it was occurring. Detectors of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory detected the GRB as it began and radioed its position to the Gamma Ray Burst Coordinates Network (GCN) at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). GSFC immediately forwarded the position to astronomers around the world. In response to this signal, the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) team in Los Alamos, New Mexico, photographed the patch of sky where the GRB was occurring. Using precise information from instruments aboard the Italian-Dutch BeppoSAX satellite, the ROTSE team was able to locate the GRB within the images they had captured. Astronomer Scott D. Barthelmy of GSFC remarked that capturing a burst as it unfolded was the “holy grail” of GCN, and that, previously, optical telescopes had only seen the afterglow of a burst, never the burst itself.(NASA, “Gamma Ray Burst Imaged for the First Time,” news release 99-8, 27 January 1999.)
A dummy satellite reached its orbit, 23,000 miles (37,000 kilometers) above Earth, signaling an important success for the Sea Launch Company. The international consortium, which had invested US$500 million to develop the first commercial, marine-based launch system, launched the dummy satellite from the Odyssey, a converted oil rig located 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) south of Hawaii. A Zenit-3SL rocket, built jointly by Ukraine and Russia, carried the satellite aloft. One hour after launch, the satellite separated from the third stage of the rocket at an altitude of 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers), to continue to its ultimate position.(Associated Press, “Satellite Reaches Orbit After First Commercial Launch from Ocean,” 30 March 1999. 689 European Space Agency, “Mission to Mars Set To Revolutionize ESA’s Working Methods,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 1999.)
NASA announced its selection of three very small satellites, each about 16 inches (41 centimeters) across and 8 inches (20 centimeters) high, to conduct the Nanosat Constellation Trailblazer mission, the fifth mission in NASA’s New Millennium program. NASA had developed the New Millennium program to test technology for future missions, with the goal of dramatically reducing the weight, size, and costs of missions, while simultaneously increasing science capabilities. NASA scheduled the US$28 million Nanosat Constellation mission to launch in 2003 as a secondary payload on an expendable launch vehicle.(NASA, “NASA Selects Miniature Spacecraft To Test Space Technology,” news release 99-95, 19 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-095.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
Brazilian space officials, having lost contact with their country’s Saci-1 satellite days after its launch, asked NASA to help them rescue the US$4.6 million satellite. Saci-1 had launched on 14 October from China along with another satellite, the CBERS-1, which the two countries had built jointly. Brazil asked NASA to photograph the satellite, check its condition, and devise a plan for its recovery. President of the Brazilian Space Agency Luis Meira Filho remarked that Brazil had not given “the satellite up for lost,” because space officials knew its location. The CBERS-1 satellite was functioning normally and had returned images of Brazil.(Reuters, “Brazil Asks NASA Help To Rescue Lost Satellite,” 21 October 1999.)
After a one-day delay, a Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the US$128 million Stardust spacecraft. Stardust launched on a mission described as NASA’s first attempt to “return to Earth solid extraterrestrial material from beyond our [M]oon’s orbit.” Astronomers expected that, after traveling for about five years, the craft would rendezvous with a medium-sized comet. A device aboard the Stardust would collect tiny particles from the comet before returning to Earth on 15 January 2006.(Michael Cabbage, “Stardust Is Launched To Sweep Comet Debris,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 February 1999.)
NASA announced that NASA scientists and other weather researchers had “gained intriguing new information about upper-level winds that drive hurricanes and about the storms’ devastating impact as they collide with mountains.” The research findings were the result of a seven-week study conducted by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and several universities during the previous summer, as part of the Third Convection and Moisture Experiment (CAMEX-3). The study’s purpose was to gauge the strength of Atlantic hurricane winds and rainfall. CAMEX-3 researchers had used data collected with special laser instruments aboard NASA’s DC-8 aircraft, which flew through hurricanes Bonnie, Danielle, Earl, and Georges; data collected from NASA’s ER-2 high-altitude aircraft, which flew above the hurricanes to collect “first-of its-kind data”; and data from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission satellite. Edward J. Zipser of Texas A&M University remarked, “the multi-aircraft datasets obtained by NASA aircraft in these hurricanes are unprecedented in their comprehensiveness.”(NASA, “NASA Hurricane Study Reveals Intriguing Results,” news release 99-4, 15 January 1999.)
Ukraine’s Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstan’s Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rocket’s lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.”)
Lockheed Martin Corporation named former Martin Marietta President and Chief Operating Officer A. Thomas Young to lead an independent review of the management, engineering, manufacturing, and quality control processes of its space and missile business, specifically Astronautics, Missiles and Space, and Michoud Space Systems. The company had experienced a “series of expensive and well-publicized failures of its rockets and satellites,” including two in the previous week, when a Titan IV placed one military satellite in the wrong orbit and when another satellite, the remote-sensing Ikonos, lost contact with the ground. The company instructed the panel to submit a report to senior Lockheed management by 1 September.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Comprehensive Space Sector Review, Former Martin Marietta President Will Chair Independent Panel,” news release, 4 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesComprehensiv.html (accessed 7 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Panel To Review Lockheed Failures: Former Company President To Head Probe of Aerospace Foul-Ups,” Washington Post, 5 May 1999.)
The NASA WIRE team declared a spacecraft emergency, as ground controllers worked to recover the spacecraft. The satellite continued to spin, instead of maintaining a stable position in orbit, and had a higher temperature than expected. NASA formed a spacecraft-recovery team headed by David F. Everett of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), as well as an anomaly-investigation board.(NASA, “NASA Working To Correct Spin Rate of Wire Spacecraft,” news release 99-34, 5 March 1999. 188)
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russia’s first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion,” 22 November 1999.)
NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, “Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit,” news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, “Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission,” 9 February 1999.)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) detached the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-L (GOES-L) from an Atlas IIA rocket, returning the satellite to the integration facility Astrotech, where engineers planned to recondition its batteries and purge it of gaseous nitrogen, to prevent degradation. NOAA had planned to store the satellite in orbit, ready to replace one of the weather satellites, GOES-8 or GOES-10, but GOES-L had been on the launchpad since 6 May. On 15 May, NASA and NOAA had decided to delay the launch of GOES-L until they had received the results of the investigations into the recent Titan and Delta launch failures.(NOAA, “Weather Satellite De-mated from Launch Vehicle, NOAA and NASA Announce,” news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases99/june99/noaa99GOESDemate.html (accessed 12 February 2008).)
NASA selected winners of its Government Inventor of the Year and Commercial Invention of the Year awards. Charles E. Clagett, Associate Head of the Component and Hardware Systems Branch at GSFC, won the Government Inventor of the Year Award for his Apparatus for Providing Torque and for Storing Momentum Energy. Clagett had developed the apparatus, known more commonly as the SMEX Reaction/Momentum Wheel, for NASA’s Small Explorer program. NASA had used the apparatus successfully in the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer and the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite. Paul M. Hergenrother, Joseph G. Smith Jr., and Brian J. Jensen of Langley Research Center won the Commercial Inventor of the Year Award for their Phenylethynyl Terminated Imide Oligomers, fifth composition, known as PETI-5, which is a type of glue that holds fibers together. The Langley team had developed PETI-5 as an adhesive for use in various aerospace and commercial applications. Used in high- speed, high-temperature aircraft, PETI-5 had netted US$10 million in sales since becoming commercially available.(NASA, “NASA Selects Top Inventions of the Year,” news release 99-42, 12 March 1999.)
Kazakhstan lifted its ban on launches of Russian Proton rockets after Moscow paid US$270,000 in compensation for the 5 July crash of one of the booster rockets and completed an agreed-upon joint investigation. The lifting of the ban cleared the way for two Russian Yamal-100 communications satellites to launch aboard a Proton rocket on 6 September. Although initially the country had banned all launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, which Russia had rented since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan had modified the ban to bar only Proton rocket launches, pending a joint investigation of the accident.(Russia Today, “Kazakhstan Ends Russia Proton Rocket Ban,” 1 September 1999.)
V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASA’s first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASA’s new space-grant program, Rasmussen’s primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension work⎯using the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information system⎯as “precision agriculture,” because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, “NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work,” Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
NASA launched Mars Polar Lander from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Boeing Delta II rocket, three weeks after the launch of its companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter. The craft’s main purpose was to search Mars for signs of water. Lander carried machinery and two microprobes, as well as a microphone to record the sounds of Martian wind. Mars Polar Lander and Mars Climate Orbiter formed a pair, the second launched in a 12-year series of dual missions to explore Mars, with the ultimate goal of collecting a sample of Martian soil to bring to Earth by 2008.(Reuters, “U.S. Mars Probe Launched from Florida,” 3 January 1999; Beth Dickey, “Craft Joins Mars Quest for Water,” New York Times, 4 January 1999.)
Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in China’s Shanxi Province launched two Iridium World Communications satellites into orbit aboard a Chinese Long March 2C rocket, replenishing the 66-satellite Iridium constellation, which provides telephone, paging, and fax communication services worldwide. The satellite was the 57th launched from Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center and the 15th consecutive successful launch since October 1996 for the Long March rocket series.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Iridium Launches Two More Satellites,” 11 June 1999.)
An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Florida’s Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agency’s Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstan’s Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and China’s Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the group’s findings: “companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer.” Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Florida’s expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, “Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, “NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights,” 7 January 1999.)
NASA announced the end of the scientific mission of its WIRE satellite, after the craft released into space its entire supply of frozen hydrogen, a critical element of the mission. Preliminary reports indicated that the satellite had released the primary telescope cover three days earlier than planned, exposing the telescope’s cryostat to sunlight. The sunlight had warmed the frozen hydrogen in the cryostat, which was supposed to maintain the telescope’s temperature, causing the hydrogen to vent into space at a much higher rate than planned. Ground controllers believed the fast venting of the hydrogen had caused the satellite to spin, but they did not yet know what had caused the release of the telescope cover.(NASA, “Wire Spacecraft Instrument Runs Out of Hydrogen,” news release 99-37, 8 March 1999.)
A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles O’Brien, “Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station,” CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, “Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches,” 28 October 1999.)
India’s government-run space agency began commercial operations with the launch, from an island in the Bay of Bengal, of its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C-2 (PSLV), carrying Indian, German, and South Korean satellites. PSLV carried into orbit Oceansat-1, India’s remote- sensing satellite, intended to carry out oceanographic research; KITSAT-3 of South Korea’s Satellite Technology Research Center; and the German Aerospace Center’s Tubsat. Chairperson of Indian Space Research Organization Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan stated that India could “offer to launch satellites at a much cheaper rate than other countries with launch facilities.” Without naming how much India was charging for its newly inaugurated launch services, Kasturirangan said that in the international market it would cost US$1 million to piggyback a satellite.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Indian Rocket with Korean and German Satellites Takes Off,” 26 May 1999.)
Two satellites, the China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS-1), sometimes called ZY-1 in Chinese reports, and the Brazilian Saci-1 satellite, launched atop a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Taiyuan Launch Center in central China. Brazil and China had jointly financed the 1,500-kilogram (3,307-pound) CBERS-1, which carried three high-resolution cameras for monitoring environmental and vegetation conditions in Brazil and China, as well as in other, unspecified locations. Brazil had designed the 60-kilogram (132-pound) Saci-1 microsatellite to monitor cosmic rays, the magnetic field, and plasma. Shortly after launch, communications with the craft failed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 552, 1 November 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx552.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
The People’s Republic of China announced it had launched into orbit its first piloted spacecraft, a non-reusable capsule named Shenzhou, which carried a mannequin for test purposes but was capable of carrying a crew of four. Xinhua news agency reported that the capsule, launched from Jiuquan satellite launch center aboard the new model Long March 2F, had spent 21 hours in space, orbiting Earth 14 times. China had built a new land- and sea-based, space-monitoring-and- control network for the launch. China heralded the launch as a breakthrough in the Chinese government’s effort to “join the United States and Russia in the elite club of manned space flight.” The Chinese had abandoned the pursuit of human spaceflight in the late 1960s, because Premier Zhou Enlai thought it was too costly, but in 1992, President Jiang Zemin had decided to renew Chinese efforts, with the goal of putting a human in space by the end of the century. The head of China’s Manned Spaceflight Program told Xinhua news agency that the successful test flight of the Shenzhou capsule demonstrated that the Chinese spacecraft and the new Long March rocket performed superbly. During the mission, the Chinese had conducted experiments in remote sensing, environmental monitoring, space materials, astronomy, and physics. Shenzhou had landed in Inner Mongolia using a parachute.(Michael Laris, “Chinese Test Craft for Manned Orbits: Space Launch Boosts National Pride,” Washington Post, 22 November 1999; Washington Times, “Chinese Successfully Launch First Spacecraft,” 22 November 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 553, 1 December 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx553.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
NASA released its newest and most accurate map of the continent of Antarctica, created from data that the Canadian Space Agency’s (CSA’s) RADARSAT-1 satellite had collected over an 18-day period during the spring of 1997. Vexel Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had developed software to generate a mosaic of the continent from “many small images made from different angles and orientations of the satellite.” Project officials and scientists remarked that the most important discoveries resulting from the radar images concerned the network of ice streams; the new satellite data revealed that the streams traveled “enormous distances at speeds up to 3,000 feet (914 meters) per year⎯100 times faster than the flow of surrounding ice.” The CSA had begun planning RADARSAT in 1980, because of Canada’s interest in using a high- resolution radar satellite to monitor shipping channels in the Arctic. NASA’s negotiations with the CSA had resulted in an agreement: NASA would launch the satellite and provide software and data analysis in exchange for access to some of the data the satellite produced. Additionally, the CSA would make at least two imaging scans of Antarctica. RADARSAT had launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on 4 November 1995, but, until 1997, Canadian controllers had not completed a difficult rotation of the satellite, necessary to place Antarctica in full view. Once correctly oriented, RADARSAT had been able to complete the imaging in 18 days because it could collect data anytime of the day or night and in any weather. The last satellite map of Antarctica had used images from five different satellites, spanning the years 1980 to 1994.(NASA, “NASA Unveils New, Most Accurate Map of Antarctic Continent,” news release 99-122, 18 October 1999; Malcolm W. Browne, “Under Antarctica, Clues to an Icecap’s Fate: Radar Uncovers a Network of Ice Streams Larger and Faster than Expected, and More Ominous,” New York Times, 26 October 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force “officially declared dead” its US$800 million Milstar communications satellite. Launched atop a Titan IV rocket on 30 April and placed in the wrong orbit, the Milstar would “never reach its intended 22,300-mile-high [35,900-kilometer-high] orbit.” U.S. Air Force representative Aaron Renenger stated that the useless satellite “could remain in orbit for hundreds of years,” but posed no threat to other spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead,” 12 May 1999.)
NASA successfully launched its Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) telescope aboard a Delta II rocket. FUSE’s three-year mission was to measure the abundance of deuterium, or heavy hydrogen, which stars consume every day and convert to helium. Astronomers hoped that the study of deuterium would help them understand better “what the universe was like moments after creation.” The FUSE scientists sought to determine how much deuterium still exists and how much of it stars consume regularly, thereby calculating “the original makeup of the universe.” NASA had nearly cancelled the FUSE project in the early 1990s, because of cost overruns and missed deadlines, but in 1994 NASA had asked Johns Hopkins University to manage the project. Project managers at Johns Hopkins had scaled down the scientific instrument and used existing equipment instead of developing new technologies. The Canadian Space Agency had provided the camera, the French Space Agency had provided the spectrograph, and other U.S. universities had provided various parts for the telescope. Orbital Sciences Corporation had built the spacecraft using an existing design to reduce costs further. NASA considered the spacecraft and its launch a success; NASA’s Science Director Edward J. Weiler remarked, “We have never had a satellite as sensitive as FUSE.”(Washington Times, “Special Telescope To Look for First Signs of Creation,” 25 June 1999; Steven Young for Reuters, “NASA Launches Telescope To Seek Universe’s Origin,” 24 June 1999.)
The main engine of Japan’s H-2 rocket malfunctioned 4 minutes after launching from Tanegashima Space Center, failing to put the Mtsat satellite into orbit. Fearing they could lose control of its trajectory, officials ordered the rocket’s destruction 8 minutes into its flight, marking the first time the National Space Development Agency of Japan had destroyed a rocket in flight. It was the second launch failure for the H-2 rocket during 1999; another H-2 had failed to place its payload in orbit in February. However, before the February malfunction, Japan had launched five H-2 rockets successfully. The Mtsat satellite, intended to replace the Himawari 5 satellite, would have observed weather patterns and monitored aircraft.(Associated Press, “Japan Destroys Rocket in Midair as It Lifted $95 Million Satellite,” New York Times, 16 November 1999; Dow Jones Newswire, “Japan Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, Rocket Destroyed,” 15 November 1999.)
NASA announced that spacecraft engineers who had worked on NASA’s new Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) had won an American Electronics Association Technical Achievement Award for the “development of a spacecraft at a record-setting pace of one year.” Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had built the satellite for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), assembling the QuikSCAT faster than any construction of a spacecraft since the 1958 Explorer I satellite. To accomplish this fast pace, NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had developed a new procurement system called the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, to accelerate NASA’s purchase procedure. The new acquisition process had enabled NASA to take advantage of “low-cost commercial technology from the burgeoning spacecraft industry,” to develop satellite systems such as the QuikSCAT. NASA had been able to reduce the time needed to select a contractor and to initiate spacecraft development, from one year to 30 days. Chip Barnes, a QuikSCAT spacecraft system engineer at Ball Aerospace commented that the production had involved a “remarkable effort to get the spacecraft built, integrated, and tested in an 11-month time frame.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Quikscat Team Wins American Electronics Achievement Award,” news release 99-045, 3 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/aeaaward.html (accessed 12 February 2008). 720 Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Release Satellite, Head for Home,” Washington Post, 6 June 1999.)
A Lockheed Martin Titan II rocket launched successfully, carrying JPL’s QuikSCAT satellite. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation had built QuikSCAT in 11 months, setting an industry record. JPL stated that the satellite had “opened its solar arrays as planned an hour after launch, and a tracking station in Norway acquired the first signal from the spacecraft 18 minutes later.” NASA had originally scheduled the satellite’s launch for November 1998, but delayed it when a Titan IVA exploded after launch, carrying a payload for the National Reconnaissance Office. NASA had postponed the QuikSCAT launch until engineers could determine whether Titan II used any of the hardware that had caused the explosion on the Titan IVA. Following the launch of a Titan IVB rocket that placed a Milstar satellite in a faulty orbit, NASA had again delayed the QuikSCAT’s launch, pending investigation of the failure. The successfully launched QuikSCAT satellite was on a two-year mission with the option of a third year, to “gather about 400,000 detailed measurements of the speed and direction of winds over the ocean’s surface.” NASA intended the US$98 million mission to “improve weather forecasting and detect the onset of conditions like El Niño.” Engineers had designed the QuikSCAT to radiate microwave pulses over wide areas and to listen for the pulses’ echo. Those return signals would “allow scientists to determine wind speeds and directions at the surface of the oceans. Understanding the interaction [of wind and ocean circulation] is important for weather prediction.” Under the terms of NASA’s first contract using the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, Ball Aerospace had provided the QuikSCAT spacecraft bus, launch interface, system integration, test, launch support, and two years of mission operations.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Lockheed Martin’s Titan Launches with QuikScat Satellite,” 20 June 1999; “Satellite Launched on Weather Mission,” New York Times, 20 June 1999; Aerospace Daily, “QuikSCAT Makes It to Space After Six-Month Delay,” 22 June 1999; Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corp., “BATC Launches Its First Commercial Spacecraft,” news release, 19 June 1999, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=30 (accessed 25 February 2008).)
