NASA launched the most advanced communications satellite it had ever developed, the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-H (TDRS-H) created to provide communication between the Space Shuttles, ISS, HST, and NASA control centers. Intended to replace a communications satellite that had been in place since 1983 and had surpassed its mission-designed lifetime, the new TDRS-H was the first of three communications satellites planned to link NASA’s space-bound vehicles. NASA had designated nearly US$500 million for the design, building, and launch of the three new satellites. The TDRS-H launched aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIA rocket, separating from it after about 30 minutes of flight. Once the satellite reached 171° longitude, it became operational.(Lockheed Martin Inc., “International Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Provide Mission Success for NASA Satellite Launch,” news release, 30 June 2000; NASA, “Advanced Communications Satellite Ready To Serve New Millennium Space Projects,” news release 00-98, 21 June 2000.)
NASA released a comprehensive new study, which found that the levels of ozone in the Arctic stratosphere were declining rapidly. In some parts of the stratosphere, the atmosphere had lost 60 percent of its ozone over the course of one year. The report, compiled by hundreds of European and American scientists, also demonstrated that changes in the global climate (primarily global warming) threatened to delay the recovery of the ozone layer. The scientists were optimistic that the ozone layer would recover eventually, but perhaps not until the mid-21st century. The study had cost NASA more than US$20 million, and the European scientists contributed US$10 million. The researchers had gathered data using satellites, airplanes, and hundreds of weather balloons.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Thinning Ozone over Arctic Raises Concerns,” 6 April 2000; William K. Stevens, “New Survey Shows Growing Loss of Arctic Atmosphere’s Ozone,” New York Times, 6 April 2000.)
After two earlier unsuccessful trials, Russia launched, without incident, a modified Proton rocket carrying a large Gorizont communications satellite. Propulsion-system flaws had triggered explosions of the Proton rocket in previous trials. The United States viewed the successful test launch as a positive sign of Russia’s commitment to the ISS project, a boost for the strained relationship between the two countries. After the failed tests, a joint NASA-Russian Space Agency research crew had determined that production flaws in the turbomachinery of the rocket’s second and third stages, including the presence of contaminants such as asbestos cloth and metal fragments, had caused the problems. Russia planned to test the Proton rocket again before scheduling the much-delayed delivery of its crew module to the ISS.
NASA controllers began sending signals to the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to perform a series of maneuvers that would ultimately end in the satellite crashing into the Pacific Ocean. The endgame commands marked the conclusion of a successful nine-year mission, which had recorded data on more than 2,500 gamma-ray bursts. The US$670 million satellite, launched on 5 April 1991 aboard Mission STS-37, had provided researchers with never-before-seen images of explosions throughout the universe. “It will be like losing a member of the family,” remarked one NASA scientist who had worked on the program since 1979. NASA officials had decided to end the satellite’s space tenure because of the possibility that the aging satellite might become unresponsive and plummet out of control to Earth. By initiating the satellite’s demise, NASA could control the landing area of the 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) spacecraft. Some critics charged NASA with being too conservative, because it had based its decision on the 1-in- 1,000 odds that an uncontrolled descent of the satellite to Earth would result in injuries.(James Orberg, “Plan To Scrap Satellite Sacrifices Science,” USA Today, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “NASA To Destroy Compton Satellite After Nine Years,” 28 May 2000.)
Jason Allen Diekman of Mission Viejo, California, pled guilty to federal charges of computer crimes after negotiating a deal with prosecutors. Prosecutors had charged Diekman in September with illegal hacking and with using stolen credit card numbers to purchase US$6,000 worth of computer equipment and other items. He had confessed to investigators that he had hacked into “hundreds, maybe thousands” of computers over two years, including systems at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, Cornell University, the University of California at San Diego, and California State University at Fullerton. Diekman’s most serious confessed invasions had occurred at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where he had gained root-level access to two computer systems, and at Stanford University, where he had gained control over 24 systems, two of them owned by NASA and containing flight-control software for NASA’s satellites. The U.S. District Judge set sentencing for 5 February 2001.(David Rosenzweig, “Hacker Pleads Guilty to Invading JPL, Stanford Computers Crime: Mission Viego Man, 20, Accepts Federal Plea Bargain. He Had Gained Control of NASA Computers at Both Sites,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 2000.)
NASA announced that its Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS) had detected water vapor throughout interstellar space. However, in the very coldest areas, where temperatures are only 30° above absolute zero, the satellite had detected far less water vapor than most theories had predicted. In those areas, SWAS measurements had indicated water vapor concentrations of only a few parts per billion. Ronald L. Snell of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst remarked that the finding presented a “real puzzle to our understanding of the chemistry of interstellar clouds.” In warmer regions, such as those within star-producing gas clouds, SWAS had measured water concentrations as much as 10,000 times greater than in the coldest regions. The new results were the product of 18 months of observations using the compact radio observatory, launched in 1998 on a mission to “study the composition of interstellar gas clouds and their collapse to form new stars.”(NASA, “Cosmic Gas Clouds Yield Puzzling Concentrations of Water,” news release 00-126, 16 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-126.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA made data from its Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) available to the public. ASTER, a general-purpose imaging instrument featuring 14 spectral bands, extremely high spatial resolution, and stereo-imaging capabilities, had launched aboard NASA’s Terra satellite in December 1999. One of ASTER’s primary goals was “to acquire a one-time cloud-free image of the entire land surface of Earth,” intended as a baseline image for monitoring environmental change.(NASA, “Terra Satellite’s ASTER Data Now Available to the Public,” news release 2000-124, 5 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/terra.html (accessed 7 April 2008).)
00-114, 20 July 2000; NASA, “First Opportunity Tonight for Zvezda To Dock with International Space Station,” news release N00-36, 25 July 2000. satellite because it was able to meet challenging demands for bandwidth, power, and in-orbit flexibility.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Build First Interactive Broadband Multimedia Spacecraft for New Skies Satellites,” news release, 4 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedContractBuildF.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
In a much-anticipated launch, the Astro-E satellite lifted off aboard an M-5 rocket from the Kagoshima Space Center on the Japanese island of Kyushu. However, soon after launch, Astro-E was lost when the rocket suffered a “control system breakdown,” propelling the satellite into a lower orbit than planned. U.S. officials monitoring the launch determined that the satellite had most likely burned up in Earth’s atmosphere. Astro-E, the product of a joint venture between the United States and Japan, carried new x-ray–sensing equipment, which scientists had hoped would further illuminate the material surrounding black holes. Scientists had designed the new equipment to sense minute changes in the heat of single protons. The specialists overseeing the launch and mission had hoped that Astro-E would orbit and gather data for five years. The satellite had cost more than US$100 million to develop.(NASA, “Japanese-U.S. Satellite Ushers in Golden Era of X-ray Astronomy,” news release 00-18, 2 February 2000; Associated Press, “Japan Suffers Another Setback When Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit,” 10 February 2000; Justin Ray, “Astro-E Believed Lost Following Botched Launch,” Space Flight Now, 10 February 2000.)
The ESA signed a four-year contract with two industry groups⎯Sarcom, led by Spot Image of Toulouse, France, and the Emma consortium, led by Eurimage of Rome⎯granting the two groups “priority access to the Envisat radar remote-sensing satellite” scheduled for launch in 2001, as well as imagery from the ERS-2 spacecraft, already in orbit. About the new business relationship, a major policy shift for the ESA, Acting Envisat Mission Manager Günther Kohlhammer remarked that the ESA had realized that it needed to change so that it could develop new markets. The contract gave commercial orders for the satellite images priority over scientific requests, setting new limits on the type and number of users ESA would grant access to data without paying commercial prices.(Peter B. de Selding, “ESA Hands Radar Satellite Responsibility to Industry,” Space News, 30 October 2000.)
During routine testing in preparation for a July 2000 launch, excessive vibration damaged NASA’s High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Images (HESSI) spacecraft. The vibration test device was accidentally set at a level 10 times higher than appropriate, causing structural damage and cracks in two of the satellite’s four solar arrays. Officials estimated that the damage would delay the planned launch by at least six months. NASA had designated about US$75 million for the project. The faulty test, occurring at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, revealed the high degree of precision required of engineers when creating and testing a space-bound craft. Although the satellite had vibrated at the incorrect setting for only about 200 milliseconds, it still sustained damage. However, the project engineers were optimistic that the mission would resume eventually.(Associated Press, “NASA Engineers Damage Satellite During Shake Test,” 24 March 2000; NASA, “HESSI Sustains Damage During Vibration Testing,” news release 00-45, 24 March 2000.)
The Sea Launch Company suffered a setback in its bid to become a major participant in the satellite launch industry, when one of its Russian-Ukrainian Zenit 3SL rockets carrying a British communications satellite crashed into the Pacific Ocean. The launch was only the third undertaken by the international company, which had planned to use a converted ocean oil rig known as Odyssey as its permanent launchpad. The Sea Launch Company comprised the Boeing Company, together with companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway. The company had designed its innovative Sea Launch System to use Earth’s rotation and the faster movement of Earth’s surface at the equator to make it easier to launch rockets with heavy payloads. The failed satellite had cost London-based ICO Global Communications more than US$100 million to develop.(Associated Press, “Sea Launch Satellite Falls into Ocean; Boeing-Led Venture Out $100 million,” 13 March 2000.)
NASA’s Office of Earth Sciences selected Gencorp Aerojet to build the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), a spaceborne instrument for measuring microwave energy emitted and scattered by the atmosphere. NASA intended the ATMS to replace instruments currently used on polar-orbiting weather satellites. NASA planned for the ATMS, working alongside an infrared sounder instrument, to produce daily global atmospheric temperature, humidity, and pressure profiles, essential for accurate weather forecasting and long-term climate research. Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that the advanced technology would improve the accuracy of weather forecasting, from the current three-to-five day forecast span to seven-to-ten day predictions. NASA planned to fly the first unit as part of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project Bridge mission, intended to ensure continuity of research-quality data through the bridging of sounding data between NASA’s Earth Observing System research missions and future NPOESS operational missions. Goddard Space Flight Center would provide oversight of the contract, worth US$206.6 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Build Next Generation Weather Instrument,” news release C00-q, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-q.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
Iridium Satellite LLC announced that the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York had approved its bid to purchase the operating assets, property, and intellectual property of Iridium LLC. Iridium Satellite LLC would continue providing commercial satellite communication services to the U.S. government.(Iridium LLC, “Statement for Iridium Satellite LLC,” news release, 15 November 2000. 299)
In the second on-orbit failure of Hughes Electronic Corporation’s HS601-model satellite, the Spacecraft Control Processor (SCP) of Mexico’s Solidaridad I communications satellite malfunctioned, disrupting television, radio, and pager services. The first incident had occurred on the Galaxy IV satellite, causing similar communications disruptions in the United States during 1998. In the current malfunction, operators in Iztapalapa and Hermosillo received a series of alarms indicating that the only functioning SCP on board the Satmex-owned craft had turned itself off. The satellite had two SCPs on board and needed only one to carry out its communications relay properly, but Solidaridad I already was running on its backup SCP, having lost its first processor a year ago. Engineers suspected that the cause of the incident was the growth of a tiny crystalline structure that leads to electrical shorts. Hughes investigators had identified this type of malfunction in their satellites containing tin-plated relay switches and, therefore, had begun to use nickel-plated switches in new satellites to prevent future occurrences of such electrical shorts. However, Solidaridad I, designed for 14 years of service in space, had launched in 1993 before the conversion to nickel-plated switches. The Solidaridad series, comprising two satellites, provided service to all of Mexico, also extending to the southwestern United States, the Caribbean, and Central and South America. The malfunction led to the loss of educational television programming in 12,000 schools in Mexico, mostly in remote rural areas where some students rely entirely on televised courses. Satmex was transferring Solidaridad I users to the three other satellites in its fleet.(Justin Ray, “Satellite Failure Causes Communications Blackout,” Spaceflight Now, 29 August 2000. 280)
After completing four months of on-orbit checkout and verification, Terra, the newest in NASA’s series of Earth Observing System Satellites, became functional. NASA had developed and launched Terra to monitor Earth’s atmosphere on a daily basis. Researchers hoped that gathering frequent data would allow a more comprehensive assessment of Earth’s climate change. According to Yoram J. Kaufman, Project Scientist for Terra at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), “Terra is measuring and documenting the Earth’s vital signs, many of them for the first time.” In the midst of public and scholarly discussions of global warming and climate change, the new research satellite was a step toward understanding the causes of the changes. “The data will help us understand our planet, aid in our distinguishing between natural and human-induced changes, and show us how the Earth’s climate affects the quality of our lives,” Kaufman clarified. The satellite’s first transmitted images thrilled scientists. The satellite surveyed North America, creating images in many different layers, to reveal how different levels of population and types of vegetation affected the climate. NASA officials planned to make the images obtained by Terra available to business, scientists, and the public.(NASA, “Terra Spacecraft Open for Business,” news release 00-62, 19 April 2000; NASA, “New Views of Earth from Terra Satellite Wednesday,” news release N00-16, 18 April 2000.)
SkyCorp signed a commercial Space Act agreement with NASA providing that SkyCorp deploy into orbit, either from the Space Shuttle or from the ISS, a satellite containing an Internet server. NASA and SkyCorp planned to test the idea as a “proof of concept” for a Low Earth Orbit 544 satellite constellation, offering Internet access on a global scale. SkyCorp chose to launch an Apache server on a small satellite containing an Apple 500 MHz Power Mac G4. The agreement with NASA outlined SkyCorp’s novel idea of launching a partially assembled satellite aboard a Space Shuttle. Astronauts would assemble the craft in space before tossing it from a Shuttle or ISS airlock into an independent orbit. SkyCorp named its concept Gossamer. Typically, engineers assemble a satellite fully on Earth, and it must withstand the stress of launch. A satellite built according to the Gossamer concept would only need to retain structural integrity in microgravity, greatly simplifying guidance, navigation, and control requirements.(SkyCorp, “SkyCorp Announces Space Act Agreement with NASA To Fly First Internet Webserver in Space,” news release, 20 October 2000; Keith Cowing, “SkyCorp Signs Agreement with NASA To Fly the First Webserver in Space⎯and It Will Be a Mac G4,” SpaceRef.com, 23 October 2000.)
A National Academy of Sciences task force issued a report supporting the development and deployment of the Triana research satellite proposed by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. Congress had authorized the task force in 1999, to investigate the feasibility of Gore’s plan, which called for a satellite to orbit Earth continuously, capturing live pictures of the planet. Gore believed that obtaining the images and making them available on the Internet would increase public awareness of environmental issues. The proposal had sparked a political controversy between Gore and the Republican Congress, prompting Congress to demand that a task force investigate the value of the project. The task force reported that the satellite had scientific merit. White House science advisor Neal Lane praised the study’s results, urging House members to act with “bipartisan Congressional support.” The process of investigation and approval of the project had drawn public attention to the political debate about space exploration.(Warren E. Leary, “Science Panel Supports Gore Satellite Plan,” New York Times, 9 March 2000; Associated Press, “Panel Finds Merit in Space Mission Proposed by Gore,” 8 March 2000.)
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event “a bittersweet day for NASA.” The spacecraft, NASA’s “gamma-ray equivalent” of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellite’s control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASA’s efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns,” news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, “Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth,” news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, “A Satellite’s Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project,” Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
Arianespace, the France-based European satellite launch company, announced that it had won a contract to launch three more satellites for INTELSAT, the international satellite corporation based in Washington, DC. Arianespace already held a contract to launch three other satellites in the INTELSAT IX series. INTELSAT had scheduled six of the series’ seven spacecraft for launch from mid-2001 through the end of 2002, on Ariane 4 or Ariane 5 launch vehicles, from Europe’s spaceport in French Guiana. California-based Space Systems/Loral was building the 4.7-tonne (4,700-kilogram or 5.2-ton) satellites. In 1965 INTELSAT had launched the world’s first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird.(Reuters, “France: Arianespace in Deal To Launch 3 INTELSAT Satellites,” 27 September 2000.)
NASA announced that, on 3 September 2000, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) aboard NASA’s Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) satellite had detected an 11 million-square-mile (28.5 million-square-kilometer) ozone-depletion area⎯surpassing the ozone hole’s record of 10.5 million square miles (27.2 million square kilometers) set on 19 September 1998. Scientists investigating the extent of the ozone-depletion area expressed their surprise, suggesting that early-spring conditions and an “extremely intense Antarctic vortex”⎯an upper-altitude stratospheric air current that moves around the continent⎯might partly explain the record-setting size. Jack A. Kaye of the Office of Earth Sciences, Research Director at NASA Headquarters, remarked that, although scientists expect variations in the size of the ozone hole from one year to the next, they plan to observe the evolution of the ozone-depletion area in the coming months, to compare it with previous years. Manager of NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Program Michael J. Kurylo suggested that the new data reinforced concerns about the fragile nature of the ozone layer, indicating that, although international agreements had curbed the production of ozone-destroying gases, concentrations of those gases in the stratosphere were just reaching their peak levels. Therefore, he warned that it would be decades before the depletion area in the ozone layer would no longer occur annually. Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar commented that such discoveries demonstrated the value of long-term observations.(NASA, “Largest-Ever Ozone Hole Observed over Antarctica,” news release 00-137, 7 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-137.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The United States and Brazil signed a treaty giving U.S. aerospace firms access to Brazil’s Alcântara launch site, located just 3° south of the equator. The treaty was the first accord signed by the United States that allowed U.S. satellites to launch from foreign soil. The launch site’s location near the center of the globe would save money for aerospace companies, because satellites could take a shorter path to equatorial orbit, requiring less fuel. Brazil benefited from the boost to its embryonic space program and the possibility of capturing a portion of the lucrative commercial-satellite business. At the time of the agreement, U.S. firms controlled two- thirds of the annual US$66 billion commercial satellite industry.(Reuters, “Brazil: Joins Space Race with U.S. Satellite Treaty,” 17 April 2000; Peter Fritsch, “Brazil To Sign U.S. Accord To Enter Satellite Business,” Wall Street Journal, 18 April 2000.)
The National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Integrated Program Office (IPO) selected Raytheon Company to provide imaging-sensor instruments for the new NPOESS craft, which would replace the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Polar- Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellites (POES) and the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites. Under a contract valued at US$152.8 million, Raytheon would design, develop, and test the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) instrument and develop the algorithms to produce environmental data records from VIIRS data.(Associated Press, “Raytheon Awarded $152.8 Million Contract for Meteorological Satellite Imaging Sensor,” 28 November 2000.)
NASA successfully launched the GOES-L satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The new weather satellite would provide the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with detailed readings on severe weather systems affecting the United States. NASA deemed the GOES-L satellite a top priority because of the declining returns of the aging GOES-8 satellite. NASA had delayed the US$220 million satellite project because of engine problems, causing anxiety to weather forecasters who depended on the satellites to track the powerful hurricanes that affected the United States in 1999. As Director of the National Weather Service’s Southern Region, William Proenza explained, “It is vitally important that we have continuity of data or we may be finding ourselves impaired in our ability of forecasting.” NASA had kept the May 2000 launch of the GOES-L on track, despite some calls to postpone it so that NASA could launch Shuttle Atlantis on an urgent repair mission to the International Space Station (ISS). However, NASA officials had determined that the risk of inadequate weather forecasting was too great to take a chance on delaying the launch.(Associated Press, “NASA Launches Hurricane-Tracking Satellite,” 3 May 2000; Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Weather Satellite Has Successful Launch, Heads for Orbit,” 3 May 2000.)
A Russian Proton-K rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the Russian Ministry of Defense’s Raduga-1-5 spacecraft, a military communications satellite with the alternate names Globus-1 and Cosmos 2372. Although the Globus-1 was a classified program, news sources reported that the craft would use a geostationary orbit to serve as a relay link for Russian military forces. At the time of the launch, many Raduga craft remained in orbit, but only five were operational.(Justin Ray, “Proton Rocket Lofts Russian Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2000; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 562, 1 September 2000, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx562.html (accessed 6 August 2008). 975 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Duxbury Named Project Manager of Stardust Mission,” news release 2000- 084, 30 August 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/duxbury.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
After detailing only a few computer glitches, which had occurred during the dreaded Y2K transition, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA had narrowly avoided a Y2K data flaw that might have redirected the orbit of its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. According to NASA’s Chief Information Officer, the software that transmitted the commands directing satellite orbits had automatically reverted to 1 January 1999 commands, when it should have used 1 January 2000 commands. Attentive operators caught the potential problem before the software had sent the faulty data to any satellites. Although the episode accentuated the seriousness of the Y2K computer transition, it was notable that, in spite of the risks, very few computer crashes actually occurred during the changeover.(Paula Shaki Trimble, “NASA Discovered Last-Minute Y2K Glitch,” Federal Computer Week, 4 January 2000. 859 NASA, “Mars Program Independent Assessment Team Begins Work,” news release 00-6, 7 January 2000.)
NASA announced that SPX Services Solutions had obtained a license to use NASA-patented technology to monitor more carefully levels of exhaust produced by the United States’ millions of motor vehicles. NASA had developed its atmospheric, remote-sensing technology to track greenhouse gases and to monitor Earth’s ozone layer. Combining government and private forces, researchers intended to focus on the pollution output of motor vehicles, particularly that of individual automobiles. SPX Services planned to design a device that would enable a driver to test his or her own vehicle to determine its compliance with U.S. Clean Air Act standards, rather than requiring the driver to take it to an auto mechanic for an emissions test. The goal of self- monitoring suited the increasingly popular idea of encouraging individuals to accept personal responsibility for protecting Earth from noxious pollutants.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Technology To Monitor Motor Vehicle Pollution,” news release 18 July 2000.)
NASA announced that scientists using the Chandra X-ray Observatory had confirmed the existence of “middleweight” black holes. Several groups of scientists used Chandra to focus on a mid-mass black hole located 600 light-years from the center of galaxy M82. Previous x-ray data from the German-U.S. ROSAT (Röntgensatellite) and the Japan-U.S. ASCA (Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics) had suggested the existence of a mid-mass black hole in M82. Scientists compared Chandra’s new high-resolution images with optical radio and infrared maps to determine that a single, bright source was emitting most of the x-rays. The scientists continued to observe M82 over an eight-month period, noting that the intensity of the x-rays rose and fell every 600 seconds. Philip Kaaret of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics explained that this behavior was similar to black holes swallowing gas from a nearby star or cloud. Martin Ward of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom remarked that the findings opened “a whole new field of research.”(NASA, “Chandra Clinches Case for Unexpected Black Hole Discovery,” news release 00-140, 12 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-140.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The first of two Cluster spacecraft launches took place from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. NASA and the European Space Agency had formed a partnership to develop and build the exploration craft, designed to travel around the Earth in a tetrahedral formation, collecting data on solar wind. Space officials planned to launch two additional Cluster craft one month after the first two had entered their orbiting pattern. With four satellites launched and flying in formation, scientists expected to harvest data about the “turbulent battle” raging between Earth’s magnetic field and the solar winds blowing at an estimated rate of 1–2 million miles (1.6–3.2 million kilometers) per hour. Researchers also hoped the new information would help scientists understand other interactions between the Earth and the Sun. Each of the four Cluster spacecraft carried instruments to measure the patterns of electrons and the presence of protons and helium, as well as instruments to monitor the characteristics of electronic fields, solar wind, and plasma waves.(NASA, “New Cluster Mission To Provide Unprecedented Detail about Space Weather,” news release 00-105, 13 July 2000.)
New NASA research published in the 1 October issue of the American Meteorological Society’s Journal of Climate warned that clouds might not help counteract climate-warming trends. Anthony D. Del Genio, of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York City, had analyzed observations of low clouds over land, collected between 1994 and 1997 as part of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Atmospheric Radiation Measurement program. Del Genio had found that clouds are thinner when temperatures were higher, a phenomenon occurring in any weather condition or season and at any time of day. Some climate theories had predicted that high temperatures would cause thicker clouds because of an increase in water vapor, but Del Genio explained that during warmer temperatures, the bottoms of clouds rise and become thinner. This occurs because clouds that form over a warm, dry air mass must rise higher before becoming sufficiently saturated with water to form a cloud base. Thinner clouds are less capable of reflecting sunlight back into space and are, therefore, unable to act as a “natural sun shield.” Del Genio’s findings corroborated long-term, worldwide satellite observations, published using the NASA-funded International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) database. The ISCCP, a global composite of cloud observations from international weather satellites, began showing a link between cloud thinning and temperature in 1992.(NASA, “Revised⎯NASA Scientist Predicts Less Climate Cooling from Clouds,” news release 00-151, 3 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-151.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rocket’s successful launch confirmed Russia’s ability to transport its Zvezda module: “This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS.” The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, “Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab,” 5 July 2000.)
EarthWatch Inc., a Colorado-based company developing a network of satellites to capture images of various regions of the Earth for commercial applications, launched its QuickBird 1 craft from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, aboard a Russian Cosmos-3M rocket. However, ground stations did not pick up its signals as planned. U.S. tracking data listed the craft’s orbit as “decayed,” and a Russian Aerospace Agency spokesperson described the craft as “effectively lost.” EarthWatch had lost its first satellite, Early Bird 1, four days after its 24 December 1997 launch because of a power-system problem.(Stephen Clark, “Commercial Eye-in-the-Sky Appears Lost in Launch Failure,” Spaceflight Now, 21 November 2000.)
The board appointed to investigate the mishap that had damaged the High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) spacecraft in preflight testing announced its findings. The investigators had discovered that the computer controlling the vibration device had sensed an abnormally high level of static friction and had responded by delivering approximately 10 times the exertion of gravity suitable for the test. A slight misalignment of the shaker mechanism had proved just enough to throw off the preflight testing. The board had determined that the accident had been avoidable. Routine maintenance and a pretest of the testing device itself would have caught the problem before any damage had occurred. NASA planned for the HESSI satellite to undergo repairs at the University of California at Berkeley.(NASA, “Board Finds Cause of HESSI Mishap,” news release 00-80, 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “NASA Identifies Causes of Test Accident that Broke Spacecraft,” 12 May 2000.)
Lockheed Martin and NASA entered into a consolidated space operations contract (CSOC), allowing NASA to use the services of two commercial, satellite ground-tracking stations. Under CSOC, NASA customers would have access on a per-pass basis to additional stations on Svalbard Island in Norway, owned by Kongsberg Spacetec-Lockheed Martin Space Data Services, and in Poker Flat, Alaska, owned by DataLynx. Both tracking stations had recently completed CSOC operational-readiness reviews in preparation for inclusion in Lockheed Martin’s catalog of services available to NASA programs.(“Lockheed Martin Adds Two Commercial Stations to CSOC Capability,” Aerospace Daily, 29 November 2000. 1052 NASA, “NASA Technology Allows Engineers to See Airframe Noise,” news release 00-189, 30 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-189.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
At a ceremony at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs, Colorado, U.S. Air Force General Ralph E. Eberhart succeeded General Richard B. Myers as the nation’s top military space official, overseeing the U.S. Space Command, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, and the North American Aerospace Defense Command, in addition to thousands of troops and more than 100 satellites. Eberhart took over the U.S. space operations post after having led the Air Force’s Air Combat Command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.(Tom Breen, “U.S. Gets New Military Space Chief,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 February 2000.)
The Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000) officially commenced in South Africa’s Northern Province, with the gathering of scientists from 14 nations and six South African universities. NASA, alongside the University of Witwatersrand, led SAFARI 2000, their goal to “determine how the region’s natural ecosystems and human land use affect air quality and atmospheric conditions.” The initiative would use specially equipped planes to make four scientific flights each week, over a six-week period, through September 2000. A modern ER-2 version of the U-2 spy plane would fly directly under the Terra satellite as it passed over various regions of southern Africa, to verify the satellite’s data. Three other aircraft would also fly with the ER-2 “like a stack of pancakes,” with the ER-2 flying at about 65,000 feet (19,800 meters) to conduct remote sensing, a Convair 580 aircraft collecting air and gas samples just below the ER- 2, and two Aerocommander 690A aircraft conducting similar tests at between 5,000 and 12,000 feet (1,500 and 3,700 meters).(Justin Arenstein for Africa News Service, “Africa’s Biggest Science Experiment Kicks Off,” 14 August 2000; Africa News Service, “NASA Project Off to a Flying Start,” 14 August 2000.)
A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americom’s fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four others⎯the GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4⎯to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide “service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.”(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site,” news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Two Earth-monitoring satellites launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Boeing Delta II rocket, successfully reaching orbit. NASA launched its Earth Observing I (EO-I) satellite, part of its New Millenium Program, to test several advanced technologies for possible use in future missions. NASA planned to fly the US$193 million craft within 2 miles (3 kilometers) of the Landsat 7 satellite to collect the same images, with the Landsat 7 images serving as the benchmark for the new imager aboard the EO-I. The second satellite⎯the multinational SAC-C satellite, a joint venture of NASA, Argentina, Brazil, Denmark, France, and Italy⎯carried 11 instruments for studying the Earth’s surface, atmosphere, and magnetic field, including an instrument to observe the migration of the Franca whale.(Associated Press, “Two Earth-Monitoring Satellites,” 21 November 2000.)
A Sirius-2 communications satellite launched aboard a Russian Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The launch marked the second success for the Sirius Company, which planned to broadcast digital radio to the United States. Sirius had placed its first satellite in orbit on 1 July 2000, scheduling a third launch for November 2000.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Russia Launches U.S. Satellite from Kazakhstan,” 5 September 2000.)
Following a 24-hour delay caused by a computer anomaly, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) successfully launched the Lockheed Martin–built, NOAAL spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base, aboard a Titan II rocket. Ground controllers confirmed that the craft had deployed its solar array and verified a power-positive condition. NASA and NOAA had designed the satellite, the second in a series of five polar-orbiting spacecraft, to collect meteorological data and to transmit the information to users worldwide. NOAA’s National Weather Service planned to use the craft’s data for long-range weather and climate forecasts. Although NASA had managed the project of building and launching the satellite, it intended to transfer operational control to NOAA 10 days following the launch.(NOAA, “NOAA-L Weather Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release 2000-069, 21 September 2000, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2000/sep00/noaa00069.html (accessed 29 April 2008); Associated Press, “Weather Satellite Launched After Delay,” 21 September 2000.)
A Starsem Soyuz-Fregat rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit for the European Space Agency (ESA) the final pair of Cluster II scientific satellites, Rumba and Tango. The launch was the 10th consecutive success for the French-Russian Starsem consortium. The first pair of Cluster II satellites, named Salsa and Samba, had launched on 16 July 2000. Designed to determine the physical process of the interaction between the solar wind and Earth’s magnetosphere, the mission’s main objective was to increase understanding of space weather, viewed as “an increasingly significant obstacle to satellite activity,” thereby improving scientists’ forecasting abilities. Each of the four spacecraft contained a collection of instruments for detecting plasma fields, waves, and particles. The Cluster II mission, designed to last for two years following an initial three-month period of instrument and system commissioning, was an international effort of more than 200 scientists from Canada, China, the Czech Republic, ESA member states, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Russia, and the United States. The original Cluster mission had ended during its inaugural launch in 1996, when a malfunction had caused the explosion of Arianespace Inc.’s Ariane 5 rocket.(European Space Agency, “Lift Off for Second Pair of Cluster II Spacecraft,” news release 52-2000, http://www. esa.int/esaCP/Pr_52_2000_p_EN.html (accessed 8 May 2008); Space Business News, “Soyuz Launches Second Pair of Cluster Probes Igniting Science Mission; Tenth Successful Launch in 18 Months,” 16 August 2000.)
New Skies Satellites N.V. selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems (LMCSS) to build a second geosynchronous satellite to provide high-speed Internet access and other multimedia communications to a large coverage area, extending from the eastern Mediterranean and southern Africa to Australia, Japan, and Korea. New Skies selected the LMCSS A
The government of the People’s Republic of China released a document outlining its policy regarding its future human spaceflight program and satellite-launch industries. The document, which provided the outside world with information about China’s top-secret space program, described the Chinese space industry as “an integral part of the state’s comprehensive development strategy” and stated, “exploration and utilization of outer space should be for peaceful purposes and benefit the whole of mankind.” The paper provided details of China’s satellite program, stating that as of October 2000, China had developed and launched 47 satellites with a success rate of over 90 percent. China had four satellite series in operation: the Dongfanghong telecommunications series; the Fengyun meteorological series; the Shijian research and technology series; and the Ziyuan Earth-observation series, which had recently launched its first spacecraft. The paper also outlined China’s efforts toward international cooperation, notably China’s signing of an agreement with a dozen countries, including the United States, Russia, Japan, and several European countries, allowing for scientific exchange and joint development of spacecraft components, as well as for commercial launch services. To date, China had launched 27 foreign-made satellites using its Long March series of rockets.(Stephen Clark, “China Temporarily Lifts Its Veil on Its Secret Space Program,” Spaceflight Now, 24 November 2000.)
Princeton University graduate student Xiaohui Fan discovered a distant quasar that scientists believed to be the oldest object ever observed by a human being. Fan had worked as part of a team using the 32-foot (10-meter) W. M. Keck Telescope. Estimating that the quasar was (Associated Press, “Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks,” 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, “Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal,” news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
