NASA researchers with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the University of California at San Diego published research indicating that particles from human-produced pollution might significantly contribute to weakening the planet’s hydrological cycle. The hydrological cycle is the circulation of water between Earth’s atmosphere and its surface water and soils. Specifically, water precipitates from the atmosphere into surface water or soils and later evaporates from surface water, soils, and plants back into the atmosphere. The researchers had examined satellite data indicating aerosol distribution in the Indian Ocean region and had found that the aerosols, primarily composed of black carbon, could weaken the hydrological cycle in two ways. The aerosols could reduce the amount of sunlight reaching the ocean, thereby decreasing the amount of water evaporating into the atmosphere. In addition, when particulates enter clouds, they reduce the size of cloud droplets, thereby reducing the amount of rain over polluted regions. The particulates in aerosols comprise a mixture of substances formed by the burning of fossil fuels and rural biomass. The new research was significant because it suggested that aerosols might be more environmentally harmful than scientists had previously understood and that air pollution is both an urban and a rural phenomenon.(NASA, “Tiny Pollution Particles May Carry Large Consequences for Earth’s Water Supply,” news release 01- 239, 6 December 2001; V. Ramanathan, “Aerosols, Climate, and the Hydrological Cycle,” Science n.s. 294, no. 5549 (7 December 2001): 2119–2124.)
Gerard A. Kriss of Johns Hopkins University led a group of astronomers using NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) satellite to obtain the best observations to date of helium gas remaining from the Big Bang. The observations provided information about the universe’s architecture millions of years ago, giving empirical support for theories about how matter in the expanding universe had condensed into a structure that permeated space between galaxies. The FUSE satellite had observed the light of the distant quasar HE2347-4342, and scientists had used the data it produced to make comparative analyses of the light’s absorption by helium and hydrogen gas on its trajectory to Earth. The astronomers had compared the ionization of the helium and hydrogen, the result of the gases’ absorption of light, to determine the most likely source of the energy that had heated the universe during its early formation. They concluded that, most likely, a combination of quasars and newly formed stars had produced the ionization of helium and hydrogen gases. Moreover, the presence of helium, in regions with no hydrogen, supported the theory that the universe’s architecture resulted from extensive gravitational instabilities during the chaos after the Big Bang.(NASA, “New View of Primordial Helium Traces Structure of Early Universe,” news release 01-160, 9 August 2001; G. A. Kriss, “Resolving the Structure of Ionized Helium in the Intergalactic Medium with the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer,” Science 293, no. 5532 (10 August 2001): 1112–1116.)
NASA’s Mars Odyssey spacecraft maneuvered into Mars’s orbit after a six-month, 286 million- mile (460 million-kilometer) voyage from Earth. Newspapers described the event as a major success for NASA, which had lost three previous spacecraft destined for Mars during the years from 1993 to 1999. NASA planned for Odyssey to orbit Mars for two and one-half years, mapping the mineral composition of Mars and searching for evidence of water ice beneath the planet’s surface. Toward the end of Odyssey’s orbital reconnaissance mission, the spacecraft would also function as a communications satellite for two robotic landers that NASA planned to launch to Mars in 2003.(Mark Carreau, “Odyssey Slips into Orbit, Breaks String of Failures,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2001; New York Times, “At Last a Success on a Mars Mission,” 24 October 2001.)
NASA launched the Jason-1 oceanography satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite launched on the same rocket as the TIMED spacecraft, but the two spacecraft were part of separate missions. Jason-1 belonged to a joint U.S.-French mission to monitor global climate interactions between Earth’s atmosphere and seas, continuing the mission that the TOPEX/Poseidon spacecraft had begun in 1992. The 500-kilogram (1,100-pound) Jason- 1 weighed about 1/5th of the TOPEX/Poseidon and carried its predecessor’s main instrument―the Poseidon 2 altimeter―as well as other, more advanced instruments that would provide Jason-1 with improved operational utility.(NASA, “NASA/French Ocean-Observing Satellite Set To Soar,” news release 01-225, 19 November 2001; NASA JPL, “Ocean Surface Topography from Space: Missions―Jason-1 Launch,”29 July 2008, http://topex- www.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/jason-1-launch.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
Members of the Landsat 7 project, involving scientists from NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), announced that, in the course of mapping Antarctica, the team had discovered a giant new crack in one of the world’s largest ice sheets. The team believed that the crack, formed within the past five weeks, would result in the calving of the Pine Island Glacier, creating a major new iceberg within 18 months. NASA had obtained the image from the Landsat 7 satellite, which had passed over Antarctica 16 times daily since its 1999 launch.(NASA, “NASA Image Reveals Giant Chip Off the Antarctic Ice Block,” news release 01-50, 22 March 2001; Reuters, “Satellite Spies Crack in Antarctica Glacier, 23 March 2001.)
In preparation for the final descent of the Mir space station, the Russian Space Agency negotiated a US$200 million insurance policy covering any damage that might occur if pieces of the craft landed in populated areas. Russian officials planned to fire the engines of the cargo ship attached to the space station, thereby pulling Mir from orbit and sending the space station hurtling into Earth’s atmosphere. Scientists predicted that intense heat would destroy most of the station during reentry, but that some fragments would hit Earth. Although space agencies had successfully deorbited many rockets and satellites to final resting places in the ocean, Russia faced increasing international consternation regarding the damage Mir’s reentry might cause. Japan was at higher risk from fragments of Mir than other countries, because the space station would pass over Japan in its final, low orbit.
A group of scientists led by Liming Zhou of Boston University published research indicating that substantial portions of the northern hemisphere had experienced effects of global warming. The scientists, who were studying the responses of vegetation to temperature changes, had used satellite data collected from July 1981 to December 1999 and had found a persistent increase in the length of the growing season in the majority of vegetated areas in the northern latitudes of Asia and Europe. A similar trend was evident in North America, but in a relatively lower proportion of land area. The data had also revealed declines in vegetated area in Alaska, Canada, and some parts of Asia, which may have resulted from temperature-induced drought in those areas. In addition, the scientists discovered a statistically significant relationship between changes in vegetated area and increasing land surface temperatures, indicating that climatic changes may have led to changes in vegetative activity in much of the world.(NASA, “Earth’s Becoming a Greener Greenhouse,” news release 01-178, 4 September 2001; L. Zhou et al., “Variations in Northern Vegetation Activity Inferred from Satellite Data of Vegetation Index During 1981 to 1999,” Journal of Geophysical Research 106, no. D17 (16 September 2001): 20069–20083.)
A team of European and American astronomers announced that they had obtained the first observations of energy leaving a black hole. The scientists, who had used ESA’s XMM-Newton satellite to observe a supermassive black hole in the center of galaxy MCG-6–30–15, had detected an x-ray glow emanating from iron gas that was moving at half the speed of the light that was close to the black hole. The scientists believed that the x-ray glow resulted from friction produced by matter rotating around a black hole before falling into it. Because the black hole’s gravity is sufficiently intense to wrap magnetic field lines around it, the entwined magnetic fields tighten around the black hole, slowing its rotation, and, as a result, increasing the temperature of the region surrounding the black hole. Observed gravity-stretching particles of light in the iron gas, the scientists had discovered unexpectedly that the total energy output of the gas was too high for only gravity and the descent of matter into the black hole to be providing the power source. The scientists had concluded that an additional power source must be increasing the energy output of the gas to the observed intensity.(NASA, “New Energy Source ‘Wrings’ Power from Black Hole Spin,” news release 01-200, 22 October 2001; Jörn Wilms et al., “XMM-EPIC Observation of MCG-6-30-15: Direct Evidence for the Extraction of Energy from a Spinning Black Hole,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 328, no. 3 (11 December 2001): L27–L31.)
NASA launched the Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED) spacecraft on a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The purpose of the mission was to study a region called the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere/Ionosphere (MLTI), located 40 to 110 miles (60 to 180 kilometers) above Earth. The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory had designed the spacecraft to produce the first set of comprehensive, global measurements of the MLTI, a region that scientists had not yet thoroughly analyzed, in which electrical currents surge and auroras create a glow over the northern and southern hemispheres of Earth. TIMED, which launched on the same rocket as the Jason-1 oceanography satellite, was the first in a series of six spacecraft that NASA intended to send to observe the MLTI from a 388-mile (625-kilometer) orbit of Earth. NASA’s GSFC would manage the TIMED spacecraft for the Office of Space Science in Washington, DC; the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory would operate the spacecraft for NASA during the mission.
NASA released new images gathered by the Terra satellite’s instrumentsClouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy System (CERES)which revealed shrinking glaciers, as well as the most accurate global radiation measurements ever captured. Launched in December 1999, Terra monitored most of the world’s major glaciers. The CERES instruments had captured the high- resolution images from 440 miles (708 kilometers) above Earth’s surface. Initial analysis of the new data had revealed that most glaciers had shrunk considerably since previously measured. For example, the glaciers in the mountains of Patagonia had receded about 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) over the course of 13 years. CERES had also provided the first complete year of radiation readings since 1987, capturing readings from the May 2001 heat wave, which had produced record temperatures in the United States.(NASA, “NASA’s Terra Satellite Captures a World of Sunlight and Heat,” news release 01-123, 21 June 2001; Kenneth Chang, “Spacecraft’s Supercamera Captures Earth in All Its Detail,” New York Times, 19 June 2001.)
Konrad Dennerl, of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany, and his team of astronomers announced that they had performed the first x-ray observations of the planet Venus. The team had used NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to conduct the observations, which revealed new information about the planet’s atmosphere. The x-ray observations of Venus were different from views of the planet made in visible light, because fluorescence, rather than reflection, produced the x-rays from the planet. Most of the fluorescent x-rays come from oxygen and carbon atoms located 120 to 140 kilometers (74 to 87 miles) above the surface of Venus, whereas clouds that are 50 to 70 kilometers (31 to 43 miles) above the surface reflect optical light. The observations represented a technological breakthrough. Other x-ray astronomy satellites had been unable to point steadily in the direction of Venus, because the planet’s relative proximity to the Sun had prevented them from locking onto guide stars that were visually distinct from the Sun.(NASA, “Chandra Captures Venus in a Whole New Light,” news release 01-236, 27 November 2001.)
Presiding over the launch of a Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite, Major Nina M. Armagno became the first female launch director at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Armagno assumed responsibility for a 400-person crew and for making the final decision about whether to proceed with launch plans.(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
Researchers published findings from an unprecedented analysis of NASA-produced satellite data of carbon absorption by northern hemisphere forests. The researchers had used the satellite data to study the extent to which forests had absorbed carbon released into Earth’s atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide from fossil-fuel combustion. Many scientists consider atmospheric accumulation of carbon dioxide to be a primary cause of global climate change, because forests act as “sinks,” absorbing carbon dioxide, thereby reducing its atmospheric accumulation. The researchers had found that forests in Europe, Russia, and the United States annually absorbed almost 700 million tonnes (771 million tons or 1.5 trillion pounds) of carbon from 1981 to 1999. They had also found geographic variations in carbon absorption, with Russian forests accounting for nearly 40 percent of the carbon sink and Canadian forests losing carbon. The findings were significant, because they indicated which forests had lost carbon and which had stored it. The findings also validated relationships between satellite measurements and ground-based measurements of carbon absorption, demonstrating the crucial importance of satellites in monitoring forests. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, dedicated to understanding human- induced and natural changes in Earth’s environment, had funded the research.
Researchers from NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) published research indicating that, during the 20th century, the world’s average temperatures had increased, and the United States’ average temperatures had declined. Using data from satellites and 7,200 weather stations worldwide, NASA and NOAA scientists had found that the global mean surface air temperature had increased by 1oF (0.6oC) during the 20th century. However, temperatures had not increased consistently but had undergone successive periods of warming (from 1900 to 1940), cooling (1940 to 1965), and warming again (1965 to 2000). The evidence also indicated that these temperature changes had not been uniform throughout Earth. For example, although the average surface air temperature in the United States had increased during the latter part of the 20th century, it had remained at a level comparable to average U.S. temperatures during the 1930s. In addition, the researchers had discovered evidence that humans had influenced surface air temperatures on a local scale in large urban areas, suburbs, and even in small towns. However, the data also indicated that this effect had been of modest magnitude and might reflect problems with data measurement.(J. Hansen et al., “A Closer Look at United States and Global Surface Temperature Change,” Journal of Geophysical Research 106, no. D20 (2001): 23947–23963; NASA, “Satellites Shed Light On Warmer World,” news release 01-212, 5 November 2001.)
The American geosynchronous relay satellite XM 1, often referred to as Roll, launched into space aboard a Russian Zenit rocket, from a floating launchpad in the Pacific Ocean. The launch of Roll followed on the heels of the March 2001 delivery to space of XM 2, known as Rock. With both Rock and Roll in orbit, XM Satellite Radio became available to subscribing listeners in the United States. The president of the company XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, DC, called Rock and Roll the “newest power couple” in Washington, DC, declaring that his firm was ready to compete with Sirius Radio for subscribers. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed and built the satellites.(The Boeing Company, “Sea Launch on a Mission To Launch XM’s ‘Roll’ Satellite,” 1 May 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010501s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571, 1 June 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx571.html (accessed 28 July 2008); Jim Banke, “Sea Launch Sends ‘Roll’ Spacecraft into Orbit for XM Satellite Radio,” Space.com, 8 May 2001, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/launches/zenit_launch_010508.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
A rocket carrying a NASA satellite and other payloads failed to reach orbit. The 91-foot (27.7- meter) Taurus rocket launched at 11:49 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, and within minutes, NASA observed indications of problems with the rocket, including a skewed trajectory near the time of the first-stage separation. The rocket’s manufacturer Orbital Sciences Corporation was uncertain about the exact details of the launch problem but presumed that the rocket had not reached orbit. The rocket was carrying NASA’s ozone-analyzing Quick Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (QuikTOMS) satellite, a private imaging satellite called OrbView-4, and a private payload with the cremated remains of individuals who had paid to have their remains launched into orbit.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch with NASA, Orbital Sciences Payload Goes Awry, Satellites Probably Lost,” 21 September 2001.)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASA’s global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASA’s JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deere’s NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm,” news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
India successfully launched its first experimental geosynchronous satellite (GSAT-1) aboard the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV). The successful test suggested that India was poised to launch its own communication satellites. In a previous trial, India had halted a GSLV launch only moments before liftoff, when sensors indicated that the booster had insufficient power. Subsequent tests remedied the problem, enabling the successful 18 April launch. The Indian government praised the mission as the culmination of a decade of research and development aimed at achieving Indian launch capability.(Indian Embassy, “GSLV Launched Successfully,” news release, 18 April 2001, http://www.indianembassy.org/press_release/2001/april/apr_18.htm (accessed 1 July 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
NASA announced that images provided by the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS), which NASA had launched in December 1998, showed new evidence that extra- planetary systems contain water. In particular, astronomers had studied the giant IRC+10216 star, also known as CW Leonis, and had located water vapor surrounding the celestial body. Scientists had never considered the giant star, located some 500 light-years from Earth, as a likely host of water because of its high levels of carbon. Gary Melnick of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics led the SWAS study, which concluded that the most viable explanation for the “substantial concentrations of water vapor” around the star was that the star’s gravity had pulled the water vapor from the icy surfaces of nearby comets. The discovery had broad implications for scientists’ theories about how Earth might eventually end. “We think we are witnessing the type of apocalypse that will ultimately befall our own planetary system,” said one SWAS researcher. “Several billion years from now, the Sun will become a giant star and its power output will increase five thousand fold. As the luminosity of the Sun increases, a wave of water vaporization will spread outwards through the solar system, starting with Earth’s oceans and extending well beyond the orbit of Neptune.”(Gary J. Melnick et al., “Discovery of Water Vapour Around IRC+10216 as Evidence for Comets Orbiting Another Star,” Nature 412, no. 6843 (12 July 2001): 160163; NASA, “Stellar Apocalypse Yields First Evidence of Water-Bearing Worlds Beyond Our Solar System,” news release 01-140, 11 July 2001.)
Scientists announced the first confirmed observation of the optical afterglow of a gamma-ray burst (GRB). GRBs are the most energetic phenomenon in the universe. NASA’s High Energy Transient Explorer (HETE) had observed a GRB―dubbed GRB 010921―occurring nearly 5 billion light-years from Earth in the constellation Lacerta. The astronomers had coordinated the HETE data with observations that Italy’s BeppoSAX satellite and ESA’s Ulysses spacecraft had captured, enabling them to find the afterglow in optical light and to measure its redshift―the warping of electromagnetic radiation by gravity. The measurement of the redshift helped them determine the GRB’s distance from Earth. The observation was a special opportunity to obtain information on GRBs. Scientists hoped that with additional observations they could begin to understand the causes of this frequent, but enigmatic phenomenon.(NASA, “NASA’s HETE Spots Rare Gamma-Ray Burst Afterglow,” news release 01-218, 7 November 2001; P. A. Price et al., “GRB 010921: Discovery of the First High Energy Transient Explorer Afterglow,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 2 (1 June 2002): L121–L125; G. Ricker et al., “GRB 010921: Localization and Observation by the High Energy Transient Explorer Satellite,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 2 (1 June 2002): L127– L130.)
Shang-Ping Xie of the University of Hawaii’s International Pacific Research Center and Meteorology Department and W. Timothy Liu of NASA’s JPL published in the journal Science the results of their study of Hawaii’s so-called tail, demonstrating that a strong ocean current connects Hawaii with Asia. The researchers had concluded that the current was the result of the wind whipping around the small Pacific Islands and creating wakes eastward toward Asia. Scientists had long recognized that the Hawaiian Islands cause an eastward current, but common knowledge had suggested that the current’ reaches less than 200 miles (322 kilometers). However, using data from NASA’s QuikSCAT satellite, the European Sensing Satellites, and the United States-Japan Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission, Xie and Lie had traced the eastward- flowing current farther, discovering that it actually extends nearly 5,000 miles (8,000 kilometers). From an historical perspective, the discovery provided evidence in support of the tradition that early Hawaiian settlers had sailed to the islands from the Far East.(Shang-Ping Xie et al., “Far-Reaching Effects of the Hawaiian Islands on the Pacific Ocean-Atmosphere System,” Science 292, no. 5524 (15 June 2001): 20572060; NASA, “Satellites Reveal Hawaii’s Long Tail of Wind and Water,” news release 01-121, 14 June 2001.)
Russia launched the Coronas-F solar observatory satellite aboard a Tsiklon 3 rocket. The launch took place from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia. Engineers had designed the satellite to monitor light intensity, solar bursts, and several solar radii. The satellite carried 13 separate instruments, to gather data as the spacecraft orbited while pointing toward the Sun. The Coronas-F satellite was Russia’s second attempt to place in orbit such a complicated research craft. The Coronas-I, launched in 1994, had operated for only a couple of months before a control failure had caused it to lose its functionality.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573.)
The Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP) launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. MAP carried two Gregorian telescopes, designed to record temperatures in selected locations throughout the sky. MAP’s broad mission was to provide further insight into how the universe formed. The spacecraft cost US$95 million to build.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Delta II Helps Unlock Secrets of the Universe,” news release, 30 June 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010630h.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Peter N. Spotts, “Latest NASA Launch Aims To Take Cosmic Baby Picture,” Christian Science Monitor, 29 June 2001;)
NASA made available the first large-scale images revealing a tail of electrified gas streaming from Earth toward the Sun. One of the images, which NASA’s Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had produced, appeared on the cover of Science. The IMAGE technology had captured new views of previously unverifiable gas trapped within Earth’s magnetic field, known as the magnetosphere. The images placed in the context of the solar system the vast reach of the region affected by Earth’s magnetosphere, which extends past the Moon on the night side of Earth. Astronomers compared the perspective the new images provided them, to the perspective satellite images of Earth provide to scientists researching hurricanes.(NASA, “NASA’s Image Reveals Earth’s Invisible Magnetic Tail,” news release 01-08, 25 January 2001; cover of Science 291, no. 5504 (26 January 2001).)
NASA formally accepted the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite–H (TDRS-H) from Boeing Satellite Systems. TDRS-H was part of a constellation of satellites that formed a communication- signal relay system, providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellites served the HST, the ISS, and other NASA programs. Boeing had built TDRS-H under contract from NASA, which had launched the satellite in June 2000. However, NASA had delayed its formal acceptance of the spacecraft, after Boeing engineers had found that the satellite’s multiple- access, phased-array antenna did not meet contractually specified performance standards. On 10 August 2001, NASA and Boeing had announced that they had tentatively agreed to a settlement and were finalizing negotiations for NASA to accept the satellite.(The Boeing Company, “NASA To Take Control of TDRS-H Satellite,” news release 10 August 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q3/nr_010810t.html (accessed 28 January 2010); NASA, “Media Kit: TDRS-J Mission,” http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/gsfc/earth/pictures/20021127tdrs_j/)
NASA suspended indefinitely the launch of the climate-monitoring satellite Triana, which NASA had designed to provide imagery of entire hemispheres from nearly 1 million miles away in space. By contrast, weather satellites often remain in low Earth orbit and, therefore, are only able to provide images of continents. Triana was also called GoreCam or GoreSat, because former Vice President Gore had originated the project. Gore had conceived of the satellite in March 1998, choosing to name it in honor of Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Columbus’s ship who had first sighted land. NASA had planned to launch the US$120 million Earth-observation satellite by the end of 2001. However, the Republican-controlled U.S. House of Representatives had voted to eliminate the project’s funding from NASA’s fiscal year (FY) 2000 appropriation. A conference committee of the House and the Senate had later agreed to suspend funding for Triana and to delay its launch, so that the National Academy of Sciences could review the project’s merits. Although the National Academy of Sciences had strongly endorsed the project, NASA had decided to shelve the satellite project indefinitely, as part of its effort to prioritize scientific expenditures and concentrate its resources on projects such as the HST and the ISS.(Joel Achenbach, “For Gore Spacecraft, All Systems Aren’t Go; Earth Observation Satellite Shelved,” Washington Post, 8 August 2001.)
NASA launched the Kodiak Star from Kodiak Island in Alaska at 2:40 a.m. (UT), NASA’s first mission ever launched into Earth orbit from that location. The Kodiak Star’s payload consisted of four small satellites: PCSAT, PICOSat 9, Sapphire, and Starshine 3. The PCSAT and Starshine 3 would serve amateur radio operators; Sapphire carried a voice synthesizer to convert text messages into human voice; and PICOSat 9 would test electronic components and systems in space conditions. NASA had funded the Starshine 3, and the DOD had sponsored the other three satellites.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575; NASA KSC, “Kodiak Star Scheduled for Launch from Alaska Sept. 17,” news release 101-01, 22 August 2001.)
