NASA released topographic data collected during its Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM), which had lasted from 11 to 22 February 2000, producing three-dimensional measurements of more than 80 percent of Earth’s landmass between 60° north and 56° south of the equator. Because of South America’s proximity to the equator and its frequent tropical cloud cover, traditional satellites had encountered difficulty acquiring imagery of its topography, but the cloud-penetrating radar on board the SRTM had produced information with scientific and commercial value that would help improve life on the continent. SRTM Project Scientist Michael Kobrick of NASA’s JPL remarked that the data would assist governments to prepare for natural hazards like earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, and floods. In addition, the information would help improve aviation safety in mountainous areas, and would help land-use planners make better-informed decisions about the development of critical infrastructure. The mission was a cooperative project of NASA, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) of the U.S. DOD, and the German and Italian space agencies.(NASA, “South America Shines in NASA’s Latest Space Radar Map Release,” news release 03-204, 19 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03204_S_Amer_Space_Radar.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
The newest Boeing Delta rocket, the Delta 4, launched the USA 167also known as the Defense Satellite Communications Systems Phase 3 (DSCSIII-A3), or Discus satelliteinto orbit, from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The American geostationary military communications satellite was the first U.S. Air Force craft launched atop Boeing’s newest Delta rocket, as well as the first mission for the U.S. Air Force’s Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program. The craft, a triaxially stabilized spacecraft with solar power of 1.24 kilowatts, operating at six superhigh frequencies between 40 and 85 megahertz, joined the DSCS III constellation of eight similar craft to provide very secure global links to the U.S. military. The launch of the Discus satellite featured the smallest of the Delta 4’s several possible configurations, with two stages and no booster rocket.
NASA announced that scientist David Atlas of NASA’s GSFC and University of Colorado scientist Christopher Williams had created the first “full-body scan” of an evolving tropical thunderstorm, using data collected from an unusual storm over the Amazon rain forest, which had occurred in February 1999. At that time, a team of scientists from NASA, NOAA, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, and several universities had used sensitive radar equipment, such as scanning Doppler and vertically oriented Doppler, to detect and measure different types of particles from the storm’s base to its top, approximately 8.7 miles (14 kilometers) above the rainforest floor. Participants from the University of North Dakota had operated a jet aircraft to gather some of the data. One of the study’s goals had been validating the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite measurements, to help plan the TRMM’s successor, the Global Precipitation Mission. TRMM had provided data about how such storms operate, thus enabling scientists to understand how wind circulates in the upper atmosphere. The research, which Atlas and Williams had published in the American Meteorological Society’s Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, provided new insight into the intense and hazardous conditions within storms. Scientists expected the research to improve forecasts, helping aircraft avoid dangerous storms and making air travel safer, and to improve satellite measurements of precipitation.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “NASA Scientists Take First ‘Full-Body Scan’ of Evolving Thunderstorm,” news release 03-07, 15 January 2003, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/2003/03- 07.htm (accessed 28 July 2008); Reuters, “NASA Takes First ‘Full-Body Scan’ of Thunderstorm,” 15 January 2003; Lee Bowman for Scripps Howard News Service, “Probing the Inner Workings of Storm Clouds,” 16 January 2003.)
A Delta 2 rocket carried NASA’s Ice Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) into orbit, launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. ICESat was one in a series of Earth Observing System (EOS) spacecraft to follow the Terra satellite, launched in December 1999, and the Aqua satellite, launched in May 2002. NASA had designed the 661-pound (299.8- kilogram) craft to measure the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica, so that scientists could determine whether global sea levels were rising or falling. The craft’s only instrument, the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System, would beam rapid pulses of laser light to the icy surface, and the ice sheets would reflect the light back to the satellite, acting like radar. The GPS would determine the ICESat’s location as it fired its laser, enabling program scientists to measure the ice sheets’ topography. The rocket also carried a second, smaller craft into orbitCHIPSat, NASA’s 131-pound (59-kilogram), University Explorer Class probe, the Cosmic Hot Interstellar Plasma Spectrometer. CHIPSat would gather data on the origin, physical processes, and properties of the hot gas between stars. The CHIPSat mission was the first U.S. mission to use end-to-end satellite operations over the Internet, treating the craft “something like a node on the Internet.”(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches ICE and CHIPS Satellites,” news release 03-011, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-011.txt (accessed 22 July 2008); Associated Press, “Rocket Carrying NASA Satellites Launched,” 12 January 2003; Jim Banke, “Boeing Launches Pair of Science Research Satellites for NASA,” Space.com, 12 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030112.html (accessed 22 July 2008).)
Russia successfully conducted its first test of a modified Soviet RS-18 Stiletto missile, launching the missile from an underground silo at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Stiletto, renamed Strela, or Arrow, carried a dummy satellite into low Earth orbit. Originally designed to carry six individually guided nuclear warheads, Russia planned for the modified Stiletto to become the world’s cheapest booster rocket for commercial satellite launches. Spokesperson for the Russian military Lieutenant-Colonel Igor Zatula stated that Russia would need to conduct several more test launches before the rocket would become available for commercial use.(Reuters, “Russia Tests New Role for Cold War Nukes,” 8 December 2003.)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched the Geostationary Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV)–D2 rocket from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The main payload was the GSAT-2, a geostationary communications and space-monitoring satellite, which carried four C-band and two Ku-band transponders that would provide voice and video transmissions to India and neighboring countries. The GSLV-D2 also carried into orbit experimental payloads: a Coherent Radio Beacon Experiment, a Solar X-ray Spectrometer, an external Total Radiation Dose Monitor, a Radiation Sensitive Field Effect Transistor, and a Surface Change Monitor. However, its main mission was to test the GSLV-D2, an improved version of the GSLV first launched in April 2001.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595, 1 June 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx595.html (accessed 20 November 2008); K. S. Jayaraman, “India Launches Second GSLV Rocket with GSAT,” Space.com, 8 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/gslv_launch_030508.html (accessed 1 December 2008).)
Japan’s Unmanned Space Experiment Recovery System (USERS) capsule splashed down 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) south of Tokyo, Japan, near the Ogasawara Islands, while the USERS Service Module continued to orbit Earth. Japan’s NASDA had launched the system aboard an H- 2A booster from the Tanegashima Space Center in September 2002, along with a Japanese Data Relay Test Satellite. The capsule contained a superconductive product, created within the capsule during its 10 months in space, using an electrically heated furnace. Japanese researchers were investigating contamination-free, high-quality crystals, created in a microgravity environment, for their potential use in the superconductive magnets needed in flywheel-type, electric-energy storage systems and magnetically levitated train transportation. Scientists planned to collect data from the USERS Service Module to use in the design and production of future satellite hardware. The Institute for Unmanned Space Experiment Free Flyer, a group established in 1986 to promote the industrialization of space, had initiated the USERS project.
JAXA launched an H2-A rocket carrying two classified satellites intended to monitor North Korea, but aborted the launch when one of the vehicle’s two boosters failed to separate. Because the malfunction meant that the rocket would be unable to attain sufficient height and speed to achieve orbit, JAXA destroyed the rocket 10 minutes after launch. In March 2003, Japan had launched its first two spy satellites to monitor North Korea’s missile and nuclear programs.(Audrey McAvoy for the Associated Press, “Failed Launch Blamed on Rocket Booster Malfunction,” 30 November 2003.)
The German-Russian Eurockot Launch Services’ Rockot launch vehicle, a modified Russian ballistic missile, lifted off from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome carrying nine satellites and nanosatellites. The Rockot booster fired its Breeze upper stage twice, the first time releasing the 145-pound (66-kilogram) Czech Micromeasurements of Satellite Acceleration (MIMOSA) satellite into orbit and, the second time, leaving the Canadian Microvariability and Oscillation of Stars (MOST) scientific satellite and six Japanese, Danish, and U.S. nanosatellites in a Sun- synchronous orbit. A mock-up of a Russian Earth observation satellite that remained attached to the upper stage would gather mission data before de-orbiting. The Czech Astronomical Institute had launched MIMOSA to gather data on the density of Earth’s upper atmosphere, using a sensitive accelerometer designed to detect slight drag forces. President of the Canadian Space Agency Marc Garneau described the 113-pound (51.3-kilogram) MOST as “the world’s smallest space telescope,” with an aperture of just 15 centimeters (6 inches), about the size of Galileo’s telescope. Using an ultra-high-precision attitude-control system, the craft would very finely point toward targets, such as neighboring stars, studying how stars eject gas into the interstellar medium and seeking data to answer fundamental questions about the universe. Students had designed the two Japanese nanosatellites―CubeSat XI-IV and CUTE-1―to test various space technologies in flight. Three more student-built nanosatellites deployed via a launch tube―the Canadian CANX-1and the Danish AAU CubeSat and DTUSAT―would image stars. Quakesat, an American photo-imaging nanosatellite, would conduct an earthquake detection experiment.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597, 1 August 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx597.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Stephen Clark, “Rockot Booster Successfully Launches 9 Payloads,” Spaceflight Now, 30 June 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “Rockot Delivers Multiple Satellites to Earth Orbit from Russia,” Space.com, 30 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/rockot_ launch_)
From its floating platform Odyssey, Sea Launch launched a telecommunications satellite Thuraya-2 aboard a Zenit 3-SL rocket. The satellite belonged to Thuraya Satellite Telecommunications Company based in Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, a company providing mobile telephone services to more than 100 countries in the Middle East, Europe, Africa, and Asia. Sea Launch had launched Thuraya-1 in October 2000.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, “Communications Satellite Launched,” 10 June 2003; Jim Banke, “Sea Launch Soars Again Carrying Thuraya-2 to Orbit,” Space.com, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/zenit_launch_030610.html (accessed 15 December 2008).)
The Dutch-Italian satellite known as BeppoSAX reentered Earth’s atmosphere and splashed into the equatorial Pacific Ocean seven years after its launch into orbit on 30 April 1996. The Italian Space Agency and the Netherlands Agency for Aerospace jointly operated the 3,086-pound (1,400-kilogram) x-ray satellite, best known for its discovery of 50 gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). The Italian Space Agency had estimated that as much as 1,325 pounds (601 kilograms) of the craft could survive reentry, with individual pieces weighing 220 pounds (99.7 kilograms) and had, therefore, notified 39 countries that pieces of the spacecraft could potentially land in their territory. However, the debris falling closest to land splashed into the ocean 186 miles (299 kilometers) northwest of the Galapagos Islands.
The CAIB released its first two official recommendations, suggesting that before resuming Shuttle missions, NASA should 1) improve its inspections of the leading edge of the orbiters’ wings, and 2) ensure that U.S. spy satellites would capture detailed images of the orbiters during each mission. Although the Board had not yet begun developing its final report, the CAIB released preliminary recommendations so that NASA could begin to implement them expeditiously. The CAIB made the first recommendation because it had found that inspection techniques in place did not enable engineers to assess the structural integrity of the orbiter’s heat shield, considered a “criticality one” item. The failure of the heat shieldcomprising the reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC) panels that protect the front of the orbiter’s wings during reentry, the RCC panels’ supporting structure, and the attaching hardwarewould lead to the loss of the vehicle and crew. The CAIB made the second recommendation because it had discovered that NASA officials had cancelled an informal request that the U.S. military capture images of Columbia to check for possible damage caused by launch debris. NASA already had a new memorandum of agreement with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) to provide NASA with images of orbiting Shuttles. Previously, NIMA had only made images available upon request, but the CAIB recommended that NASA and NIMA make imaging each Shuttle flight a standard requirement.(Jim Banke, “Columbia Board Releases Two Recommendations to NASA,” Space.com, 17 April 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030417.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
An American GPS satellite, GPS 2R-9, launched atop a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS 2R-9also known as NAVSTAR 52 and USA 168replaced the aging GPS 2-5, which had been in orbit since 1989. The fleet of GPS satellites consisted of 28 spacecraft.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Kelly Young, “Delta 2 To Carry GPS Satellite into Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 2003.)
Beidou 1C, a People’s Republic of China geostationary navigational satellite, launched from Xichang Satellite Launching Center in Sichuan province aboard a Long March 3A rocket, joining two other Beidou craft launched in 2000 to complete the satellite constellation. Xinhua, the Chinese national media outlet, reported that the transportation industry, telecommunications industry, weather forecasters, environmental planners, emergency personnel would be able to use the global positioning and navigational satellites. However, western analysts speculated that China was more likely to use the Beidou satellites’ capabilities to make its own military and weapons systems more precise.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Stephen Clark, “China Lofts Navigation Craft on Long March Booster,” Spaceflight Now, 25 May 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched its Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F16 craft aboard a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, marking the final launch of the Lockheed Martin launch vehicles. In keeping with its 1986 agreement with the U.S. Air Force, Martin Marietta had converted 14 Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) into space launch vehicles. The Air Force had used the converted missiles to launch weather and spy satellites into low Earth orbit; the first such converted missile launched in September 1988. The Titan 2 that launched the DMSP F16 satellite was the 13th of the 14 converted ICBMs to launch; the Air Force had no plans for the 14th converted ICBM except to hold it as a spare. The successful launch of the satellite marked the end of the 33 months of postponements of the US$450 million mission that had resulted from technical problems. The Air Force intended for the craft to track clouds, storm systems, and hurricanes, planning to use the data that the satellite collected to forecast weather and to monitor ice and snow coverage, pollution, and fires. The constellation of two primary DSMP satellites and older backups provided meteorologists with information for generating forecasts, which commanders and troops relied upon for strategic and tactical planning. DSMP F16 replaced DSMP F15, which had launched in December 1999, as the lead craft in the constellation’s mid-morning orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Justin Ray, “US Weather Satellite Finally Escapes Grasp of Hard Luck,” Spaceflight Now, 14 October 2003; Roger Fillion, “Titan II Rocket Soars into Retirement,” Rocky Mountain News (Denver, CO), 21 October 2003.)
After a series of delays, a Titan 2 rocket carried into orbit the U.S. military’s Coriolis research satellite, launching from the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The refurbished Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missile placed the spacecraft in orbit 51⁄2 minutes after launch, and the rocket’s second stage deployed its payload approximately 1 hour later. The US$224 million Coriolis mission carried the Navy’s Windsat microwave polarimetric radiometer and the Air Force’s Solar Mass Ejection Imager. The U.S. military had designed Windsat to measure wind speed and direction at or near the surface of Earth’s seas, providing improved weather forecasting to assist in planning naval operations. The Air Force intended the Solar Mass Ejection Imager to provide “an early warning of coronal mass ejections from the Sun that impact Earth, disrupting communications and power grids.”(Justin Ray, “Coriolis Launched To Track Ocean Winds, Solar Storms,” Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2003. 105)
The U.S. Air Force launched an Atlas 2-AS rocket carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), marking the final launch of the II-AS model from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch cleared the way for officials from the military and from Lockheed Martin to begin renovating Launch Complex 3 to accommodate the Atlas 5 rocket. Renovation plans included raising the mobile service tower 30 feet (9.14 meters) to accommodate the taller launch vehicles, building a fixed launch platform, modifying the umbilical tower, and enlarging the flame trench. The Lockheed Martin Atlas team planned to launch the first Atlas 5 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2005.(Associated Press, “Air Force Sends Spy Satellite into Space,” 2 December 2003; Justin Ray, “Atlas Soars on Secret Mission Under Cover of Darkness,” Spaceflight Now, 2 December 2003.)
Officials from Boeing and Finmeccanica, an Italian aerospace corporation, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in a joint ceremony held in Rome and at the Italian Embassy in Washington, DC. The purpose of the MOU was to explore joint initiatives and to pursue growth opportunities in aerostructures and commercial aircraft, aircraft modification, UAVs, satellite systems, navigation, launch services, missile defense, space infrastructure, and avionics. The MOU called for the creation of an executive steering committee to investigate the possibilities of collaborative activity in space navigation, satellite services, launch services, and services to the ISS. The committee would make the final decision about which activities the partnership would pursue.(UV Online.com, “Finmeccanica and Boeing To Collaborate on UAVs,” 23 January 2003, http://www.shephard.co.uk/news/category/1/uvonline/.)
NASA launched SORCE―its Solar Radiation and Climate Experiment satellite―from a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from a jet plane 140 miles offshore over the Atlantic Ocean. On board the satellite were five instruments designed to help scientists better understand how the Sun affects Earth’s climate. SORCE’s high-precision instruments could measure total radiation from the Sun, and its spectrometers could analyze light in all its various wavelengths, capturing information that scientists hoped would help them build a long-term data set that future generations would use.(NASA, “NASA’s SORCE Satellite Soars into Space To Catch Some Rays,” news release 03-022, 27 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-022.txt (accessed 9 July 2008); Associated Press, “NASA Launches Satellite To Measure Sun’s Radiation,” 25 January 2003.)
The National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron, Ohio, inducted 17 aviation and aerospace inventors, among them Harold A. Rosen, recognized for his pioneering work in developing the world’s first 24-hour commercial communications satellite and for his subsequent contributions to satellite communications. Rosen had led the Boeing Satellite Systems team that had begun developing the geostationary Syncom in 1959. The team had planned for Syncom to communicate directly and continuously with any ground station in its line of sight, in contrast to the communications satellites in use at the time, which required expensive tracking computers. The first Syncom had failed to launch successfully, but Syncom 2 had reached its synchronous orbit on 26 July 1963. Later that year, Syncom 2 had relayed by satellite the first live two-way call between heads of state―a phone call between President John F. Kennedy in Washington, DC, and Nigerian Prime Minister Abubaker Balewa in Africa. Syncom 3 had brought live coverage of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics to U.S. viewers. The satellites had remained active through 1966, surpassing their one-year design life. David L. Ryan, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Satellite Systems, remarked that contemporary satellites that deliver video, voice, and data communications are all descendants of Syncom, and “when Harold Rosen and his colleagues launched Syncom, they launched a revolution and changed the world.”(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Satellite Pioneer Harold Rosen Inducted to National Inventors Hall of Fame,” news release, 1 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030501n.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
The People’s Republic of China and ESA launched Double Star 1 from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest China. Double Star 1 was the first of two spacecraft in the Double Star mission to study Earth’s magnetic fields―the first joint project between China and ESA. Known in China as Tan Ce 1, Double Star 1 carried eight instruments for investigating Earth’s magnetosphere―five from ESA and three from the Chinese National Space Administration. ESA and China had designed the mission to study how magnetized and charged particles streaming off the Sun affect Earth. The space agencies had scheduled the second of the two craft to launch six months after the first.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 602, 1 January 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx602.html (accessed 26 March 2009); United Press International, “China-EU Launch Space Project,” 30 December 2003.)
U.S. Representative William L. Jenkins (R-TN) announced that NASA had awarded East Tennessee State University a grant valued at US$363,310 to study light patterns of stars located hundreds of light-years away. The award would grant researchers of the university’s physics and astronomy department access over the next five years to data from COBEthe Cosmic Background Explorer satellite. The scientists would use the COBE data to study the infrared variability of asymptotic giant branch stars, “older stars with shells of gas and dust around them.” During its mission in 1989 and 1990, the COBE satellite had surveyed the sky on 10 infrared wavelengths, observing the cosmic backlight of the universe, as well as asymptotic giant branch stars. Although astronomers in the field had conducted significant research on the backlight data, they had done little with COBE’s infrared data on the stars.(Sam Watson, “NASA Grant To Fund ETSU Study of Stars,” Johnson City Press (TN), 9 January 2003.)
An Atlas 5 rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 11:45 p.m. (UT), carrying the Rainbow 1 satellite into orbit. The 4.3-tonne (4.7-ton or 4,300-kilogram) Cablevision Systems Corporation satellite would provide direct-to-home television services in the contiguous United States. The Atlas 5, on its third flight since its inaugural flight in August 2002, carried for the first time two 64-foot (19.5-meter), Aerojet-built solid rocket boosters, which enabled the rocket to clear the launchpad in just 7 secondsonly half of the time required in the two previous launches. The launch marked the completion of flight-testing of all major new systems in the Atlas line. The U.S. military had designed Atlas 5 under its Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597; Associated Press, “Most Powerful Atlas Rocket Carries Cablevision Satellite into Space,” 18 July 2003.)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced an agreement between NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which provided for NIMA to capture detailed satellite images of Space Shuttles in orbit. NASA had sought this agreement with NIMA because of critics’ “pointed questioning” of NASA’s decision not to capture satellite images that it could have used to check for damage to Columbia’s heat shields while the Shuttle was in orbit. The agreement would enable NASA to “employ NIMA assets during targets of opportunity” without requiring NASA to make a specific request for imaging. Before the disaster, NASA had turned down a NIMA offer to capture images of Columbia, and NASA officials had withdrawn an unofficial request for U.S. Air Force telescopes to capture images. O’Keefe stated that the agreement did not represent any NASA decision “about whether those images might have helped determine damage” to Columbia.(Associated Press, “Military To Capture Future Shuttle Flight Images,” 29 March 2003. 123)
Japan launched two reconnaissance satellitesInformation Gathering Satellites (IGSs), IGS 1A and IGS 1Batop an H-2 rocket from Tanegashima Space Center. The pair, the first of at least four such spacecraft that Japan intended to place in orbit as part of a US$2.05 billion program, were capable of monitoring global natural disasters and hurricanes, as well as observing nuclear explosions and missile launches in nearby countries. Because the craft were able to monitor weather events, the launch did not violate the terms of the Japan-North Korea Declaration of September 2002. However, Japanese space officials acknowledged that Japan had developed the program in reaction to the “Taepodong shock,” when a North Korean Taepodong ballistic missile flew over Japan’s main island in 1998. North Korea protested the IGS program as a “‘hostile act’ that violates the spirit” of the countries’ bilateral agreement. One of the IGS craft carried optical cameras with 1-meter (3.3-foot) resolution and the other carried synthetic-aperture radar to capture images with resolutions of several meters. Japanese space officials provided no information about which craft carried which instrument.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, “Japan’s First Spy Satellites Reach Earth Orbit,” 27 March 2003.)
The U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) announced that it had awarded a five- year contract worth up to US$500 million to the Colorado-based companies Space Imaging and DigitalGlobe. Under the contract, which stipulated a base performance period of three years with two additional one-year options, NIMA agreed to purchase a minimum of US$72 million worth of data from DigitalGlobe and a minimum of US$120 million from Space Imaging during the first three years. The contract and accompanying agreements marked “the Pentagon’s strongest commitment yet to buy products and services from the U.S. commercial satellite imaging industry.” Space Imaging, based in Thornton, Colorado, operated the Ikonos satellite launched in September 1999, which was capable of distinguishing ground objects as small as 1 meter. DigitalGlobe, based in Longmont, Colorado, operated the QuickBird satellite, launched in October 1999, which, under certain conditions, was capable of distinguishing objects as small as 0.61 meter.(NIMA, “NIMA Partners with Remote Sensing Industry,” media release 03-05, 17 January 2003, http://www.nga.mil/NGASiteContent/StaticFiles/OCR/nima0305.pdf (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren Ferster, “NIMA Awards Lucrative Contracts to U.S. Satellite Imaging Firms,” Space News, 17 January 2003; Satellite Imaging Corporation, “About the Ikonos Satellite,” http://www.satimagingcorp.com/ satellite-sensors/ikonos.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Satellite Imaging Corporation, “About the QuickBird Satellite Sensor,” http://www.satimagingcorp.com/satellite-sensors/quickbird.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
While moving NOAA’s 14-foot (4.3-meter) NOAA-N Prime weather satellite from a vertical to a horizontal position, workers at a Lockheed Martin plant dropped the nearly completed US$239 million craft, causing serious damage. Lockheed Martin spokesperson Buddy Nelson stated that the cart holding the spacecraft “was not in the proper configuration for the planned activity.” NASA’s GSFC was responsible for overseeing the construction and launch of the satellite, and NOAA would assume control of the craft once it was in orbit. Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company had been building weather satellites since the NOAA satellites’ initial launch in the early 1960s.(Associated Press, “$239M Satellite Damaged at Lockheed Plant,” New York Times, 10 September 2003.)
Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the craft’s unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecraft’s descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the craft’s antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, “Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction,” 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, “Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russia’s Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission,” 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, “Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency,” news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, “NASA Names New Chief of Staff,” news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
NASA awarded its Commercial Invention of the Year to the Video Image Stabilization and Registration System (VISAR) and its Government Invention of the Year to the Computer Implemented Empirical Mode Decomposition Method, also known as the Hilbert-Huang Transformation (HHT) Method. David H. Hathaway, a solar physicist, and Paul Meyer, an atmospheric scientist, both of NASA’s MSFC, had created the basis for the VISAR technology, which turns dark, jittery images into clearer stable images. NASA had developed VISAR in response to an FBI request for assistance. The FBI first used VISAR in 1996 to analyze video of the bombing at the Olympic Summer Games in Atlanta. At the time of the award, investigators were using VISAR to help isolate images collected during the launch of the ill-fated Space Shuttle Columbia, images that they were examining to locate possible damage to the orbiter. Norden E. Huang, Director of the Goddard Institute of Data Analysis at NASA’s GSFC, had invented the HHT Method, which had applications in a variety of fields. Researchers could use the HHT Method in the study of topics as diverse as climate cycles, earthquake engineering, geophysical exploration, submarine design, turbulence flow, basic nonlinear mathematics, satellite data analysis, structural damage detection, nonlinear wave evolution, variations in solar neutrinos, blood pressure variations, and heart arrhythmias. NOAA had used the HHT Method to analyze sea-surface temperature data collected by Earth-orbiting spacecraft, successfully linking environmental changes with weather changes.(NASA, “NASA Selects Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year,” news release 03-120, 26 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03120.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Brian Lawson, “ NASA Cites Two for Imaging Work: Invention Has Been Used To Help Law Enforcement Effort,” Huntsville Times (AL), 27 March 2003.)
The Boeing Company announced that, because commercial launches were costly and in relatively low demand, it would not seek commercial satellite launch contracts for five years, focusing instead on providing service for the U.S. military and NASA. However, Boeing was a member of the consortium International Launch Services (ILS), which would continue to offer commercial launch services. ILS used Russian-made Zenit 3-SL rockets to launch commercial payloads from a floating platform known as Sea Launch. Boeing indicated that it would accommodate customers that preferred to use Delta rockets instead of the Russian-made rockets. The company stated that the change in business strategy would not affect any employees who worked on the launch programs.(Brian Monroe and Wayne T. Price, “Boeing To Bail Out of Commercial Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 July 2003.)
In its first launch since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in February, NASA launched its Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) research satellite aboard a Pegasus XL rocket released from an L-1011 cargo plane that had flown out of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. GALEX carried a telescope measuring 19.7 inches (50 centimeters) in diameter, designed to provide a wide-angle view of the ultraviolet light that distant galaxies emit. NASA had planned the mission, which would survey the light emitted by a million galaxies over 28 months, to learn more about galaxies dominated by hot, short-lived stars that give off a great deal of energy as ultraviolet light. The mission cost US$103.7 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Associated Press, “NASA in 1st Launch Since Columbia Breakup,” 28 April 2003. 427 Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “BeppoSAX Satellite Falls Harmlessly into Ocean,” 30 April 2003.)
NASA announced the successful implementation of new software in three computers controlling the precision pointing of NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscope Explorer (FUSE) satellite. In mid-April 2003, NASA had installed the software for the spacecraft’s Attitude Control Instrument Data System and the processor for the Fine Error Sensor guide camera, and testing of the new configuration had been ongoing since that time. George Sonneborn, FUSE Project Scientist at NASA’s GSFC, explained that the uploaded software would allow FUSE to operate with any number of gyroscopes, or none, in the event of gyroscope failure. Tests showed that FUSE could operate with no gyroscopes without experiencing any degradation in quality of scientific data and with only a slight loss of efficiency in scheduling observations. Before the new software installation, FUSE had required at least one operating gyroscope on each of its three axes to conduct normal scientific operations.(NASA, “NASA Team Gives Fuse Spacecraft Triple Brain Transplant,” news release 03-243, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03243_fuse_transplant.html (accessed 23 December 2008).)
NASA announced its selection of the Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) project for the next mission of NASA’s Medium-class Explorer (MIDEX) program. The mission would study the causes of auroras. THEMIS comprised five small satellites with identical suites of electrical, magnetic, and particle detectors. With a launch date set for 2007, NASA would place the craft in carefully coordinated orbits, where they would line up along Earth’s magnetic tail every four days, to track disturbances. THEMIS satellite data would combine with data gathered from a network of observatories across the Arctic Circle. NASA also announced that it had the opportunity to select an instrument for ESA’s Extreme Universe Space Observatory mission aboard the ISS, which would observe the blue light generated when high-energy cosmic rays collide with Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “NASA Selects Next Medium-Class Explorer Mission,” news release c03h, 20 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03h.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
CBERS 2, a China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS) launched aboard a Long March 4B rocket from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in the People’s Republic of China’s Shanxi province. The 1.6-tonne (1.76-ton or 1,600-kilogram) CBERS 2 remote-sensing satellite, designed to collect data related to the environment, agriculture, urban planning, and water pollution, would be under Chinese control for 18 months before transferring to Brazilian control for a minimum of six months.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Reuters, “China Launches Satellite Developed with Brazil,” 21 October 2003; Stephen Clark, “Earth Monitoring Satellite Launched by China and Brazil, Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
Hellas-Sat, a geostationary communications satellite jointly owned by Greece and Cyprus, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard an Atlas 5 rocket with a Russian RD-180 motor. The 3.45-tonne (3.8-ton or 3,450-kilogram) Astrium Eurostar 2000+ model carried 30 Ku-band transponders to provide voice, video, data, and broadcast services to Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. The launch, the second for the Atlas 5 series, was the 65th consecutive successful flight for the Lockheed Martin–built Atlas rocket and for mission provider International Launch Services (ILS).(Lockheed Martin, “ILS Launches Hellas-Sat on Atlas V―65 Successes in a Row for Atlas,” news release, 13 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/ILSLaunchesHellasSat)
JAXA officials announced that the chances of restoring the operations of ADEOS 2, known as Midori 2 in Japan, were extremely slight. JAXA had lost contact with ADEOS 2 on 25 October and had been unable to restore communications with the US$654 million craft. Analyses of the malfunction had provided little hope for recovery. ADEOS 2 had replaced the ADEOS 1 mission of 1996, which Japan had abandoned after 10 months when its solar panel had broken down as a result of a design fault. Japanese officials stated that they believed ADEOS 2 had not suffered exactly the same fate as its predecessor but, rather, had experienced a problem with its power circuitry. A JAXA spokesperson suggested that recent solar flares might have affected the craftone of the solar flares had been the largest in three decades.(Agence France-Press, “Japan Bids Adios to ADEOS Earth Observation Satellite,” 31 October 2003; Justin Ray, “Hope of Salvaging Japanese Environmental Satellite Fades,” Spaceflight Now, 31 October 2003.)
Telesat Canada selected Astrium, Europe’s largest space company, to manufacture a replacement for its Anik F1 satellitethe Anik F1R. Engineers had determined that the Anik F1, based on the 702 platform of Boeing Satellite Systems, was defective. Several of the Boeing-built 702 satellites were “afflicted with a solar panel malady” expected to shorten each craft’s operational lifetime. Telesat planned to base the Anik F1R, which would carry 24 C-band and 32 Ku-band transponders, on Astrium’s Eurostar 3000 platform.(Telesat, “Telesat Selects European Manufacturer for New Anik F Satellite,” news release, 4 February 2003, http://www.telesat.ca/news/releases/2003/03-02-e.asp (accessed 12 August 2008); Sam Silverstein, “Telesat Canada Selects Astrium to Replace Anik F1,” Space News, 4 February 2003.)
Undersecretary of the U.S. Air Force Peter B. Teets testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Environment, Technology, and Standards that the National Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) System spacecraft would not be available until late 2009 or 2010, at the earliest. The U.S. Air Force and NOAA had jointly funded the system, the first of its kind, originally planning to deliver it in early 2008. The Bush administration had decided to request less money for the project in the near term than it had previously planned, and that decision had reportedly caused the delay. Because of the postponement of the delivery date, the Air Force and NOAA would need to restructure the contract to account for anticipated cost growth. The new system would replace the polar-orbiting systems that the agencies had previously operated separately. Greg Withee, NOAA’s Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, stated that the delay could result in a 21-month gap in coverage if NOAA encountered problems with its existing fleet.(Jeremy Singer, “Delay Means Cost Growth for New Weather Satellites,” Space News, 17 July 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin launched the Milstar II military communications satellite into orbit aboard a Titan 4B launch vehicle with a Centaur upper stage. The satellite joined four other Milstar satellites already in orbit, completing the constellation. The Milstar constellation provided secure, global communication links for U.S. military joint forces, transmitting voice, data, and imagery, as well as providing video-teleconferencing capabilities. Milstar II was the third satellite to carry the Boeing Satellite Systems–built, medium-data-rate payload, which had 32 channels, each capable of processing data at speeds of 1.5 megabits per second. The craft carried a low-data-rate payload as well, built by Northrop Grumman Space Technology.(Lockheed Martin, “U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin Team up to Successfully Launch Final Milstar II Satellite on a Titan IV B Rocket,” news release, 8 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/USAirForceLockheedMartinTeamUpSucce.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
NASA announced its collaboration with Japan’s NASDA and the Japanese Meteorological Research Institute to study snowfall over Wakasa Bay, Japan. The study would use NASA’s EOS Aqua satellite in conjunction with research aircraft, which would gather data for the study using the coastal radar systems. NASA had begun the Wakasa Bay Field Campaign on 3 January 2003, scheduling the study to run through 14 February 2003. Although, historically, scientists had found it difficult to quantify contributions to the global hydrologic cycle from the northern Pacific Ocean, they expected that the new satellite instruments, which could detect precipitation over water, would provide data needed to interpret the effect of Pacific Ocean hydrology on the world.(NASA, “NASA Joins Snow Study over the Sea of Japan,” news release 03-025, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-025.txt (accessed 29 July 2008).)
NASA announced that the Demonstration for Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft had completed the lengthy design-certification review for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program, verifying the craft’s safety, performance, and functional requirements. The DART team, based at NASA’s MSFC, planned to demonstrate the vehicle without a human pilot in 2004, launching it on a Pegasus rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet. At 40,000 feet (12,192 meters) over the Pacific Ocean, the Pegasus rocket and the DART craft would separate, and DART would travel from a parking orbit to maneuver close to a target satellite or to rendezvous with it. The demonstration would require 24 hours. DART was the first of three flight-testing demonstrators: Boeing Expendable Launch Systems was developing the X-37 flight demonstrator, and Lockheed Martin Corporation was developing the launchpad-abort demonstrator. DART was NASA’s first completely computer-controlled, rendezvous-capable spacecraft.(NASA, “Space Flight Demonstrator Completes Design Certification,” news release 03-274, 21 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03274_dart_design.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
Scientists studying data from NASA’s Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) satellite and ESA’s four-satellite Cluster constellation published a study in the journal Nature reporting that solar wind creates large cracks in Earth’s magnetic field, allowing the wind to penetrate the magnetic field and causing geomagnetic storms. The leader of the study, Harald U. Frey of the University of California at Berkeley, stated that the data showed that the cracks do not open and close sporadically, as scientists had previously thought, but rather, that the cracks can remain open for several hours. Using this information, scientists would be able to create a better model of the affect of space weather on Earth, helping them to predict geomagnetic storms, which disrupt power, interfere with satellites, and endanger astronauts. IMAGE had monitored a spot in Earth’s upper atmosphere, revealing an area of heavy particles (ions) striking the ionosphere above the Arctic region, thereby creating an aurora with enough energy to power 75,000 homes. Unlike the auroras known as the northern and southern lights, this aurora was not visible to the human eye. Far above the IMAGE satellite, the Cluster constellation had flown through the opening created by the solar wind’s interaction with Earth’s protective magnetic field. The scientists estimated that the size of the crack was twice that of Earth. The crack occurred at the edge of the magnetic field, 38,000 miles (61,155 kilometers) above the planet.(H. U. Frey et al., “Continuous Magnetic Reconnection at Earth’s Magnetopause,” Nature 426, no. 6966 (4 December 2003): 533–537; Maggie Fox for Reuters, “Cracks Let Solar Wind Disrupt Earth’s Atmosphere,” 4 December 2003; Chris Kridler, “Protective Layer’s Cracks Make Earth Vulnerable,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 December 2003.)
A Delta 2 rocket launched, carrying a GPS-2R8 satellite and an Experimental Spacecraft System (XSS-10) microsatellite into orbit. The U.S. Air Force was launching the GPS-2R8 to replace the 22nd GPS satellite, which had launched 10 years earlier, joining a constellation of 26 operational GPS spacecraft. Although the military GPS created in the 1970s had generated a commercial industry with sales in excess of US$6 billion, the system had continued to exist primarily to serve the U.S. military. The U.S. Air Force was launching the 62-pound (28-kilogram) XSS-10 spacecraft to test new guidance and navigation software and to demonstrate new technologies, such as a miniature communications system, a lightweight propulsion system, and advanced lithium polymer batteries.(Jim Banke, “Delta 2 Rolls, Launches GPS and Experimental Satellites,” Space.com, 29 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030129.html (accessed 23 July 2008).)
In its first mission to the Moon, ESA launched its Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART-1) spacecraft aboard an Ariane 5 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. SMART-1 was the first spacecraft since NASA’s 1998 Lunar Prospector to attempt the journey to the Moon. ESA planned for the 770-pound (349.2-kilogram) craft, powered by an ion- propulsion engine, to reach the Moon in early 2005. SMART-1 carried 33 pounds (15 kilograms) of miniature instruments, which researchers from Finland, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom had provided, including a color camera the size of a human eye, a 4.4- pound (2-kilogram) infrared spectrometer, and an 11-pound (5-kilogram) x-ray spectrometer. The purpose of the SMART-1 mission was to solve certain mysteries about the Moon’s formation, its mineralogical composition, and the amount of water it has, if any. The Ariane 5 also carried into orbit two telecommunications satellites―the INSAT 3-E for India and the European e-BIRD. ESA had delayed the launch of e-BIRD since 28 August to allow the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to make further checks on its satellite.(Frank D. Roylance, “Europe Finally Ready for Mission to Moon,” Baltimore Sun, 29 September 2003; Agence France-Presse, “European Rocket Places Lunar Explorer, Two Satellites into Orbit,” 29 September 2003.)
The White House unveiled the U.S. Commercial Remote Sensing Policy, which President George W. Bush had approved on 25 April to replace former President William J. Clinton’s 1994 Presidential Decision Directive-23. The new policy loosened government restrictions on the collection and sale of commercial satellite imagery, directing military and civilian agencies first to approach the commercial sector to fulfill satellite imagery needs. The NSC had created the new guidelines as part of a review of U.S. national space policy, which the White House had directed the NSC to conduct in June 2002 with the support of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. The new policy retained the government’s ability to restrict operations of commercial satellite imaging companies for national security reasons, but emphasized that the U.S. military should plan actions in the knowledge that adversaries also had access to commercial satellite imagery. The policy encouraged companies to use the most capable systems possible. However, at the same time, the government retained the right to restrict the sale of the most advanced imagery to U.S. government customers. The policy named the U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) as the interface between government and industry for national security applications of commercial satellite imagery. The U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Interior, and NASA would fulfill that role for civilian applications.(Jason Bates, “White House Loosens Curbs on Commercial Satellite Imaging,” Space News, 13 May 2003; Dan Caterinicchia, “Commercial Satellite Policy Released,” Federal Computer Week, 15 May 2003.)
SuccessfulI.html (accessed 19 September 2008); The Boeing Company, “Boeing-Built AsiaSat 4 Communication Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/
From its Odyssey Platform in the Pacific Ocean, Sea Launch lifted off its 10th commercial mission, launching the shared commercial communications satellite Echostar 9also known as Telstar 13atop a Ukrainian Zenit 3-SL rocket. Space Systems/Loral had built the 10,443- pound (4,737-kilogram) satellite, which two companies shared. Echo Star Communications Corporation operated the Ku-band and Ka-band transponders to provide additional direct- broadcast television service, via the corporation’s DISH network. Loral Skynet operated the 24 C-band transponders to provide cable television service to North America, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Central America.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598, 1 September 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx598.html (accessed 21 January 2009); Jim Banke, “Shared Communications Satellite Lofted into Orbit by Sea Launch,” Space News, 8 August 2003.)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the Boeing-built AsiaSat 4 satellite aboard a Lockheed Martin–built Atlas 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, marking 64 consecutive successful launches for the Atlas rocket over 10 years. The mission was ILS’s third launch for AsiaSat, the dominant satellite operator in its region. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed the AsiaSat 4 craft, a high-power 601HP spacecraft, to provide 15 years of direct-to-home communications and broadband services to customers in Asia and Australia.(Lockheed Martin, “Atlas III Launch of Asiasat 4 Successful in 1st ILS Mission of 2003,” news release, 11 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/AtlasIIILaunch OfAsiaSat4)
A telecommunications satellite jointly owned by the United States and Japan―known as Horizons 1 or Galaxy 13―launched aboard a Sea Launch Zenit 3-SL rocket from a platform in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. Connecticut-based PanAmSat and Tokyo-based JSAT corporations launched the craft to provide digital video, Internet, and data transmission services to Hawaii and to Central America and North America. PanAmSat owned the satellite’s C-band payload Galaxy 13 and planned to use it as part of the company’s Galaxy cable constellation. President and CEO of PanAmSat Joseph R. Wright Jr. remarked that the addition of Galaxy 13 to the company’s fleet would create the first high-definition neighborhood and would help to meet the growing demand for high-resolution television. The two companies would jointly operate the satellite’s Ku-band payload Horizons 1, which would offer a variety of digital video, Internet, and data services, as well as creating new IP-based content-distribution networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600, 1 November 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx600.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Justin Ray, “Communications Satellite Launched from Pacific Ocean,” Spaceflight Now, 2 October 2003.)
A Russian Cosmos-3M rocket launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia carrying three 100-kilogram (0.1-tonne or 0.11-ton) satellites into orbit for Nigeria (NigeriaSat-1), Turkey (BILSAT-1), and the United Kingdom (UK-DMC). The satellites joined a similar satellite from Algeria, launched in November 2002, to form the Disaster Monitoring Constellation (DMC). The DMC’s purpose was to provide environmental information regarding floods, earthquakes, and fires. Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd. of Guildford, United Kingdom, which specialized in small satellites, had initiated the DMC project. The four craft had ground resolution of 32 meters (105 feet), and each image produced by the satellites showed 600 square kilometers (231.7 square miles). The Cosmos-3M also carried two military satellites for Russia. One of the satellites, Rubin-4 DSI, was a Russian communications experiment in transmitting telemetry data via standard e-mail, using Orbcomm communications satellites. Another, Mozheyets-4, built by students at the Mozhaisk Military Space Academy, tested hardware for future use on Russia’s GLONASS (Global Satellite Navigation System). The third was South Korea’s KAITSAT-4 scientific-research microsatellite, a demonstration platform to test new satellite systems, hosting five science experiments from an international team of researchers.(Peter B. de Selding, “Disaster Monitoring Satellites Launched,” Space News, 30 September 2003; Jim Banke, “Kosmos 3M Booster Carries Six Satellites to Earth Orbit,” Space News, 29 September 2003.)
NASA announced that NOAA, Lockheed Martin, and NASA had formed teams to investigate the 6 September accident involving the NOAA-N Prime satellite. While moving the spacecraft from a vertical to a horizontal position, Lockheed Martin workers had dropped it, significantly damaging the craft. NASA and Lockheed Martin had placed the satellite under guard, securing all records. NASA and NOAA were waiting for an assessment of the damage to determine how the accident would affect satellite programs.(NASA, “NASA, NOAA and Lockheed Martin Investigate Satellite Accident,” news release 03-287, 9 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03287_satellite_accident.html (accessed 28 January 2009). 514 Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Boeing Names New ISS Leader,” 12 September 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched a Titan 4B rocket with a Centaur upper stage carrying USA 171, an Orion classified satellite serving the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The Air Force provided no comment on the payload’s destination or its whereabouts following the separation of the second stage of the Centaur. The Air Force had delayed the launch of USA 171 since April 2002 because of a series of technical problems and issues with the payload. The launch was likely the last of the Titan-Centaur launches, with only three Lockheed Martin–built Titan 4 rockets and one Titan 2 remaining to launch. The Air Force had contracted with Boeing and Lockheed Martin to replace the Titan 4 family with the Boeing Delta 2 and the Lockheed Martin Atlas 5, to provide the Air Force with cheaper, more reliable access to space for military payloads.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 599, 1 October 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx599.html (accessed 3 February 2009); Associated Press, “Air Force Launches Titan 4B Rocket Carrying Secret Military Payload,” 9 September 2003; Chris Kridler, “Titan Carries Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 2003.)
The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post”; Stephen Clark, “Proton Lifts Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
NASA announced the publication in the Journal of Geophysical Research of the conclusions of a research team that had used data spanning the years 1991 through 2000, which the Microwave Limb Sounder on NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite had collected. The team had found that ozone depletion over Earth’s Arctic region varies in amount, timing, and pattern of loss, confirming previous variations in Arctic ozone-loss estimates. The team’s findings provided the first “consistent, three-dimensional picture of ozone loss during multiple Arctic winters.” (NASA, “NASA Finds Wide Annual Fluctuations in Arctic Ozone Loss,” news release 03-125, 28 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03125.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
France’s Alcatel Space signed a US$148 million contract with South Korea’s state-operated KT Corporation to build South Korea’s first satellite with military capabilities. South Korea planned to place Koreasat 5 in orbit by early 2006. KT Corporation spokesperson Cho Chul-Je told the media that South Korea’s military would use military transponders on the satellite for communication and operation, but he declined to confirm reports that the craft would assist the military in collecting security information in Northeast Asia. The craft would also be equipped with commercial transponders. Koreasat 5 would replace Koreasat 2, which had launched in 1996, allowing telecommunications companies to expand mobile networks to Japan, the People’s Republic of China, Taiwan, and the Philippines.(Agence France-Presse, “French Company To Build South Korea’s First Military Satellite,” 8 June 2003.)
ESA’s Science Programme Committee (SPC) dropped the Eddington mission and scaled back the BepiColombo mission because of budgetary concerns―the SPC had determined that ESA would only have sufficient resources to fund one new mission in the next decade. For that mission, the Committee had selected the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) Pathfinder mission, which would launch in 2006 or 2007 and would test technologies and strategies for the planned 2012 LISA mission to detect gravitational waves. ESA had planned for the Eddington mission, scheduled for launch in 2008, to monitor the brightness of stars, study their interiors, and search for planetsof the size of Earth or smallerpassing in front of the stars. Japan and Europe had scheduled BepiColombo, their joint mission to Mercury, for launch in 2011 and had originally planned to send a lander to Mercury as part of that mission. Although the SPC had cancelled the lander portion of the mission, it still planned for ESA to launch two satellites to orbit the planet.(Vanessa Thomas, “ESA Axes Planet-Finding Mission and Mercury Lander,” Astronomy.com, 12 November 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “European Planet-Finding Mission Cancelled,” Space News, 10 November 2003.)
Russia’s Space Forces launched a Molniya 3-53 military communications satellite aboard a four- stage Molniya-M rocket from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region of Russia. Molniya 3-53 was the second Molniya communications satellite launched in 2003.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, “Russia Lofts Military Payload from Plesetsk, Makes Plans for Commercial South American Shots,” 20 June 2003; Stephen Clark, “Molniya Satellite Deployed from Plesetsk Spaceport,” Spaceflight Now, 20 June 2003.)
JAXA officials announced that mission controllers had lost contact with the Advanced Earth Observing Satellite 2 (ADEOS 2), nicknamed Midori 2. The environmental research satellite was conducting a joint mission of the United States and Japan designed to study ocean winds, sea surface temperatures, sea ice, and water vapor distribution in the atmosphere; to monitor plant life and vegetation in marine areas; and to monitor Earth’s ozone layer. The craft had launched 14 December 2002 to replace Midori 1, which had been lost in 1997 when a solar-array malfunction had left it with no power supply.(Justin Ray, “Earth Monitoring Satellite Goes Silent,” Spaceflight Now, 25 October 2003; Jason Bates, “Japan Loses Contact with ADEOS-2 Satellite,” Space News, 27 October 2003.)
NASA confirmed that its satellites’ observations had provided the first evidence that the rate of ozone depletion in Earth’s upper atmosphere was decreasing, a possible indication of the first stage of ozone-layer recovery. Scientists had analyzed data that NASA’s first and second Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment (SAGE) and Halogen Occultation Experiment (HALOE) satellite instruments had collected, discovering a decrease in ozone depletion after 1997. The scientists had found that the rate of depletion was consistent with the decline in abundance of the human-made chemicals that contribute to ozone destruction. However, according to Michael J. Newchurch of the University of Alabama, the lead scientist for the study, ozone depletion was still occurring, although its rate had decreased. Joseph M. Zawodny, a scientist on the SAGE II satellite-instrument science team at NASA’s LaRC, remarked that the finding would not have been possible if the two satellites had not lasted so long past their normal mission lifetimes. SAGE II was approaching its 19th launch anniversary, and HALOE had returned data for 11 years. Scientists had also used international ground networks to corroborate the satellites’ data. The findings indicated the effectiveness of international treaties in encouraging countries to curb pollutionspecifically the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its amendments.(NASA, “NASA Observations Confirm Expected Ozone Layer Recovery,” news release 03-253, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03253_Ozone_Recovery.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Peter N. Spotts, “After 30 Years, Ozone Is Recovering,” Christian Science Monitor, 1 August 2003.)
to 62.1 miles). Designed to last two years, the craft would orbit Earth 15 times each day, focusing on the chemical processes that control the distribution of ozone in the atmosphere.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, “Canadian Ozone Satellite Successfully Launched from Plane Off California Coast,” 13 August 2003.)
ESA launched aboard an Ariane 5G rocket Optus-1, a Japanese-built, hybrid communications/military satellite jointly owned by Australia and Singapore, and B-Sat 2C, a Japanese geostationary communications satellite from Kourou, French Guiana. The Australian Defence Force and Optus, the Australian telecommunications firm and subsidiary of Singapore Telecommunications, had jointly funded the Optus-1 craft. To avoid mixing up data between defense and commercial applications, the two portions of the Optus-1 payload operated independently, one devoted to military use and the other to television broadcasts, high-speed Internet services, and voice and data communications across Australia and parts of Asia. B-Sat 2C would provide direct digital broadcasts to Japan and neighboring countries using Ku-band transponders.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, “Europe Launches Japanese-Built Australian Military Satellite Half Owned by Singapore Government,” 12 June 2003.)
The Russian military successfully launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome a military communications satellite aboard a Molniya-M booster. The purpose of the satellite Molniya 1-92 was to orbit above the far northern regions of Russia relaying commands and communications among military forces. At the lower end of its orbit, the craft would sweep quickly over the Southern Hemisphere, returning to orbit above northern Russia. From this position, the craft would serve users who were out of range of most communications satellites, which, traditionally, orbit at geostationary positions above the equator.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594, 1 May 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx594.html (accessed 14 October 2008); Stephen Clark, “Military Spacecraft Launched by Russian Forces,” Spaceflight Now, 2 April 2003.)
The Canadian Space Agency successfully launched its scientific satellite SciSat 1 aboard a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet flying out of Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The 330-pound (150-kilogram) atmospheric-research satellite carried two instrumentsthe Fourier Transform Spectrometer and the Measurements of Aerosol Extinction in the Stratosphere and Troposphere Retrieved by Occultation (MAESTRO)intended to monitor atmospheric ozone and dust composition in an altitude range of 4 to 100 kilometers (2.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program,” 11 January 2001; Associated Press, “Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth,” 16 January 2001.)
NASA announced the release of the first scientific product of the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) mission, a joint effort of NASA and the German Aerospace Center. The GRACE mission had produced the most accurate map to date of Earth’s gravity field, using preliminary data collected over 111 days. Project scientists had created the map from selected data, which they had used to calibrate and validate the instruments of the pair of American and German satellites comprising GRACE. The satellites had measured Earth’s gravitational force from orbits 500 kilometers (310.7 miles) high, with 220 kilometers (136.7 miles) separating them, making a pass of the entire planet once each month, and producing measurements of unprecedented accuracy. The measurements provided precise views of ocean currents and tidal changes, enabling scientists to better understand how the oceans affect climate. Although the data was preliminary, NASA had released it to oceanographers immediately, months in advance of the scheduled start of routine GRACE scientific operations, underscoring the mission’s importance and the data’s value.(NASA, “Oceanographers Catch First Wave of Gravity Mission’s Success,” news release 03-244, 21 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03244_gravity_success.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Larry O’Hanlon, “Gravity Map Shows Earth Is Very Lumpy,” Discovery News, 29 July 2003.)
Progress M-48 12P launched on a Soyuz FG rocket, carrying 2.6 tonnes (2.87 tons or 2,600 kilograms) of food, fuel, water, and equipment to the ISS. Among the supplies Progress M-48 carried were an Iridium satellite phone and GPS equipment for the use of the Expedition 7 crewRussian Commander Yuri Malenchenko and NASA Science Officer Edward T. Luwhen they returned to Earth in the Soyuz TMA-2 spacecraft in October. The Russian Space Agency had added the satellite phone and GPS equipment to the supplies because Soyuz TMA-1 had experienced an internal glitch while returning the Expedition 6 crew to Earth, resulting in a long, tense search for the craft and crew.
A 66-foot-high (20-meter-high) VLS-1 O3 rocket exploded on its launchpad during tests at Alcântara Launch Center in Brazil, delivering “a serious blow to Brazil’s nascent space program.” Brazil had hoped to be the first Latin American nation to place a satellite in orbit. According to the Brazilian Ministry of Defence, the accident, which occurred three days before a scheduled launch, killed 21 people, mostly civilian technicians, injured 20 others, and destroyed two research satellites. The rocket had successfully completed two days of tests before the explosion. Brazil’s Minister of Defence José Veigas Filho stated that, for unknown reasons, one of the four main motors of the US$2.2 million rocket had ignited, leading to the explosion that destroyed the launchpad. The accident was Brazil’s third failed attempt to launch a rocket with a research satellite.(“Brazil’s Rocket Test Kills 21,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 August 2003; Stan Lehman, “Brazil Mourns Dead, Vows to Reinforce Space Program,” Houston Chronicle, 25 August 2003.)
A European Ariane 5 rocket launched two satellites into orbit from Kourou, French GuianaPanAmSat’s Galaxy 12 commercial telecommunications satellite and the Indian Space Research Organisation’s (ISRO’s) INSAT 3A satellite. The Ariane 5G standard version was the first launch of an Ariane rocket since the enhanced Ariane 5 ECA had failed in December 2002, a failure that had prompted a complete review of the Ariane 5 system, particularly its main-stage cryogenic engine. The 1.8-tonne (2-ton, 1,800-kilogram, or 3,968-pound) Galaxy satellite built by Orbital Sciences Corporation carried 24 C-band transponders to provide voice, video, and data transmissions to North America and South America from its position at longitude 72o west. The 3-tonne (3.3-ton, 3,000-kilogram, or 6,614-pound) INSAT 3A geostationary communications and weather-monitoring satellite carried 12 C-band, 6 extended C-band, and 6 Ku-band transponders, to provide voice, video and data transmission to western Asia, eastern Asia, and India from its position at longitude 93.5o east. The ISRO satellite carried the typical INSAT package of visual, infrared, and water-vapor band sensors to monitor clouds and storms, as well as a separate transponder for an international search-and-rescue program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Peter B. de Selding, “Ariane 5 Successfully Returns to Flight,” Space News, 11 April 2003.)
A NASA four-engine, P3-turboprop, “flying laboratory” airplane flew its last flight in a two- week-long series of flights scanning a section of Alaska’s coast. The scanning was part of a collaborative project between NASA, NOAA, and representatives from the University of Colorado and the University of Alaska at Fairbanks. The project, called Arctic 2003, had collected data about sea-ice variability for comparison with data that NASA’s Aqua satellite had collected. The Aqua had launched in May 2002 with a state-of-the-art radiometer for studying water systems. The P3 had carried equipment similar to Aqua’s radiometera Japanese- developed microwave scannerbut because it had flown closer to the ground than the Aqua, the P3 had been able to collect sharper images. P3 flights had traveled over Norton Sound, St. Lawrence Island, St. Matthew Island, Point Hope, and Barrow. In addition to the P3 and Aqua data, ground crews had traveled to some areas to collect samples of ice and snow.(Associated Press, “Flights Help Scientists Understand Sea Ice Changes,” 24 March 2003.)
