ESA launched the satellite Giove A on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket at 5:19 a.m. (UT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The satellite was the first component of a satellite navigation system called Galileo. According to ESA’s plan, the Galileo system would consist of 30 satellites and would commence operations by 2008. ESA had created Galileo to reduce European dependence on the United States for satellite navigation services and to provide more accurate civilian services than the GPS, a system that the U.S. military had created. According to ESA, users who had mobile phones with integrated chips would be able to use Galileo to find directions to particular destinations, such as parks and restaurants. Galileo would be capable of providing civilian users with real-time positioning accuracy to within 1 meter (3.28 feet). Civilian services from the GPS were accurate to nearly 5 meters (16 feet).(Molly Moore, “With Satellite Launch, E.U. Positions Itself to Compete,” Washington Post, 29 December 2005; ESA, “First Galileo Satellite on Orbit to Demonstrate Key Technologies,” ESA news release 61-2005, 28 December 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_61_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
The Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft, a NASA technology demonstrator, launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, aboard a Pegasus-XL HAPS rocket released from an L-1011 cargo aircraft. NASA intended the launch to test the 360-kilogram (793.76-pound or 0.4-ton or 0.36-tonne) satellite’s video-guidance-system technology, which would enable DART to rendezvous with an experimental military communications satellite and maneuver around it. The technology would allow future spacecraft to approach and dock with another craft automatically.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
ESA successfully launched from its base in Kourou, French Guiana, an Ariane 5 ECA rocket, the world’s most powerful commercial launcher, more than two years after its inaugural flight in December 2002 had ended in disaster. Capable of carrying up to 10 tons (9,071 kilograms or 9.07 tonnes) into space, the rocket lifted a 7.3-ton (6,623-kilogram or 6.62-tonne) payload consisting of two satellitesthe U.S.-Spanish XTAR-EUR satellite and the Dutch experimental SLOSHSAT-FLEVO microsatellite. Fitted with 12 wideband, X-band transponders, the XTAREUR geostationary satellite would provide military communications for the United States and Spain. For 10 days, the Netherlands’ microsatellite SLOSHSAT-FLEVO, weighing just 127 kilograms (0.127 tonnes or 0.139 tons), would test the dynamics of de-ionized water in orbit. FLEVO was the acronym for Facility for Liquid Experimentation and Verification in Orbit, as well as the name of the latest Dutch province that the Netherlands had reclaimed from the sea. ESA also sent aloft a monitor, MAQSAT, which remained attached to the rocket to gather data about the rocket’s dynamic behavior, from launch through the release of the two satellites. In its inaugural launch, the rocket had veered off course, prompting Mission Control to destroy it. An inquiry board had determined that the cooling system of the rocket’s Vulcain engine had malfunctioned.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616, 1 March 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx616.html (accessed 26 August 2009); Associated Press, “European Rocket Delivers Payload,” 14 February 2005; Laurent Marot for Reuters, “Upgraded Ariane-5 Rocket Orbits Satellites,” 13 February 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched two military satellites aboard an Atlas 3B, the last of Lockheed Martin’s Atlas 3 rockets. The launch marked the 145th and final launch from Complex 36 at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after 43 years of operation. NASA had built the complex in the early 1960s, specifically for its Atlas-Centaur program, which included the launches of NASA’s historic Surveyor, Mariner, and Pioneer missions. Launches from the site had proved highly successful; the launch of the last Atlas 3B marked the 75th consecutive successful Atlas rocket launch, including all six Atlas 3 flights. Launch Complex 36 was one of the United States’ oldest continuously operating launch sites and the last of the U.S. launch sites to use a traditional blockhouse to control the launch. The final Atlas 3B carried a pair of formation-flying, classified satellites, which analysts believed were part of the Naval Ocean Surveillance System (NOSS) of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). Satellites in the NOSS, a network for monitoring ships around the globe, were reportedly capable of detecting radio transmissions from ships to pinpoint their locations precisely.(Justin Ray, “Last Atlas 3 Rocket Launches a Pair of Spy Satellites” and “Atlas Rocket Workers Say Goodbye to Complex 36,” Spaceflight Now, 4 February 2005; Todd Halvorson, “Atlas 3 Climbs Through Fog to Final Successful Mission,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 February 2005.)
USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASA’s Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probes―Viking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, “Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral,” Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
ISS Expedition 10 Commander Leroy Chiao and Flight Engineer Salizhan S. Sharipov completed the second and final spacewalk of their mission 1 hour ahead of schedule, returning into the ISS after 4.5 hours. To help in navigation, Chiao and Sharipov installed a set of space-to- space antennas around a section of Zvezda, the Russian service module that would aid in the docking operations of Europe’s Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) during a future cargo mission. The crew also attached a GPS unit to the Zvezda module to help the ATV. The ATV, scheduled to arrive during the next year, had the capability to deliver up to 8.5 tons (7,711 kilograms or 7.71 tonnes) of cargo, including 10,000 pounds (4,536 kilograms or 4.54 tonnes) of propellant. After the crew finished connecting the antennas, Sharipov returned to the Pirs docking compartment to retrieve a small satellite called NanoSputnik. The satellite, which weighed just 11 pounds (5 kilograms) and measured only 1 foot (0.31 meter) long, carried a transmitter designed to test control and orientation systems for small spacecraft during its 100- day mission. Sharipov released the satellite into a retrograde orbit by hand, while Chiao photographed the launch.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalking Astronauts Outfit ISS for New Cargo Ship,” Space.com, 29 March 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_eva2_050328.html (accessed 3 September 2009); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Two Astronauts Complete Spacewalk Work,” 29 March 2005.)
ESA and JAXA performed the first bidirectional, optical, interorbital communication, a form of communication in which satellites use lasers to transmit and receive commands and data over long distances. Laser-based communications have numerous advantages over communications using radio waves, including freedom from interference and higher data-transmission speeds and volumes. ESA and JAXA performed the communication between ESA’s Advanced Relay and Technology Mission satellite and JAXA’s Optical Inter-Orbit Communications Engineering Test Satellite. Previously, ESA and JAXA had conducted unidirectional, optical communications between their satellites, but this event was the first bidirectional form of this type of communication.(ESA, “Successful Optical Data Relay Link Between OICETS and Artemis,” http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMIJVVLWFE_index_0.html (accessed 27 July 2009); JAXA, “Toward the Era of Optical Communications in Space,” news release, 9 December 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/12/ 20051209_oicets_e.html (accessed 27 July 2009).)
The Apstar 6 satellite launched aboard a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China’s Sichuan Province. The 4.8-tonne (4,800-kilogram or 5.3-ton) satellite carried 38 C-band and 12 Ku-band transponders. Replacing the ageing Apstar 1A, the craft would provide digital, multimedia transmissions to Australia, India, and countries in eastern Asia. The satellite was the first Western-built, commercial telecommunications spacecraft to carry almost no U.S.-made components, as well as the first commercial Chinese satellite with an antijamming payload. Hong Kong–based APT Satellite Company had requested that Alcatel Space include the antijamming technology in response to the threat of satellite-signal piracy, which had occurred several times over the previous two years. The new Alcatel Spacebus 4000 C1 satellite platform selected for Apstar 6 included no U.S. parts subject to the export controls of the U.S. Department of State. Because the U.S. government had refused to grant export licenses for U.S. satellite parts destined for launch in China, Alcatel Space had substituted European, Russian, and other non-U.S. components.
Japan successfully launched a geostationary weather satellite MTSAT-1R aboard an H-2A rocket from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima prefecture, after a glitch in communications between the rocket and ground systems had caused a 76-minute delay. The launch was Japan’s first launch of a heavy-lift vehicle since November 2003, when one of the H-2A’s solid boosters had failed to jettison as expected after completing its burn, causing the launch to fail. In the failed launch, Japan had lost the second pair of the four spy satellites that it had built after North Korea had fired a missile into Japanese territory in 1998. The other pair of the four satellitesone optical and one radar-sounding satellitewere all Japan had left to monitor its threatening neighbor. Furthermore, the launch failure had dashed Japan’s plans to enter the commercial satellite-launch business and had caused Japan to lose its international credibility. The successful launch of the MTSAT-1R restored morale to Japan’s rocketry program. A second mission of the MTSAT-1R was to replace a satellite lost in November 1999 when the final H-2 rocket, the predecessor of H-2A, had failed to reach orbit. Japan had designed the MTSAT-1R to service the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency, fulfilling the two missions of facilitating air-traffic management and obtaining satellite imagery for meteorologists.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616; James Brooke, “After Failures, Space Effort in Japan Gets a Lift,” New York Times, 28 February 2005; Justin Ray, “Beleaguered H-2A Rocket Roars Into Orbit,” Spaceflight Now, 26 February 2005.)
Russian space officials and officials from the French rocket company Arianespace signed an agreement in Moscow allowing Russia to launch medium-weight satellite payloads from ESA’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. Under the agreement, Europe would provide 344 million euros to build a launchpad for Russian Soyuz rockets, and Russia would erect a tower for the launchpad, ship the rockets from Russia, and make any changes to the rockets necessary for them to operate in the equatorial climate. Locating launches at the equator would allow Russia to increase the weight of its payloads from 1.6 tonnes (1,600 kilograms or 1.7 tons) to about 3 tonnes (3,000 kilograms or 3.3 tons). The arrangement also filled a niche that Arianespace’s two rocket fleets did not. Arianespace Vega rockets launched small scientific satellites weighing no more than 1.5 tonnes (1,500 kilograms or 1.65 tons) into a low orbit. The two models of Ariane 5 rockets could launch payloads weighing 6.6 tonnes (6,600 kilograms or 7.3 tons) or 10 tonnes (10,000 kilograms or 11 tons), respectively, into geostationary transfer orbit. Expecting to launch three or four Soyuz rockets per year, beginning in 2008, Arianespace had already booked three launches from Kourou using the Russian Soyuz rocket―launches of one Australian telecommunications satellite and two French scientific satellites.(Maggie McKee, “Russian Rockets To Launch from South American Base,” New Scientist, 13 April 2005. 772 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618, 1 May 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx618.html (accessed 8 September 2009); Peter B. de Selding, “Apstar 6 Launched from China,” Space News, 13 April 2005.)
Astronomers announced the detection of the most distant explosion ever observed, at approximately 12.6 billion light-years from Eartha gamma-ray burst (GRB) occurring after a massive star’s collapse and transformation to a black hole. The explosion, which astronomers had named GRB 050904, had occurred nearly 1.1 billion years after the Big Bang, which itself had happened 13.7 billion years ago. The astronomers used ground-based telescopes and NASA’s Swift satellite to detect GRB 050904’s emitted infrared light. Because the event had occurred so far away, the infrared light had just begun to reach Earth. However, the explosion was not the most distant object or event that astronomers had ever observed. Scientists had detected a quasar and a galaxy located 12.7 billion light-years from Earth.(Guy Gugliotta, “Satellite Detects Massive Explosion,” Washington Post, 13 September 2005; NASA, “Most Distant Explosion Detected, Smashes Previous Record,” news release 05-259, 12 September 2005.)
J. Stephen Fossett landed the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer experimental aircraft in Salinas, Kansas, after flying the first solo, nonstop, non-refueled, around-the-world airplane trip. The flight had lasted three days, during which Fossett had not slept and had only consumed 12 milkshakes. The craft, designed by X Prize–winning SpaceShipOne creator Burt Rutan, carried NASA’s advanced experimental Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) transceiver, the Low Power Transceiver (LPT) that NASA researchers believed would provide a flexible and inexpensive option for relaying information between spacecraft. NASA had placed the new transceiver on board GlobalFlyer to test the device’s function during a real flight, especially its performance in delivering a constant video feed. NASA had loaned GlobalFlyer a modified version of its Personal Cabin Pressure Monitor to alert the pilot of potentially dangerous or deteriorating cabin pressure. Because the background noise in GlobalFlyer’s cockpit was too loud for the pilot to hear an alarm, the modified monitor vibrated to signal a problem. The mission had successfully overcome periodic failures of GlobalFlyer’s navigation system. Furthermore, while passing through Japanese airspace, the aircraft had appeared to be running out of fuel too quickly, but a solid tailwind had helped Fossett avoid making a landing in Hawaii.(NASA, “NASA Technology Supports Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer,” news release 05-068, 3 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05068_globalflyer_congrats.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, “NASA Helps Record Flight,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2005.)
NASA announced it had accepted an invitation to join the National Invasive Species Council (NISC), a cabinet-level council established in 1999 to coordinate federal responses to harmful invasive species. As a member of the council, NASA would provide data acquired using Earth- observation spacecraft and predictive models to assist 12 other federal agencies’ efforts to combat invasive species nationwide. The council had extended the invitation because of NASA’s previous work monitoring invasive species: NASA had provided data, predictive models, and systems engineering to the USGS, information that had helped the USGS build predictive maps of invasive species in Utah’s Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. With NASA’s assistance, USGS had converted data from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer aboard NASA’s Terra satellite, as well as other data, to create predictive maps of plant species distribution. USGS had used the National Invasive Species Forecasting System to help improve the nation’s response to invasive species.(NASA, “NASA Research to Aid Federal Invasive Species Council Efforts,” news release 05-035, 2 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05036_Invasive_Species.html (accessed 19 August 2009). 739 Warren E. Leary, “Repair Costs for Hubble Are Vexing to Scientists,” New York Times, 3 February 2005; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Repair Could Hinge on Who Pays at NASA,” 3 February 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Options for Hubble Science, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 2 February 2005.)
NASA announced findings from research exploring the impact of black carbon or soot on Earth’s climate, findings that provided new and additional evidence that pollution generated through the process of incomplete combustion contributes to the accelerated melting of sea ice and snow, as well as to the changing atmospheric temperatures in the Arctic region. Dorothy M. Koch, of Columbia University and NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), and James E. Hansen, also of GISS, coauthored the study, using satellite data and computer models to recreate the climate and to track pollution. In addition to confirming past findings regarding the relationship between pollution and climate change in the Arctic region, the study had found that most of the pollution in the environment and the atmosphere of the Arctic did not originate in the developed world, but rather in southern Asia, which had the highest level of industrial soot emissions in the world. Using the GISS General Circulation Model (GCM) to locate the origins of Arctic soot, Koch and Hansen had found that one-third of the pollution originated in southern Asia, one-third was the result of burning vegetation and natural materials around the world, and the remainder originated in Russia, Europe, and North America.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Soot May Be Changing the Arctic Environment,” news release 05-084, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05084_arctic_soot.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Miguel Bustillo, “Airborne Soot Adds To Arctic Melting, Study Finds,” Los Angeles Times, 24 March 2005.)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the European satellite Inmarsat 4-F1 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a stretched version of the Atlas 5 rocket. Weighing 13,138 pounds (5,959 kilograms or 5.96 tonnes), the EADS Astrium-built Inmarsat 4 was the largest commercial satellite ever to launch. As part of a three-satellite constellation comprising the new Broadband Global Area Network, the spacecraft would provide wireless, broadband connections to ships, planes, and remote areas that had not previously had reliable access to ground-based, high-speed networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 617, 1 April 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx617.html (accessed 31 August 2009); Associated Press, “Atlas 5 Rocket Hauls Satellite into Space,” 12 March 2005.)
A group of scientists led by David N. Burrows of Pennsylvania State University announced that they had found evidence of black holes behaving in a manner previously unknown. Using observations from NASA’s Swift satellite, the scientists had discovered newly formed black holes that were simultaneously consuming matter while propelling away other material. They also observed that, after the black holes had emerged from large star explosions, the energy from the black holes’ initial formative activities had caused several subsequent explosions during the following minutes, with a gamma-ray burst (GRB) from the first explosion followed by x-ray flares from later explosions. Previously, scientists had believed that black holes and GRBs were only associated with single explosions of collapsing stars, rather than with a rapid succession of explosions. The scientists had been able to conduct their analyses because NASA’s Swift satellite could observe GRBs within minutes after their occurrence, whereas other satellites had only been able to observe GRBs hours after they had occurred.
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
NASA-funded researchers reported that they had discovered that lightning in clouds a few miles above the ground clears a safe zone in the Van Allen Beltthe radiation belt located thousands of miles above Earth. Without this zone, satellites would have no safe area in which to orbit. The discovery, which NASA described as unexpected, resolved a 40-year debate about how the safe zone forms and how the region clears after magnetic storms fill it with radiation. Previously, the prominent theory held that turbulence in the zone generates radio waves in space, which clear the radiation. However, lightning also generates radio waves. The research team had confirmed the lightning theory using a global map of lightning activity created from data that the Micro Lab 1 spacecraft had collected. The team had also collected radio-wave data from the Radio Plasma Imager aboard the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft, combining that data with archival data from the Dynamics Explorer spacecraft. These two data sets showed that radio-wave activity in the safe zone closely follows terrestrial lightning patterns; if the radio waves had originated in space rather than Earth, no such correlation would exist. Therefore, the team had concluded that lightning clears radiation within a few days following magnetic storms. According to NASA, engineers could eventually design spacecraft that generate radio waves at the correct frequency and location to clear radiation belts around other planets, enabling humans to explore planets and moons such as Jupiter’s Europa.(NASA, “NASA Finds Lightning Clears Safe Zone in Earth’s Radiation Belt,” news release 05-070, 8 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05070_radiation_belt.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Agence-France Presse, “Lightning Cuts Safe Zone Between Earth Radiation Belts: NASA,” 9 March 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force launched the most technologically advanced GPS satellite ever developed, the GPS IIR-14, on a Delta-2 rocket at 11:37 p.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS IIR-14 was the first of eight satellites planned for the new GPS, which the Air Force had created to provide improved encryption and GPS antijamming capabilities for the U.S. military, as well as an improved GPS signal for civilian users. At the time of the launch, the GPS constellation consisted of 28 satellites, which the Air Force was operating for both civilian and military users.(Lockheed Martin, “First Modernized GPS Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully by the U.S. Air Force,” news release, 26 September 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/ FIRSTMODERNIZEDGPSSATELLITEBUILTBYL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company announced the formation of a joint venture called United Launch Alliance, combining the production, engineering, testing, and launch operations associated with U.S. government launches of Boeing Delta and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. The merger ended a two-year legal battle between the two largest government contractors, in which Lockheed Martin had accused Boeing of cheating to win rocket-launch work. The venture eliminated market competition for launching weather satellites for NOAA, scientific satellites for NASA, spy satellites for the National Security Agency, and communications satellites for the U.S. Air Force. According to the agreement, the joint venture would produce both Boeing’s Delta and Lockheed’s Atlas rockets, consolidating production at Boeing’s Decatur, Alabama, facility. Lockheed’s Denver, Colorado, office would serve as headquarters, housing the engineering and administrative functions. Lockheed Martin’s Vice President of Financial Strategies Jeffrey D. MacLauchlan remarked that the preservation of the two separate rocket families was the crux of the venture’s appeal to the federal government.(Lockheed Martin, “Boeing, Lockheed Martin To Form Launch Services Joint Venture,” news release, 2 May 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/BoeingLockheedMartin FormLaunchServi.html (accessed 17 September 2009); Renae Merle, “Boeing, Lockheed Join Rocket Division,” Washington Post, 3 May 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the December 2004 inaugural launch of Boeing’s Delta 4 Heavy Rocket, which had failed when engines shut down prematurely. The Air Force and Boeing had intended the launch of the rocket, which was transporting a dummy payload, as a full dress rehearsal. The plan had been to test the newest and largest member of Boeing’s next-generation rocket series before critical national security satellites began using it. Boeing had designed the rocket with three Common Booster Cores, each with a cryogenic main engine. The three cores, secured together, formed a craft capable of launching large cargo into space. The investigation had determined that each booster’s engines had undergone premature shutdown during the launch, after internal sensors incorrectly determined that the engines had exhausted their liquid-oxygen fuel supply. Investigators had concluded that cavitationbubbles in the liquid oxygen plumbinghad caused the glitch. Major Rodney Houser, the lead investigator for the Air Force, stated that the investigating team would focus on determining the cause of the cavitation within the liquid-oxygen feed system and on implementing corrective measures to prevent the problem’s repetition.(Justin Ray, “Delta 4-Heavy Investigation Identifies Rocket’s Problem,” Spaceflight Now, 17 March 2005. 235)
NASA scientists announced the first measurements ever taken of changes in sea level that were unrelated to changes in land height. Although researchers believed that rising sea levels were related to global warming, they were unsure of how much sea levels had changed, the degree to which sea-level changes were attributable to upward and downward land movements, and the causes of those changes. However, using data from numerous satellites, NASA scientists had discovered that global sea levels had increased during the previous 50 years, at an estimated rate of 1.8 millimeters (0.07 inches) annually, and that the rate of increase had accelerated to 3 millimeters (0.12 inches) annually in the previous 12 years. The scientists attributed half of the rise in sea levels to the expansion of water from warmer ocean temperatures and the remainder to various other sources, such as the melting of ice covers in Antarctica, Greenland, and elsewhere.(Juliet Eilperin, “NASA Able To Pinpoint Changes in Sea Levels,” Washington Post, 8 July 2005; NASA, “NASA Satellites Measure and Monitor Sea Level,” news release 05-175, 7 July 2005.)
NASA announced that scientists analyzing images from the its Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and from the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had discovered that Earth’s northern and southern auroras are not mirror images of each other, as previously thought. Images from the two spacecraft showed that auroras move and change, depending on the tilt of Earth’s magnetic field toward the Sun and on solar wind conditions. Knowing more about how auroras react to the solar wind could help scientists predict space weather. Timothy J. Stubbs of the Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics at NASA’s GSFC remarked that the analysis was the first to track the locations of the auroras using simultaneous observations, in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, of the auroras in their entirety.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Earth’s Auroras Are Not Mirror Images,” news release 05-089, 5 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05089_aurora_images.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
NASA launched a new environmental satellite for NOAA, aboard a Boeing Delta 2 7320-10 expendable launch vehicle, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The NOAA-18 (N), the fourth in the series of five Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellites (POES) carrying improved imaging and sounding capabilities, would improve weather forecasting and monitor environmental events globally, collecting data about Earth’s surface and atmosphere. The craft also carried instruments used in COSPAS-SARSAT, the international Search-and-Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking System (COSPAS is the Russian acronym for “Cosmicheskaya Sistema Poiska Avariynyh Sudo,” which means “Space System for the Search of Vessels in Distress”). Established in 1982, COSPAS-SARSAT had saved 5,000 lives in the United States and 18,000 worldwide.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619; NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Environmental Satellite,” news release 05- 129, 20 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05129_ NOAA_)
NASA announced the establishment of the DART Mishap Investigation Board to determine why the DART spacecraft had failed to complete its mission on 15 April. Initially, NASA had believed that DART had come within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the target satellite before low fuel readings prompted it to abort its mission. However, NASA spokesperson Kimberly D. Newton later explained that new data had indicated that DART had bumped the satellite, boosting its orbit by as much as 5.75 miles (9.3 kilometers). However, DART had abandoned its target approximately halfway through its 24-hour mission. The Board consisted of seven voting members from NASA’s MSFC, NASA’s GSFC and ARC; the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; and the U.S. Air Force Space Command. NASA assigned eight federal employees to serve as advisors to the Board―six from MSFC, and one each from NASA’s JSC and NASA Headquarters. NASA selected Scott D. Croomes of MSFC to chair the Board and Kerry L. Remp of GRC to serve ex officio, to assure that board activity conformed to NASA’s procedural requirements.(NASA, “NASA Announces Dart Mishap Investigation Board Members,” news release 05-105, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05105_DART_mishap_board.html (accessed 29 June 2009); NASA Engineering and Safety Center, NESC Review of Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) Mission Mishap Investigation Review Board (MIB) (NESC Request No. 05-020-E, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, December 2006), http://klabs.org/richcontent/Reports/Failure_Reports/dart/ 167813main_rp-06-119_05-020-e_dart_report_final_dec_27.pdf (accessed 18 November 2009); Chris Kridler, “Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
NASA scientists led by Karel J. Schrijver announced the results of their research on the development of better methods of forecasting solar storms. Radiation from solar storms―extremely powerful explosions in the Sun’s atmosphere―can affect unprotected astronauts and airplane passengers, as well as satellites. In the past, scientists had usually analyzed changes in solar magnetic fields to forecast solar storms (also called solar flares), but this method had demonstrated limited reliability. However, a team of NASA scientists using NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) had found that strong electrical currents in the solar atmosphere―currents associated with changes in solar magnetic fields―are the primary drivers of solar flares. Therefore, observing the electrical currents is a more reliable method of forecasting solar flares than the method previously used. The researchers had also discovered that solar flares are strongest and most likely to occur in regions of the Sun where electrical currents accumulate until they have reached an explosive threshold. According to Schrijver and the other researchers, these findings would enable scientists better to forecast periods of potentially hazardous space weather.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Closer to Timely Space Weather Forecasts,” news release 05-226, 16 August 2005; Carolus J. Schrijver et al., “The Nonpotentiality of Active-Region Coronae and the Dynamics of the Photospheric Magnetic Field,” Astrophysical Journal 628, no. 1 (20 July 2005): 501–513.)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched its Cartosat-1 Earth- mapping and remote-sensing satellite aboard a Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle-C6 (PSLV-C6) from the newly built launchpad at Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The 1.56-tonne (1,560-kilogram or 1.72-ton) Cartosat-1, the heaviest payload that the PSLV had ever ferried to space, carried two f/4.5 Panchromatic cameras, which together would enable the production of a stereoscopic image at a resolution of 2.5 meters (8.2 feet). ISRO planned to use the images to generate digital terrain-elevation maps, which would aid in assessing and monitoring land use, forest cover, and river flow. The launch vehicle also carried into orbit HAMSat, a 43-kilogram (0.043-tonne or 0.047-ton) microsatellite designed to relay amateur VHF radio communications.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619, 1 June 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx619.html (accessed 17 September 2009); K. S. Jayaraman, “India Launches Cartosat-1 Satellite,” Space News, 6 May 2005.)
JAXA launched its Suzaku astronomy satellite at 3:30 a.m. (GMT) from Uchinoura Space Center (formerly called the Kagoshima Space Center) on an M-5 rocket. Suzaku, known as Astro-E2 before the launch, was JAXA’s replacement for its first Astro-E satellite, which had been lost during launch in 2000. JAXA and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science had built the satellite to monitor space in conjunction with NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton. The Suzaku satellite was equipped with three telescopes: a Hard X-ray Detector, an X-ray Spectrometer, and an X-ray Imaging Spectrometer.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 621, 1 August 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx621.html (accessed 12 June 2009); NASA, “Suzaku: Mission Overview,” 3 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/astro-e2/ main/index.html (accessed 12 June 2009).)
NASA and NOAA announced their joint development of procedures to improve the accuracy of medium-range weather forecasts in the Northern Hemisphere. NASA and NOAA scientists had incorporated into weather prediction models the data from the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) on NASA’s Aqua satellite, improving the accuracy range of experimental six-day weather forecasts of the Northern Hemisphere by 6 hours. Observers called this improvement of 4 percent a significant development in weather forecasting. NASA had launched Aqua on 4 May 2002, enabling the AIRS to produce three-dimensional maps of air and surface temperature, cloud properties, and water vapor. Moreover, the instrument had a spectral resolution more than 100 times greater than that of other infrared sounders.(NASA, “NASA/NOAA Announce Major Weather Forecasting Advancement,” news release 05-231, 24 August 2005; NASA JPL, “AIRS: Overview,” http://airs.jpl.nasa.gov/overview/ overview/ (accessed 2 July 2009).)
Spaceway 1, a DirecTV satellite, launched from Sea Launch’s Odyssey floating platform at the equator aboard a Zenit-3SL rocket. Sea Launch used a self-propelled launch platform and a command ship that had sailed from Long Beach, California, to the equator. At the equator, the physics of Earth’s rotation make it possible to launch heavier payloads than elsewhere. Sea Launch announced that the 13,376-pound (6,067.3-kilogram or 6.1-tonne) satellite was the heaviest commercial satellite ever launched.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Associated Press, “DirecTV Satellite Launched from Sea Launch Ocean Platform,” 27 April 2005.)
Astronomers announced that they had discovered the source of short gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), which had been an enigma for decades. Gamma rays are the most energetic and deadly form of electromagnetic radiation. Although scientists had already discovered that supernovas cause long GRBs, which last for approximately 2 seconds, they had remained uncertain of the causes of short GRBs, which last less than 1 second. Using data from numerous NASA satellites, 130 astronomers from around the world found that short GRBs originate from neutron stars and not―as some theories had suggested―from supernovas. More specifically, satellite data showed that short GRBs originate from collisions involving a neutron star and either another neutron star or a black hole. However, the data was not conclusive regarding the exact type of collision that causes short GRBs, because the brevity of these events makes them difficult to observe directly.(Luigi Pir, “Short-Burst Sources,” Nature (London) 437, no. 7060 (6 October 2005): 822–823; Dennis Overbye, “Scientists Trace Gamma Rays to Collision of Dead Stars,” New York Times, 6 October 2005.)
