Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), a private company based in El Segundo, California, launched its Falcon-1 rocket from Omelek Island in the Kwajawlein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. The 70-foot-long (21.3-meter-long), two-stage rocket, powered by liquid oxygen and kerosene, successfully reached space, accomplishing stage separation and second-stage ignition before reentering the atmosphere. Although the rocket failed to reach its desired orbit of 425 miles (684 kilometers), SpaceX’s founder Elon Musk, also the cofounder of PayPal, considered the launch a success because the rocket had successfully achieved many of the riskiest milestones of launching and entering space. The company’s first attempt at launching a Falcon-1 rocket in 2006 had failed when leaking fuel caught fire just after liftoff. SpaceX had designed the most recent mission—Demo 2—to gather flight data for the company’s main customer, DARPA, which was seeking more economical means of reaching space. The typical commercial launch service cost US$30 million, but Musk had pledged to launch satellites for US$7 million.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “SpaceX Launches New Rocket Into Space,” 21 March 2007; John Schwartz, “Private Rocket Lost Shortly After Launch,” New York Times, 21 March 2007.)
DARPA’s Orbital Express mission successfully executed a maneuver to demonstrate a satellite- servicing technique. Orbital Express consisted of a robotic servicer called ASTRO and a fuel depot and client satellite called NextSat. The mission aimed to demonstrate in-orbit refueling and servicing. The test marked the first time the two craft had maneuvered separately, flying apart at a distance of approximately 10 meters (33 feet). After the two craft had flown apart for 1 hour, ASTRO directed on-board guidance and navigation instruments to close in and to dock with NextSat, completing the mission’s objectives without input from ground controllers. The test was the third of nine increasingly complex procedures DARPA had planned for the mission.(Stephen Clark, “Orbital Express Duo Split Apart, Rejoin Autonomously,” Spaceflight Now, 7 May 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket launched a German satellite called TerraSAR-X from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 (UT). The 3,000-pound (1,361-kilogram) TerraSAR-X was a night-vision radar system designed to create the most precise maps and imagery that a civilian space-radar system had produced to date. The craft’s mission was to map Earth and its oceans at a rate of 1 million square kilometers per day (almost 400,000 square miles per day), to capture scientific data such as sea-ice coverage, vegetation and crop estimates, and to acquire military reconnaissance information at a 1.0-meter (3.3-foot) resolution.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 644, 1 July 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx644.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Stephen Clark, “German Radar Imaging Satellite Launched into Space,” Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2007.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a US$695 million contract to Boeing Satellite Systems of El Segundo, California, to design, develop, and fabricate two new Tracking and Data Relay Satellites—TDRS-K and TDRS-L. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would also integrate, test, ship, provide launch support, conduct in-orbit checkout operations, and provide sustaining engineering support for the satellites. In addition, Boeing would design, assemble, test, install, and verify modifications necessary to making the ground terminals at NASA’s White Sands Complex in New Mexico fully compatible with the new TDRS spacecraft design. The period of performance for the contract, which had a value of up to US$1.22 billion, could extend through April 2025 if NASA exercised its options. These included two additional spacecraft, TDRS-M and TDRS-N. The contract would extend the lifetime of the TDRS system, the primary source of voice, data, and telemetry for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs, and would provide those services for NASA’s Constellation Program.(NASA, “NASA Awards Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Contract,” news release C07-064, 20 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_C07064_TDRSS_Awards.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Clinton Parks, “Boeing Satellite Systems Wins $695 Million TDRS Contract,” Space.com, 21 December 2007.)
On the 50th anniversary of the launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik, publisher Harry N. Abrams released America in Space, a photographic record of the history of space exploration, documenting NASA’s achievements in aeronautics, science and technology, and human spaceflight. Published in cooperation with NASA, the book contained 500 color and black-and- white photographs, including many previously unpublished photographs, selected from NASA’s archives. Heralding the space age, the launch of Sputnik led to the creation of NASA one year later.(NASA, “New Book Chronicles NASA’s First 50 Years,” news release 07-210, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07210_NASA_book.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Jeremy Hsu, “NASA Book Commemorates 50 Years of Spaceflight,” Space.com, 5 October 2007, http://www.space.com/entertainment/ 071004-nasabook-anniversary.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
The People’s Republic of China released the first image of the Moon that its Chang’e-1 lunar probe had captured, marking the formal start of China’s mission to document the lunar landscape. China unveiled the image at a ceremony at the Beijing Aerospace Control Center. China’s Premier Wen Jiabao described the event as a major step in his people’s 1,000-year-old dream of exploring the Moon. Chang’e 1 had become China’s first circumlunar satellite on 5 November when it successfully entered the Moon’s orbit.(Associated Press, “China Shows First Image from Lunar Probe,” 26 November 2007; Xinhua News Agency, “China’s First Lunar Probe Enters Moon’s Orbit,” 5 November 2007.)
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) released a study conducted over two years, examining the United States’ Earth-observing satellite missions. The study, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond, was the first 10-year plan to recommend a path forward that would restore U.S. leadership in Earth science and prevent the collapse of the U.S. system of Earth- science satellites. The report recommended that, to accomplish this goal and to rebuild the aging network of environmental spacecraft, the U.S. government should fund 17 Earth-observing-satellite missions between 2010 and 2020. To fund these missions, NASA would need to resume spending US$2 billion per year on Earth science, and the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) would need to maintain funding levels at US$1 billion each year. According to the report, NASA’s budget for Earth science had decreased 30 percent since 2000, while NOAA had experienced major cost overruns and schedule delays in its primary mission to study weather and climate. Without reinvestment, the number of NASA’s satellites monitoring the Earth’s climate could decrease by 2017 from 25 to 7, leaving the United States without scientific information to analyze severe storms and to determine changes in the Earth’s climate.(Brian Berger, “Report Urges Reinvestment in U.S. Earth Science Satellites,” Space.com, 16 January 2007, http://www.space.com/aol/businessmonday_070122.html (accessed 4 March 2010); Marc Kaufman, “Cutbacks Impede Climate Studies,” Washington Post, 16 January 2007; National Research Council, Space Studies Board and Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007), http://www.nap.edu/catalog. php?record_id=11820#toc (accessed 5 November 2009).)
The Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee held a hearing to discuss planned budget cuts to weather and environmental satellite programs, reductions that could significantly affect scientists’ ability to study Earth’s climate. Antonio J. Busalacchi, Director of the Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center of the University of Maryland, spoke extensively about the causes of the delays and cost overruns in the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS), a joint project of DOD, NASA, and NOAA. The partner agencies, intending for NPOESS to replace NASA’s QuikSCAT satellite, which had launched in 1999 with a three- to five-year life expectancy, had originally scheduled NPOESS satellites to begin launches to replace aging satellites in 2008. However, at the time of the hearing, the partners had postponed the launches, now scheduled to occur during 2013−2026. Busalacchi characterized the status of the program as “one giant leap backward for mankind,” and Commerce Committee Chair Clarence William “Bill” Nelson (D-FL) called the implementation of the NPOESS program a disaster. David A. Powner of the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) testified that, although the initial cost estimate for the program had been US$6.5 billion for six satellites, the projected cost had since reached US$12.5 billion, with two satellites and some instruments dropped from the program. The report also found that the agencies had not coordinated effectively and had not filled critical NPOESS jobs. Mary Ellen Kicza, Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services at NOAA, testified to the committee that the agencies had already addressed many of the problems that GAO had identified.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, U.S. Weather and Environmental Satellites: Ready for the 21st Century? 110th Cong., 1st sess., 11 July 2007; see also statements of Ellen Kicza, David A. Powner, and Antonio J. Busalacchi, http://commerce.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?p=Hearings (accessed 29 October 2010) ; Wes Allison, “Politics Aging Satellite Won’t Cripple Storm Trackers,” St. Petersburg Times (FL), 12 July 2007; Jessica Gresko for the Associated Press, “Senate Committee Hears Recommendations on Weather Satellites,” 11 July 2007.)
JAXA officials announced that, after project engineers had successfully put the probe through a series of maneuvers, Japan’s lunar satellite, SELENE, had reached orbit, marking the first time Japan had placed a satellite in orbit around the Moon. According to the mission plan, SELENE would place its main orbiter Kayuga in an orbit approximately 60 miles (96.6 kilometers) from the Moon and would then deploy two smaller satellites in polar orbits. The project constituted a key advance for Japan, which had launched its first satellite in 1972 but, since that time, had struggled to keep up with the People’s Republic of China. Japan had launched SELENE on 14 September, following a four-year delay of the mission.(Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, “Japan’s SELENE Probe Reaches Lunar Orbit,” 5 October 2007.)
underwater telephone. The Atlantis had an on-board telephone connected to a satellite telephone, which could contact anyone on shore. Atlantis had telephoned NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where a high-powered dish transmitter had contacted the ISS directly. Oceanographers and astrobiologists were equally enthusiastic about the telephone call because much of the information oceanographers learn researching the sea floor applies to space exploration. Astrobiologist Richard Shand of Northern Arizona University described the feat of communicating with people who are not currently on Earth’s surface, using three different media—water, air, and vacuum—as an astonishing accomplishment. Apollo astronauts, who had called Houston from a distance of 384,400 kilometers (238,855 miles), retained the record for a long-distance call. The call from the Alvin submersible to the ISS was a 253-kilometer (157-mile) long-distance call.(Christina Reed, “Houston, We Have a Phone Call,” Science Now, 26 January 2007.)
The People’s Republic of China launched its lunar orbiter Chang’e 1 aboard a Long March-3A rocket at 10:05 (UT) from Xichang Satellite Launch Center. China named the 5,070-pound (2,230-kilogram) craft for a Chinese goddess who, according to myth, had flown to the Moon. Chang’e 1 carried several scientific instruments, including a stereo camera and spectrometer imager, laser altimeter, gamma-ray and x-ray spectrometer, microwave radiometer, high-energy particle detector, and solar-wind detectors. The Chinese Academy of Sciences and CNSA planned to use the instruments to identify 14 atomic elements, helping scientists determine the mineral content of the lunar surface. The goal of the mission was to analyze the chemical and mineral composition of the lunar surface.
An Ariane-5ECA rocket launched the British Defense Ministry’s 4.7-tonne (5.2-ton) Skynet-5A satellite and ISRO’s 3.1-tonne (3.4-ton) Insat-4B civil-communications satellite from Kourou, French Guiana. The Skynet 5A was part of a system designed to deliver secure, high-bandwidth communications for British armed forces, NATO, and other allied forces. Skynet had ultrahighfrequency and super-high-frequency communications instruments, a secure payload-control system, antijamming capabilities, and multiple spot beams. Insat 4B carried 12 Ku-band transponders to reach homes and businesses throughout India, as well as 12 C-band transponders to serve users living in an area stretching from the Middle East to Southeast Asia. Insat 4B was the second Insat-4 craft to reach orbit successfully. Insat 4A had successfully launched in 2005, but Insat 4C’s launch vehicle had exploded in July 2006, destroying the satellite.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641; Stephen Clark, “British and Indian Satellites Fly to Space on Ariane 5,” Spaceflight Now, 11 March 2007, http://spaceflightnow.com/ariane/v175/ (accessed 9 June 2010 ); Jonathan Amos, “British Skynet Satellite Launched,” BBC News, 12 March 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6434773.stm (accessed 9 June 2010).)
Orbital Express successfully captured the ASTRO servicing satellite, and its client spacecraft NextSat, after the two spacecraft had flown apart for nearly eight days. ASTRO’s primary sensor flight computer AC-2 had failed during a test on 11 May, causing the craft to lose its relative navigation. During the test, the pair of craft had undocked and separated as planned, moving apart to a distance of 10 meters (33 feet). After the failure of its AC-2 computer, ASTRO had behaved according to the protocol of its programmed fault-protection software, flying 120 meters (394 feet) away from NextSat to avoid inadvertently colliding with the satellite. However, thereafter, ASTRO had drifted approximately 6 kilometers (3.7 miles) away from NextSat, requiring ground observers’ intervention to help the two craft remate successfully. DARPA planned to conduct a technical review of ASTRO’s sensor- and navigation-performance lessons and to conduct an investigation into the cause of the AC-2’s failure. The technical review would assist DARPA in planning the remaining set of Orbital Express demonstration activities, scheduled for the following weeks.(U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, “Orbital Express Spacecraft Successfully Rendezvous, Remate,” news release, 21 May 2007, http://www.darpa.mil/news/2007/oe_remate.pdf (accessed 6 April 2010); Kelly Young, “Estranged Satellite Pair Reunited at Last,” New Scientist, 21 May 2007; Stephen Clark, “Computer Problem Interrupts Satellite Servicing Demo,” Spaceflight Now, 15 May 2007.)
NASA announced that it had tested the first nanotechnology-based electronic device to fly in space—the Nano ChemSensor Unit—demonstrating that the device known as a nanosensor could monitor trace gases inside a spacecraft. NASA had launched the device into orbit on 9 March 2007 as a secondary payload experiment on board the U.S. Naval Academy’s MidSTAR- 1 satellite. Scientists had conducted the sensor test on 24 May, successfully showing that the nanosensors could survive in space conditions, as well as in the extreme vibrations and gravity changes that occur during launch.(NASA, “NASA Nanotechnology Space Sensor Test Successful in Orbit,” news release 07-140, 18 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07140_Nanotech_Sensor_Test.html (accessed 13 April 2010); United Press International, “NASA Nanotechnology Tested in Orbit,” 19 June 2007.)
ESA launched the sixth Ariane-5 rocket of 2007 from Kourou, French Guiana, setting a record for the agency. The Ariane 5 lifted into orbit the Horizons-2 telecommunications satellite, a joint U.S.-Japanese venture. The rocket also carried the RASCOM-QAF1 satellite, which would offer telephone and Internet service throughout Africa. Horizons 2, the second satellite for the U.S.- based Intelsat and the Japan-based JSAT, would replace Intelsat’s SBS-6 spacecraft, which had been in orbit for 17 years. With 20 Ku-band transponders, the 2,304-kilogram (5079.5-pound) Horizons 2 would provide telecommunications services for 15−17 years to the continental United States, the Caribbean, and parts of Canada. After 10 years struggle to organize an ownership structure, Regional African Satellite Communications Organization (RASCOM) had secured US$370 million in funding from a consortium, comprising a Libyan investment fund, the Libyan General Post and Telecommunications Company, and three African development banks. The consortium intended for its satellite, the Rascom-QAF1, to provide a first step toward 188 establishing the space infrastructure necessary to link poor rural Africans with urban areas.
The Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) successfully launched four spacecraft aboard its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C7 (PSLV-C7), from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre at 9:24 a.m. (IST). The PSLV-C7 carried the 680-kilogram (1,500-pound) Cartosat-2, an Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellite; ISRO’s 550-kilogram (1,213-pound) SRE-1 (Space Capsule Recovery Experiment-1); the Indonesian microsatellite Lapan-Tubsat; and the 6-kilogram (13-pound) PehuenSat-1, an Argentinean nanosatellite. Cartosat-2, designed to provide scene-specific spot imagery, joined six IRS satellites already in service. ISRO planned to keep SRE-1 in orbit for 11 days before testing its reentry technology. While in orbit, the craft would conduct microgravity experiments. Lapan-Tubsat, the first Indonesian-built satellite, was a technology-demonstrator craft carrying two color cameras. The University of Comahue of Argentina, the Amateur
NASA launched its Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) mission from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 6:01 p.m. (EST), marking the first time NASA had launched a five-satellite constellation aboard a single rocket. NASA had designed the mission to uncover the catalyst of geomagnetic substorms, the atmospheric events visible in the Northern Hemisphere as a sudden brightening of the aurora borealis. Scientists hoped that the mission’s findings would help protect humans and commercial satellites in space from the effects of particle radiation. NASA had planned the mission to last two years, during which time the five identical satellites would collect data, attempting to achieve what no previous single-satellite mission had been able to do—to pinpoint when and where substorms begin.(NASA, “NASA’s THEMIS Mission Launches To Study Geomagnetic Substorms,” news release 07-47, 17 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0747_THEMIS_Postlaunch.html (accessed 14 October 2007).)
The U.S. Air Force granted SpaceX a five-year license to launch satellites from Space Launch Complex 40 (SLC 40) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Commander of the U.S. Air Force Space Command Kevin P. Chilton remarked that such agreements encourage entrepreneurial space achievement, which could benefit DOD and the commercial space industry. Under the agreement, SpaceX would pay for all improvements, construction, and maintenance related to operations at the site. Before receiving the license, SpaceX had operated from a launch complex on Omelek Island, in the Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. Elon Musk of SpaceX highlighted the importance of access to the Cape Canaveral launch complex, stating that SLC 40 was the only launchpad capable of supporting activities involving SpaceX’s Falcon 9 Heavy. The license allowed the government to retain the right to let other competitors share use of the launch site.(Associated Press, “Air Force OKs License for SpaceX,” 27 April 2007; Brian Berger, “U.S. Air Force Licenses SpaceX To Launch from Cape Canaveral,” Space.com, 26 April 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070426_spacex_ capecanaveral.html (accessed 9 June 2010).)
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolev’s name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmos’s announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russia’s space scientists, reminding them, “the launch of the Earth’s first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age.” The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, “Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.”(Agence France-Presse, “Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 2007.)
NASA launched its Aeronomy of Ice in Mesosphere (AIM) satellite aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket dropped from a Stargazer-L-1011 aircraft. The Stargazer launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 21:26 (UT). NASA had designed AIM to study noctilucent clouds (NLCs) in the polar mesosphere. Observers can only see NLCs at night. Shortly before the mission, these clouds had appeared more often and had grown brighter. Observers had first seen NLCs in the 1880s, soon after the massive volcanic eruption on the Indonesian island of Krakatoa. Space- based satellites had periodically observed the clouds since the 1980s. AIM was the first spacecraft devoted to the study of NLCs. Scientists hoped to answer basic questions about why the clouds form and whether human-caused global warming was responsible for the recent changes. AIM carried three instruments: the Solar Occultation for Ice Experiment (SOFIE) would remotely sense the gases that condense to NLCs; the Cosmic Dust Experiment (CDE) would serve as an in situ sampler of the cosmic dust over the NLCs; and the Cloud Imaging and Particle Size (CIPS) experiment, a panoramic ultraviolet (UV) imager of the NLCs operating in the 265-nanometer-wavelength band, would provide the morphology of the clouds in both hemispheres.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642; NASA, “NASA’s AIM Mission Soars to the Edge of Space,” news release 07-92, 25 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07092_AIM_launch.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Associated Press, “NASA Launches Satellite To Study Clouds,” 26 April 2007.)
Europe’s Ariane-5ECA rocket launched a two-satellite payload, weighing 9.4 tonnes (10.4 tons), from Europe’s launch center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:29 (GMT), setting a new benchmark for a commercial launch. The heavy-lift rocket carried Galaxy 17, an American geostationary communications satellite, and Astra 1L, a European geostationary communications satellite. Galaxy 1 would provide telephone and television services for South America, North America, and Europe; Astra 1L would provide direct-to-home video and voice links throughout Europe. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin attended the launch to observe the Ariane- 5ECA rocket, which would begin launching payloads to the ISS later in 2007.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643, 1 June 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx643.html (accessed 26 March 2010); BBC News, “European Rocket Powers To Record,” 4 May 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/ 6621297.stm (accessed 10 June 2010).)
The People’s Republic of China ended its silence regarding a reported test of antisatellite technology, confirming that, on 11 January, China had fired a guided missile into space to destroy one of its own weather satellites. U.S. monitors had detected the test shot, and observers in the United States had protested, based on concerns that U.S. military satellites might be vulnerable to attack from China. China’s Foreign Ministry spokesperson Liu Jianchao stated that China had informed the United States and other governments about the classified test through diplomatic channels and had “emphasized that the use of anti-satellite technology” did not mean that China had “abandoned its opposition to the militarization of space.” The United States and Russia had tested antisatellite technology in the 1980s but had ceased those tests, partly because of concern that debris created during the tests could damage satellites in nearby orbits. Analysts stated that China’s test had created several hundred thousand debris fragments in a region containing as many as 125 satellites.
NASA announced that one of its STEREO satellites had recorded images of an April 2007 collision between a comet and a solar hurricane, marking the first time that scientists had observed such an event. Encke’s comet, traveling in the orbit of Mercury, had encountered a CME. NASA had designed STEREO to observe this type of solar event. As the CME swept by, the comet’s tail had brightened and then had disconnected, as the front of the ejection carried it away. Scientists had known that a comet’s plasma tail could disconnect from the comet, but the conditions necessary for this to occur had remained a mystery. Preliminary analysis of the images, which NASA researchers had combined into a movie, indicated that a phenomenon called magnetic reconnection had caused the tail to detach. In a magnetic reconnection event, the magnetic fields in a CME crunch together the oppositely directed magnetic fields around a comet, causing the comet fields to link together suddenly. This sudden reconnection releases a burst of energy that detaches the comet’s tail. Angelos Vourlidas of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, was lead author of an article about the event, published in the 10 October 2007 issue of Astrophysical Journal Letters. Remarking on the researchers’ sense of awe when they viewed the images, Vourlidas described their surprise at seeing the disconnection of the tail, calling the event “the icing on the cake.”(NASA, “NASA Satellite Sees Solar Hurricane Detach Comet Tail,” news release 07-214, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07214_Comet_Collision.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Andrea Thompson, “Solar Storm Rips Tail Off Comet,” Space.com, 1 October 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/071001_hurr_comet.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) successfully launched a spy satellite aboard an H- 2A rocket from Japan’s southern island, Tanegashima, at 1:41 p.m. (JST). The spy satellite, the fourth of a four-craft constellation, enabled Japan to monitor any point on Earth once each day. Japan had previously relied on the United States for intelligence, but, following North Korea’s 1998 launch of a ballistic missile over Japan, the Japanese government had decided to develop an independent intelligence-gathering capacity and had launched the four spy satellites. The H-2A launch vehicle also carried into orbit an experimental optical satellite, which would carry out tests for future espionage operations.(New York Times, “Japan Launches Its 4th Spy Satellite,” 25 February 2007; Agence France-Presse, “Japan Launches Spy Satellite,” 26 February 2007.)
A Zenit-3SL rocket carrying a commercial communications satellite exploded during launch from the Sea Launch consortium’s floating platform Odyssey. The Netherlands–based SES New Skies NSS-8 satellite would have provided audio, video, data, and Internet services to countries in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Indian subcontinent, and the Middle East. Sea Launch spokesperson Paula Korn stated that the consortium was forming a failure-review oversight board to investigate the cause of the accident. A Sea Launch helicopter dispatched to the launch platform would assess the damage.(Associated Press, “Sea Launch Rocket with Satellite Explodes on Lift-off,” 31 January 2007; Lon Rains, “Sea Launch Rocket Explodes During Launch,” Space.com, 30 January 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/ 070130_sealaunch_explosion.html (accessed 4 November 2009).)
Satellite Association of Argentina, and the Argentina Association for Space Technology had built PehuenSat-1 to provide a platform for Argentinean university students to perform amateur radio experiments.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 639, 31 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx639.html (accessed 4 November 2009); Chris Bergen, “India’s PSLV Launches Successfully,” NASASpaceflight.com, 9 January 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/01/indias-pslv-launches-successfully/ (accessed 4 March 2010); K. N. Arun for Associated Press, “India Launches Rocket To Test Re-entry,” 10 January 2007.)
An Atlas-5 rocket launched six satellites from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Two of the satellites were part of the Orbital Express Experiment and four would measure the chemical makeup of the atmosphere and the signal turbulence of satellites. The primary goal of Orbital Express, a joint effort of NASA, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), was to develop a system allowing spacecraft to “act independently and smarter.” Fred G. Kennedy of the U.S. Air Force, DARPA Program Manager for Orbital Express, explained that the Orbital Express mission’s goal was to enable satellites autonomously to refuel, repair, and upgrade—a feat that would “radically change satellite design.” In April 2005, NASA had launched two satellites that were supposed to rendezvous autonomously, but a collision of the two craft during the docking attempt had destroyed them. Because the satellites were preprogrammed, ground controllers had been unable to transmit commands to the satellites’ computers. To avoid such an event in the future, DARPA had designed the Orbital Express satellites to accept guidance from ground controllers.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641, 1 April 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx641.html (accessed 25 January 2010); Todd Halvorson, “Atlas 5 Launches Satellites,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2007; Shelby G. Spires, “2 Satellites To Test Auto Docking Technology,” Huntsville Times (AL), 9 March 2007.)
it with wire ties, leaving 6 inches (15 centimeters) of clearance, a distance adequate for undocking. Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin also photographed a Russian satellite navigation antenna, changed out a Russian materials experiment, photographed a German robotics experiment, and inspected and photographed an antenna and the docking targets for the European cargo craft, the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV). The ATV, designed with greater capacity than the Russian Progress craft, had not yet made its first trip to the ISS.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-10,” 22 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0710_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
ESA and Russia successfully launched Foton M-3 aboard a Russian Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 11:00 (UT). The 6.4-tonne (6,400-kilogram or 7-ton) satellite carried a payload of approximately 40 European experiments, including a 35-kilogram (77-pound) student-built module called the Young Engineers Satellite 2 (YES2), which the Foton craft would deploy to orbit Earth for 12 days. When the orbiting period had ended, the YES2 mission would use an experimental tether to return the picosatellite and reentry vehicle Fotino to Earth on 25 September. ESA and Russia had planned the tether-technology demonstration to test and produce data related to “space mail,” a concept developed to enable the return of material from space without the use of conventional chemical propulsion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647; European Space Agency (ESA), “Young Engineers’ Satellite 2; Mission Facts,” 5 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/YES/SEMLRV8OY2F_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010); ESA, “Focus On; Foton-M3 Mission To Launch European Experiments,” 11 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ SEMN5ZMPQ5F_FeatureWeek_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010).)
DARPA decommissioned its experimental Orbital Express satellites, officially ending the demonstration of on-orbit satellite servicing and robotics. The two craft comprising Orbital Express—ASTRO and NextSat—had launched together in March 2007, to demonstrate ASTRO’s ability to approach NextSat with limited interaction from the ground, to grapple the craft with a robotic arm, and to transfer fuel and hardware to NextSat. The decommissioning of the satellites followed the completion of one last maneuver. ASTRO had found NextSat and homed in on the craft from long range, assisted by the U.S. Space Surveillance Network. Beginning on 16 July, ASTRO had traveled approximately 250 miles (402 kilometers) away from NextSat, so that its sensor suite lost track of NextSat. ASTRO then required input from the ground-based network to help it locate the target satellite. DARPA had originally scheduled the decommissioning to occur on 5 July but had extended the mission two weeks to allow the research team to attempt the long-range rendezvous maneuver. Orbital Express had met all of DARPA’s criteria for mission success, including demonstrating its capability to track and to rendezvous with long-range targets.
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Q—all CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)—were technology demonstrators, including two—CalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)—that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSat—CAPE 1—with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
Yuzhnoye, the Ukrainian rocket-construction bureau and a member of the Sea Launch consortium, released its findings on the failed 30 January 2007 launch of the Zenit-3SL rocket. Yuzhnoye stated that a stray metal fragment had entered a pump in the rocket’s engine, causing the Zenit-3SL to explode during its attempt to launch a Boeing-built commercial communications satellite for the Netherlands-based SES New Skies. Representatives of the Ukrainian and Russian developers of the Zenit-3SL rocket had comprised the commission that investigated the launch failure.(Associated Press, “Company: Metal Fragment Doomed Rocket,” 14 March 2007; RIA Novosti, “Sea Launch Explosion Due To Engine Failure,” 14 March 2007.)
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the People’s Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russia’s Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, “China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars,” 28 March 2007.)
NASA and NOAA launched an Aerosonde Mk3, an unmanned aerial system (UAS), into Category 1 Hurricane Noel for the Aerosonde Hurricane Boundary Layer Mission, marking the first time they had successfully flown such an aircraft into the inner core of a hurricane. Launching from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility (WFF), the UAS flew into the eye wall of the hurricane at altitudes as low as 300 feet (91 meters). Winds reached 80 miles per hour (129 kilometers per hour) in the core of the storm. Flying for 7.5 hours inside the storm, the craft allowed scientists to make detailed real-time observations of areas known to be too dangerous for human-piloted aircraft. Combining mission data with data from recent NASA and NOAA field missions that had used conventional aircraft and satellites, scientists planned to develop a valuable new set of observations for air-sea interaction and tropical cyclone research.(Daily Times, “Wallops: Launch into Hurricane Friday Is Historic,” 6 November 2007.)
NASA’s Science Mission Directorate awarded a US$9.3 million contract to Dartmouth College of Hanover, New Hampshire, to conduct a project using more than 40 high-altitude balloons to capture data about Earth’s Van Allen Belts. The Balloon Array for Radiation-belt Relativistic Electron Losses (BARREL) would fly in 2013 or 2014 in conjunction with NASA’s Radiation Belt Storm Probes satellites, scheduled to launch in 2011. Under the terms of the contract, the mission’s Principal Investigator Robyn M. Millan and her team would conduct test flights of the balloons and their instrumentation. In 2013 the team would launch 20 balloons from South African and British research stations in Antarctica, at a rate of one per day. Each balloon, separated by approximately 620 miles (998 kilometers) and carried by winds, would float at an altitude of approximately 21 miles (34 kilometers) for as long as two weeks, forming a ring encircling the South Pole. In the first experiment of its kind working in tandem with a satellite mission, the balloons would use sensors to measure the influx of radiation from the Van Allen Belts into Earth’s atmosphere. Millan and her team would repeat the procedure with 20 more balloons the following year.(NASA, “NASA To Use Balloon Flotilla To Study Radiation That Affects Earth,” news release 07-265, 5 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07265_Balloons_and_Van_Allen_ Belts.html (accessed 20 October 2007); Kristen Senz, “Dartmouth Professor Gets $9.3 Million NASA Grant,” Manchester Union Leader (NH), 14 December 2007.)
The ISRO SRE-1 space capsule reentered Earth’s atmosphere and splashed down in the Bay of Bengal at 9:47 a.m. (IST), successfully completing India’s first test of reusable vehicles and satellites. The SRE-1 had launched on 10 January. The Spacecraft Control Centre of ISRO’s Telemetry, Tracking, and Command Centre (ISTRAC) in Bangalore, India, guided the reentry of the craft, which splashed down at approximately 40 kilometers per hour (25 miles per hour). A U.S. Coast Guard ship recovered the craft and brought it to a container port, amid tight security. From that port, ISRO sent the SRE-1 to the launching station at the Sriharikota Space Centre, to determine how well the craft had carried out its microgravity experiments while in orbit.(Indo-Asian News Service, “India Brings Satellite Back to Earth,” 23 January 2007.)
NASA announced that images about the Japanese Hinode satellite, collected by NASA-funded telescopes, had provided new information about the Sun’s magnetic field and the origins of solar wind. Hinode’s high-resolution x-ray telescope had revealed a record number of x-ray jets—up to 240—in the corona at the Sun’s poles, contrary to previous research that had detected only a few such jets daily. Based on observation of these solar jets, a team led by solar physicist Jonathan W. Cirtain, of NASA’s MSFC, concluded that a magnetic reconnection occurring in the low solar corona was forming Alfvén waves and bursts of energized plasma in the x-ray jets. Alfvén waves form when convective motions and sound waves push magnetic fields around, or otherwise allow magnetic fields to change shape or to reconnect. Previously, researchers had been unable to observe Alfvén waves because of the limited resolution of available instruments. Yet, in their search to identify the forces responsible for the formation of solar winds, scientists had long considered Alfvén waves the leading candidate. Alfvén waves are capable of transferring energy from the Sun’s surface up through its atmosphere (corona) and into the solar wind. Cirtain explained that the team’s observations had revealed a clear relationship between magnetic reconnection and the formation of Alfvén waves in the x-ray jets, and that “the large number of jets, coupled with the high speeds of the outflowing plasma, lends further credence to the idea that x-ray jets are a driving force in the creation of the fast solar wind.” The team published its findings in the 7 December issue of the journal Science, a special issue focusing on Hinode.(NASA, “Spacecraft Reveals New Insights About the Origin of Solar Wind,” news release 07-264, 6 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07264_Hinode_Waves.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Jonathan W. Cirtain et al., “Evidence for Alfvén Waves in Solar X-ray Jets,” Science 318, no. 5856 (7 December 2007): 1580−1582, http://www.sciencemag.org/content/318/5856/1580.abstract (DOI 10.1126/science.318.5856. 1571; accessed 1 December 2010).)
NASA released a study finding that, in 2005, the Arctic had replaced very little of the thick sea ice that it loses and replenishes annually. The findings complemented an earlier study showing a 14 percent decrease in perennial ice between 2004 and 2005. That study had provided the first reliable estimates of the annual variation of perennial ice replenishment at the end of summer. Ron Kwok of NASA’s JPL had used data, including data that NASA’s QuikSCAT satellite had collected, to study six annual cycles of Arctic perennial ice coverage. The results of the study indicated that only 4 percent of the thin, seasonal ice that had formed during the winter of 2005 had survived the summer, leaving perennial ice coverage in January 2006 14 percent smaller than in 2005. The 2005 replenishment was the smallest seen in any study to date. Kwok had also studied the 2005–2006 temperature records, comparing them with records dating back to 1958. The temperature records demonstrated a gradual warming trend during the first 30 years after 1958, with a rapid acceleration after the mid-1980s. Kwok remarked that “the record doesn’t show any hint of recovery from these trends,” adding that, “if the correlations between replenishment area and numbers of freezing and melting temperature days hold long term, it’s expected the perennial ice coverage will continue to decline.” Geophysical Research Letters published the study, “Near Zero Replenishment of the Arctic Multiyear Sea Ice Cover at the End of 2005 Summer,” in its 2 March 2007 issue.(NASA, “NASA Finds Arctic Replenished Very Little Thick Sea Ice in 2005,” news release 07-77, 3 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07077_Arctic_Sea_Ice.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Ron Kwok, “Near Zero Replenishment of the Arctic Multiyear Sear Ice Cover at the End of 2005 Summer,” Geophysical Research Letters 34 (2 March 2007): L05501−L05506, http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2007/2006GL028737. shtml (accessed 24 March 2010).)
NASA announced that, on 25 May 2007, its AIM satellite had captured the first occurrence that season of mysterious iridescent polar clouds. AIM had been the first satellite mission dedicated to the study of these unusual clouds, known as Polar Mesospheric Clouds (PMCs) when viewed from space and as noctilucent clouds (NLCs) when viewed from Earth. NLCs form in the Northern Hemisphere, beginning in mid-May and remaining through the end of August. They appear in the Southern Hemisphere between mid-November and March. AIM’s mission was to observe two complete PMC seasons over both poles, documenting for the first time the complete, complex life cycle of PMCs.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Captures First View of ‘Night-Shining’ Clouds,” news release 07-145, 28 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07145_AIM_First_Light.html (accessed 13 April 2010).)
A team of researchers comprising members from NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, the NSF, and the British Antarctic Survey unveiled a new map of Antarctica—the Landsat Image Mosaic of Antarctica—that scientists expected would revolutionize the study of the continent’s frozen landscape. The researchers pieced together more than 1,000 images, primarily selected from the Landsat observations of 1999−2001. The result was a realistic, nearly cloudless satellite view of Antarctica at a resolution 10 times greater than that of any previous image captured by Landsat 7. Robert A. Bindschadler, Chief Scientist of the Hydrospheric and Biospheric Sciences Laboratory at NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, explained that the map did not provide a mere snapshot of the continent, but rather a time-lapse historical record of how Antarctica had changed. The map would also enable scientists to observe changes unfold. Scientists anticipated that, among its uses, the map would help with planning scientific expeditions, because its higher resolution would enable researchers to interpret changes in land elevation in hard-to-access
The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) launched two ocean-surveillance spacecraft from Cape Canaveral aboard an Atlas-5 Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), marking the rocket’s first NRO secret mission. The NRO had designed the two craft to track ships that might be concealing al-Qaeda operatives and to monitor Iranian and Chinese sea-based military operations. However, the rocket had stopped firing prematurely, causing the craft to launch into the wrong orbit. Although the satellites separated safely from the malfunctioning booster, they did not have enough rocket propellant to reach the correct orbit. Lockheed Martin had built the Atlas 5 using a Lockheed Martin Centaur upper stage, with a Pratt & Whitney RL10 rocket engine powered with liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. United Launch Alliance, which operated the Atlas program, managed the launch in conjunction with NRO and the U.S. Air Force’s 45th Space Wing.(Craig Covault, “NRO Spacecraft in Wrong Orbit,” Aviation Week, 16 June 2007, http://www.aviationweek.com/ aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/mission06157.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
The People’s Republic of China launched NIGCOMSAT-1—a communications satellite that China had manufactured for Nigeria—aboard a Long March-3B rocket from Xichang Launch Center in Sichuan Province. The launch marked the first time that China had built and launched a satellite under a contract with another country. China had reportedly secured the US$311 million contract in 2004, in a bidding process that had included 21 companies, in addition to China. The 5.2-tonne (5.7-ton) craft carried four C-band, eighteen Ku-band, four Ka-band, and two L-band transponders, for providing voice, video, and data links to all of Africa, southern Europe, and parts of the Middle East. News reports described the launch as a symbol of China’s broad network of economic relations with African nations, suggesting that the launch signaled China’s wish to cooperate with developing countries in the peaceful use of outer space. Nigerian officials hailed the launch as a breakthrough that signaled the end of the nation’s exclusive reliance on oil. Hammed Rufai, Managing Director of the NIGCOMSAT-1 project for Nigeria, remarked that the satellite would help Nigeria develop knowledge-based industries.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643; Edward Cody, “China Builds and Launches a Satellite for Nigeria,” Washington Post, 14 May 2007.)
