Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiment’s purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASA’s LaRC.(Diane Tennant, “NASA Opens Suitcase from Space,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, “MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening,” LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
South Korea launched its first rocket, the Korea Space Launch Vehicle 1 (KSLV 1), or Naro 1, from Oenaro Island at 4:00 a.m. (EDT), becoming the tenth nation to launch a locally developed scientific satellite in its own territory. South Korean space officials had delayed the launch twice since 30 July because of technical problems. The rocket carried into orbit a 219-pound (99- kilogram) payload, the STSAT 2, which carried a microwave radiometer to measure radiation energy in Earth’s atmosphere and a laser-reflector system to allow ground stations to track its orbit. Naro 1 was the result of a partnership dating to 2002 between the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) and the Moscow-based Khrunichev, the Russian aerospace firm responsible for the Proton booster rocket. Khrunichev had provided the hardware for Naro 1’s first stage. North Korea criticized the international response to South Korea’s launch plans; an international outcry had met the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s (North Korea’s) failed launch in April 2009, and the United States had claimed that North Korea’s launch was a disguised missile test. U.S. Department of State spokesperson Ian C. Kelly had responded to North Korea’s complaints, explaining that South Korea had developed its program in an open and transparent manner, in keeping with the international agreements that South Korea had signed, unlike North Korea, which had not abided by its international agreements.(Jin-man Lee for Associated Press, “South Korea Launches First Rocket into Space,” 25 August 2009; Stephen Clark, “South Korea Makes History with Satellite Launch,” Spaceflight Now, 25 August 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of Colorado-based United Launch Alliance to launch two payloads for NASA’s SMD and two for NASA’s Space Operations Mission Directorate, under a NASA Launch Services contract. The US$600 million award stipulated that the four payloads— the Radiation Belt Storm Probes (RBSP) mission, the Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) mission, and the Tracking and Data Relay Satellites K and L (TDRS-K and TDRS-L) missions— would launch aboard Atlas-V expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) from Launch Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA planned to launch the RBSP mission in 2011, as part of its Living with a Star Program. The RBSP mission would use two nearly identical spacecraft, which would study Earth’s radiation belts for two years, helping scientists understand how the Sun’s changing energy flow affects the radiation belts. Planned for 2014, the MMS mission, part of the SMD Heliophysics Division Solar Terrestrial Probes Program, would launch four identical satellites together in a stacked formation. Traveling around Earth in an elliptical orbit, the MMS mission satellites would study the fundamental plasma-physics processes of magnetic reconnection that occur when energy emanating from the Sun’s solar wind interacts with Earth’s magnetic field. NASA planned to launch TDRS-K and TDRS-L in 2012 and 2013, to replenish the NASA communications relay network that provides voice, data, video, and telemetry links between the ground and spacecraft below geosynchronous orbit. The ISS and NASA’s HST use the NASA communications relay network.(NASA, “NASA Awards Launch Services Contract for Four Missions,” news release C09-011, 16 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_C09-011_Launch_Services.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, “NASA Contracts Science Missions on ULA’s Atlas V Rockets,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 March 2009. 40 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 665; Peter B. De Selding, “Russian Rocket Lofts ESA Gravity Mapping Satellite,” Spacenews.com, 17 March 2009, http://www.spacenews.com/civil/russian-rocket-lofts-esa-gravity-mapping.html (accessed 10 May 2011).)
The Russian Coronas Photon solar observatory launched at 13:30 (UT) from Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Tsyklon-3 rocket. Russia had dedicated the satellite to research in the fields of solar physics, solar-terrestrial connection physics, and astrophysics. Specifically, its mission was to study the connection between the Sun and Earth, using a suite of instruments designed to measure energetic particles produced by solar flares, the solar atmosphere, and solar activity in relation to magnetic storms around Earth. The Research Institute for Electromechanics in Moscow had manufactured the 4,200-pound (1,905-kilogram, or 1.9-tonne) satellite, and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute had led the science team. The Photon observatory was the third satellite in the Coronos series; two previous craft had launched in 1994 and 2001 to study the Sun and had successfully concluded their missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663; Stephen Clark, “Solar Physics Spacecraft Launched by Russia,” Spaceflight Now, 2 February 2009.)
NASA’s JPL announced that NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) had reached an agreement concerning priorities for outer-planet missions. NASA and ESA had merged separate concepts to create two missions—the Europa Jupiter System Mission and the Titan Saturn System Mission. NASA and ESA had decided to implement the Europa mission first, since it was the more technically feasible of the two missions. For the Europa mission, NASA and ESA would each provide one of two robotic orbiters. The probes would conduct studies of unprecedented detail of Jupiter and its moons Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. Launching in 2020 on separate vehicles, the probes would reach the Jupiter system in 2026, gathering data for at least three years. NASA’s probe would spend at least a year investigating Europa for signs of life and producing a global map, to prepare for a future mission that would land on Europa. Simultaneously, ESA’s probe would investigate the interior and the surface of Ganymede, to help understand the formation and evolution of the Jovian system. For the Titan Saturn System Mission, NASA would provide an orbiter, and ESA would provide a lander and a research balloon. The Titan mission, which required significant study and technological development to overcome several technical challenges, was not as far along in the planning stage. The agreement to pursue the missions was the culmination of years of debate, involving scientists, space professionals, and space enthusiasts, who had long found icy satellites like Europa intriguing. Scientists believed that satellites of this type—common in the outer solar system—have a potentially habitable environment.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA and ESA Prioritize Outer Planet Missions,” JPL news release 18 February 2009, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=2035 (accessed 7 March 2011); John Johnson Jr., “It’s All Systems Go for Europa,” Los Angeles Times, 19 February 2009.)
The People’s Republic of China successfully launched Beidou 2, or Compass G2, into a geostationary orbit aboard a Long March−3C rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest China’s Sichuan Province at 16:16 (UT). Beidou, which means “compass,” was the second satellite in a navigation system that China was building as an alternative to the United States’ GPS. China had launched the first Beidou craft in 2007. Xinhua reported that China planned to launch 30 more satellites before 2015, to complete the system. China had designed the system to provide continuous, real-time passive three-dimensional geospatial positioning and speed measurement, with the first phase covering only Chinese territory. Eventually the system would cover the entire globe.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 666, 1 May 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx666.html (accessed 33 May 2011); Associated Press, “China Launches 2d Satellite in GPS System,” 15 April 2009; Rui C. Barbosa, “China Open 2009 Schedule with BeiDou-2 (COMPASS-G2) Launch,” NASA Spaceflight, 15 April 2009.)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and JAXA President Keiji Tachikawa had signed an agreement defining the terms of the two space agencies’ cooperation on the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) mission. NASA intended the GPM mission to build on the success of the NASA-JAXA TRMM. GPM would begin to measure global precipitation, a key factor in climate. NASA described GPM as a cornerstone of the multinational Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Precipitation Constellation. The GPM mission’s spaceborne core observatory would provide the reference standard, unifying the measurements of a constellation of multinational research and operational satellites carrying microwave sensors. Using a Dual-Frequency Precipitation Radar (DPR), operating at Ku- and Ka-band frequencies, and a multichannel Global Precipitation Measurement Microwave Imager (GMI), operating at from 10 to 183 GHz, the GPM mission would provide uniformly calibrated precipitation measurements globally, every 2 to 4 hours, contributing to scientific research and societal applications. Additionally, for the first time, the observatory’s sensor measurements would make detailed observations of precipitation-particle-size distribution. The agreement made NASA responsible for the GPM core-observatory spacecraft bus, the GMI that it would carry, and a second GMI. A Low-Inclination Observatory provided by a partner agency would carry the second GMI. JAXA would supply the DPR for the core observatory, an H-2A rocket for the core observatory’s launch, and data from a conical-scanning microwave imager that would deploy on the upcoming Global Change Observation Mission satellite.(NASA, “NASA and Jaxa Sign Agreement for Future Earth Science Cooperation,” news release 09-177, 30 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_177_NASA_JAXA_Agreement.html (accessed 10 August 2011).)
NASA and Cisco announced a partnership, under the terms of a Space Act Agreement, to develop an online, collaborative global-monitoring platform called Planetary Skin. Planetary Skin would capture and analyze data from satellite-, airborne-, sea-, and land-based sensors. Governments, businesses, and the general public would have access to the data, enabling them to measure, report, and verify environmental data in near real time and thereby assisting them in detecting and adapting to global climate change. Cisco and NASA planned to start Planetary Skin with a series of pilot projects, such as Rainforest Skin. Cisco and NASA planned to develop the prototype of Rainforest Skin during the following year. Focusing on deforestation, Rainforest Skin would explore methods of integrating a comprehensive sensor network and determining how to capture, analyze, and present information about changes in rainforests’ carbon levels in a transparent and usable way. S. Peter Worden, Director of NASA’s ARC, explained that NASA had collected a lot of data, which was awaiting conversion. He remarked further that the partnership sought to combine NASA’s data and Cisco’s expertise in data handling to explain what was currently happening in the rainforests of the world.(NASA, “NASA, Cisco Partnering for Climate Change Monitoring Platform,” news release 09-20AR, 3 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/news/releases/2009/09-20AR.html (accessed 10 May 2011); Michael Burnham for Greenwire, “NASA-Cisco Climate Project To Flash ‘Planetary Skin’,” New York Times, 4 March 2009. 32 NASA, “NASA Announces Mishap Board Members for OCO Investigation,” news release 09-047, 3 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-047_OCO_MIB.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
NASA announced that its LCROSS Mission had successfully created dual impacts on the Moon’s surface, in search of water ice. NASA had launched the LCROSS spacecraft on 18 June 2009 as a companion mission to LRO. The LCROSS craft had traveled 5.6 million miles (9.01 million kilometers) over 113 days. To prepare for the mission finale, the LCROSS satellite had separated from its Centaur upper-stage rocket approximately 54,000 miles (86,905 kilometers) above the Moon on 8 October at 6:50 p.m. (PDT). The Centaur had traveled toward the lunar surface at a speed of 1.5 miles (2.41 kilometers) per second, crashing into the Cabeus crater, a permanently shadowed region near the Moon’s south pole, shortly after 4:31 a.m. (PDT). Instruments aboard LCROSS had observed the impact for approximately 4 minutes, while traveling through the dust created by Centaur’s crash, before impacting the crater itself at 4:36 a.m. (PDT). NASA reported that other observatories, as well as the amateur astronomy community, had captured images and video of both impacts, commenting that NASA intended to share its data with the LCROSS science team. Jennifer L. Heldmann, ARC coordinator of the LCROSS observation campaign, explained that one of the mission’s goals was to encourage people to view the LCROSS impacts in as many ways as possible. She anticipated that the LCROSS campaign would provide an enormous amount of corroborated information, fascinating to many observers.
ESA’s Ariane-5 rocket launched from Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:09 (UT), carrying a telecommunications satellite for Japan—JCSAT 12—and a broadcasting satellite for Australia— Optus D3. Lockheed Martin had built the 8,900-pound (4,037-kilogram) JCSAT 12, equipping it with 30 active Ku-band and 12 C-band transponders, to provide communications services to Hawaii, Japan, and the Asia-Pacific region for 15 years. Orbital Sciences had built the Optus D3, a 5,400-pound (2,449-kilogram) craft that would use 24 Ku-band transponders to relay communications and direct-to-home television services across Australia and New Zealand. Orbital Sciences had designed the Optus D3 with a 15-year life span, like Lockheed Martin’s JCSAT 12.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 670, 1 September 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx670.html (accessed 8 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Ariane 5 Places Japan, Australia Satellites in Orbit,” 22 August 2009; Xinhua News Agency, “Ariane Rocket Launches Satellites for Japan, Australia,” 23 August 2009.)
NASA announced that, using NASA’s Aqua satellite, researchers had conducted the first global analysis of the health and productivity of ocean plants. Ocean scientists had used Aqua’s Moderate Resolution Imagine Spectroradiometer (MODIS) to measure remotely the amount of fluorescent redlight emitted by phytoplankton. This research marked the first time that scientists had observed redlight fluorescence over the open ocean on a global scale. The measurements enabled the researchers to assess how efficiently the microscopic plants had been conducting photosynthesis. The data could also enable researchers to study the effect of global environmental changes on phytoplankton. Scientists consider phytoplankton to be the center of the ocean food web, accounting for half of all photosynthetic activity on Earth and playing a critical role in the balance of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Michael J. Behrenfeld, a biologist at Oregon State University, explained that the amount of fluorescent light emitted is not constant but, rather, changes with the health of the plant life in the ocean. Scott C. Doney, a marine chemist from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, added that fluorescence provides insight into how well phytoplankton are functioning within the ecosystem. The new measurement revealed that large areas of the Indian Ocean contain phytoplankton that are experiencing stress from iron deficiency. Scientists observed that phytoplankton fluorescence increases as the amount of iron decreases. Therefore, large portions of the ocean “light up” seasonally, as phytoplankton respond to the lack of iron in their diet.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Detects Red Glow To Map Global Ocean Plant Health,” news release 09-124, 28 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-124_Ocean_health.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
NASA successfully launched its Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) aboard an Atlas-V rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 5:32 p.m. (EDT). Also on board, with a companion mission, was LRO, which safely separated from LCROSS 45 minutes after launch. The mission planned for the 1,290-pound (585-kilogram) LCROSS and the 5,216-pound (2,366-kilogram) Centaur upper stage was to perform approximately three long, looping polar orbits around the Earth and the Moon, before colliding separately with the Moon on 9 October 2009. NASA had tentatively targeted an impact site at the Moon’s south pole near the Cabeus region, but refused to identify the exact target until 30 days before impact, when its scientists would have had time to study the information collected by LRO, other spacecraft orbiting the Moon, and observatories on Earth.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Lunar Impactor,” news release 09-143, 18 June 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-143_LCROSS_Launch_Success.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Mission’s 3rd and Final Spacewalk,” 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission,” 5 September 2009.)
The Aerospace Industries Association (AIA) published a report titled “The Role of Space in Addressing America’s National Priorities,” which concluded that the United States could “no longer afford to treat its national security, civil, and commercial space capabilities separately.” Therefore, AIA recommended that President Barack H. Obama’s administration “develop a mechanism to look at our space capabilities as a single enterprise consistent with national goals and objectives.” The report suggested that, in developing its space initiatives, the United States confronts many issues that are not so clearly defined as the goals of its space programs— returning to the Moon or sending humans to Mars. Instead, the United States faces a host of complex challenges, such as protecting its satellites from hostile actions; easing export-control laws to facilitate the competitiveness of U.S. companies in the global marketplace for space hardware; and maintaining an experienced space industry workforce. To address these and related issues, the AIA report recommended that the Obama administration establish a national coordinating body to develop and execute a national space strategy and provide the funding necessary to continue critical multiyear space programs.(Aerospace Industries Association, “AIA Report Recommends Space Policies for New Administration,” news release 12 January 2009, http://www.aia-aerospace.org/newsroom/aia_news/aia_report_recommends_space_ policies_for_new_administration/ (accessed 7 February 2011); Andy Pasztor, “U.S. Faces New Space Race,” Wall Street Journal, 13 January 2009.)
ESA successfully launched its Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Explorer (GOCE), the first of seven planned ESA Earth Explorer satellites, aboard a Rockot/Breeze-KM launch vehicle from Plesetsk Cosmodrome at 14:21 (UT). ESA had designed GOCE to measure Earth’s gravitational field, so that ESA could use the data to create very high-resolution maps that would provide the baseline for measurements of ocean circulation and sea-level change. The 1,100-kilogram (2,425-pound) spacecraft was 5 meters long (16.4 feet long) by 1 meter wide (3.3 feet wide). GOCE had fixed solar arrays, designed to produce 1.3 kilowatts of power. To enable the craft to acquire the high-resolution measurements, ESA had designed GOCE to travel in a near-polar orbit at an altitude of only 263 kilometers (163.4 miles), rather than at the altitude of 600 to 900 kilometers (372.8 to 559.2 miles) typical for Earth-observation satellites. Mission managers remarked that, to their knowledge, nonmilitary satellites had never before operated in this orbit, an altitude that has significant atmospheric drag effects. To counteract the atmospheric drag, which could slow the spacecraft and potentially cause a premature end to the mission, GOCE had a unique arrowhead-like design that improved its aerodynamics. Additionally, ESA had designed the craft with a xenon-ion propulsion engine that would provide gentle thrust against the effects of the drag.
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched Ibuki, the world’s first greenhouse gas−monitoring satellite, from Tanegashima, aboard an H2A rocket. In addition to Ibuki, the rocket carried seven small satellites, which JAXA, university research centers, and private industry had developed. Ibuki, also known as the Greenhouse Gases Observing Satellite (GOSAT), would help scientists calculate the density of carbon dioxide and methane at the surface of the Earth, collecting data from 56,000 locations around the world, including locations in developing countries. Two sensors on board GOSAT would track solar, infrared rays that the Earth’s surface or atmosphere reflects and would monitor clouds and aerosols. The seven smaller satellites were Prism, an expandable refracting telescope designed to observe Earth as a technology demonstrator; Small Demonstration Satellite 1 (SDS 1) designed to carry out on-orbit verification of a space-wire demonstration module, a cutting-edge microprocessor, and a thin- film solar cell; Kagayaki, designed to measure orbital debris and observe auroral electrical currents; the Space Oriented Higashi-Osaka Leading Association (SOHLA 1), an exploratory satellite that would observe lightning; Sprite-Sat, a cube satellite that would observe sprites and gamma-rays generated during thunderstorms; and KKS 1, a cube satellite designed to demonstrate a micropropulsion system and three-axis attitude-control functions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663, 1 February 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx663.html (accessed 3 February 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Japan Launches Satellite To Track Greenhouse Gases,” 23 January 2009.)
NASA announced that NASA and the National Snow and Ice Data Center had captured new data indicating that the decade-long trend of diminishing sea-ice cover had continued. In addition, new evidence from satellite observations showed that the ice cap was thinning, as well. Scientists using satellite data to track Arctic sea-ice cover stated that, during the winter of 2008−2009, they had noted the fifth lowest maximum ice extent recorded since the beginning of satellite monitoring in 1979. All six of the lowest maximum ice events had occurred since 2004. Studying ICESat data, NASA researchers had discovered that, in addition to the diminishing ice extent, ice thickness had been declining. The new, thinner ice is more vulnerable to summer melt than the older, thicker ice it replaces. Researchers explained that more than 90 percent of the sea ice in the Arctic was only one or two years old at the beginning of the spring of 2009—an indication that the Arctic sea ice was thinner and more vulnerable than at any time in the past three decades.(NASA, “Satellites Show Arctic Literally on Thin Ice,” news release 09-079, 6 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-079_Sea_ice_thins.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Arctic Sea Ice Thinnest Ever Going Into Spring,” 7 April 2009.)
ISRO launched seven satellites, placing all seven in orbit within a period of 20 minutes, to mark ISRO’s first successful mission following the abrupt end of the Chandrayaan-1 project. The seven satellites, including ISRO’s Oceansat 2, launched from Sriharikota at 6:21 (UT), aboard India’s Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) C14, a 44.4-meter (145.67-foot) four-stage launch vehicle. The 960-kilogram (2,116-pound) Oceansat 2 carried three instruments. One of these was the Ocean Color Monitor (OCM), an eight-band multispectral camera, designed to capture data in the visible and near-infrared spectrum. The OCM would observe algae, fish populations, sediment distribution, and water pollution. Another instrument was the Ku-band Scatterometer, designed to operate at 13.52 gigahertz, covering a swath of 1,400 kilometers (870 miles). It would measure near-surface wind vectors over the ocean, for use in forecasting weather. The third instrument was the Italian-designed Radio Occultation Sounder for the Atmosphere (ROSA), which would observe distortions in GPS signals passing through the upper atmosphere. ROSA would build temperature and humidity profiles, determining the electron density in the ionosphere. The rocket also carried six nano satellites: two German Rubin satellites; Beesat, of the Technical University Berlin; UWE 2, of the University of Würzburg in Germany; ITU pSAT, of Istanbul Technical University in Turkey; and SwissCube 1, of the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in Switzerland.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 671; Associated Press, “ISRO Launched 7 Satellites in 20 Minutes,” 23 September 2009. 54)
A Russian satellite launched in 1993, and that engineers believed to be nonfunctioning, crashed into an Iridium commercial satellite that had been in orbit since 1997. The collision marked the first instance of high-speed impact between two intact spacecraft. At the time of the event, Iridium had a system of 65 active satellites relaying calls from portable telephones approximately twice the size of regular mobile phones. Iridium was serving approximately 300,000 subscribers, including one of its largest cellular subscribers, the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD). The loss of the satellite caused brief, occasional outages in service. Iridium planned to replace the lost satellite within 30 days with one of eight in-orbit spares. Communications satellites, which typically orbit at high altitudes and travel separately, rarely collide. However, Iridium satellites traveled fast, at a low orbit. The Iridium collision, which occurred approximately 500 miles (805 kilometers) from Earth, created a huge debris field. Nicholas L. Johnson of NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) explained that the risk of the ISS encountering debris was low, because the space station is 215 miles (346 kilometers) from Earth.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Big Satellites Collide 500 Miles Over Siberia,” 12 February 2009; Traci Watson, “Two Satellites Collide 500 Miles Over Siberia,” USA Today, 12 February 2009.)
NASA launched its Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) aboard a four-stage Taurus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 1:55 am (PST). However, approximately 3 minutes later—7 seconds after the ignition of the third stage, the payload fairing—the nose cone protecting the satellite as it rises through the atmosphere—failed to separate, dooming the craft. The satellite fell back to Earth, landing in the ocean near Antarctica. Had the launch succeeded, the Observatory would have joined Japan’s GoSat, in precisely measuring carbon-dioxide levels in the air. GoSat had reached orbit on 23 January. (NASA, “NASA’s Launch of Carbon-Seeking Satellite Is Unsuccessful,” news release 09-039, 24 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-039_OCO_failure.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Kenneth Chang, “NASA Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit,” New York Times, 25 February 2009.)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers using data collected by NASA’s Swift satellite had found the most distant GRB to date—13.1 billion light-years from Earth. Designated GRB090423, the explosion originated from a star that had died when the universe was 630 million years old, or less than 5 percent of its present age. Swift had detected a 10- second-long GRB on 23 April and had quickly pivoted, to observe the burst location with its ultraviolet/optical and x-ray telescopes. Swift had observed a fading x-ray afterglow, but nothing in visible light. Derek B. Fox of Pennsylvania State University explained that the burst had most likely arisen from the explosion of a massive star, and that the scientists were not only seeing the demise of a star, but also—perhaps—the birth of a black hole in one of the universe’s earliest stellar generations. NASA had designed Swift to capture very distant bursts like GRB090423. Neil Gehrels of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Lead Scientist on NASA’s Swift team, remarked that the burst’s incredible distance from Earth had exceeded the team’s greatest expectations. According to Joshua S. Bloom of the University of California at Berkeley, who had observed the afterglow using the Gemini South telescope in Chili, the event marked a watershed moment in the field of astronomy. The immense distance of the burst from Earth signified that the dead star was the earliest object yet discovered from an era called “reionization,” which had occurred in the first billion years after the Big Bang. Bloom added that the observation of GRB090423 marked the beginning of the study of the universe as it was before most of the structure that scientists know about today came into being.(NASA, “New Gamma-Ray Burst Smashes Cosmic Distance Record,” news release 09-088, 28 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-088_Swift_Gamma-ray_Burst.html (added 17 May 2011); Rachel Courtland, “Most Distant Object in the Universe Spotted,” New Scientist, 28 April 2009.)
Orbital Sciences Corporation announced that NASA’s GSFC had selected Orbital Sciences to design, manufacture, integrate, and test a new low-Earth-orbit space-science satellite for GSFC’s GEMS mission. The purpose of the GEMS mission was to help answer fundamental questions about the universe. The mission aimed to find energy released near black holes, locate the origin of x-ray emissions from pulsars, and identify the magnetic field structure in high-energy nebulae. Under the US$40 million contract, which GSFC had awarded through NASA’s SMEX Program, Orbital Sciences would provide the spacecraft bus and conduct mission operations. Orbital’s proven spacecraft bus, LEOStar 2TM, would provide the design for the GEMS bus. GEMS would be the eighth satellite modeled after LEOStar 2 and the fifth SMEX satellite to use that platform. Previous space-based x-ray observatories had been insensitive to polarization but, for the GEMS mission, Orbital planned to design the first observatory able to measure x-ray polarization systematically. This capability would enable scientists to use the GEMS observatory to study scattering, magnetic fields, and strong gravitational fields. The GEMS team planned to make the mission data accessible to the astrophysics community and to the public via NASA’s High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center Web site.(Orbital Sciences Corporation, “Orbital Selected by NASA To Build New Space Science Satellite To Study X-ray Polarization,” news release, 8 July 2009, http://www.orbital.com/NewsInfo/release.asp?prid=700 (accessed 16 August 2011).)
NASA launched the latest Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) weather satellite, GOES O, from Space Launch Complex 37 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, at 6:51 p.m. (EDT), aboard a Delta-4 rocket. The craft’s schedule would place GOES O in its final orbit on 7 July 2009, at which time NASA would rename it GOES 14. Twenty-four hours after launch, Boeing Space and Intelligence Systems would hand engineering control over to NASA; five months later, NASA would transfer operational control of GOES 14 to NOAA. NOAA would perform check-out operations of the craft, store it in orbit, and make it available for activation when one of two operational GOES satellites degraded or exhausted its fuel. GOES O was the second of three of the newest generation of GOES satellites launched. In addition to providing continuous weather monitoring for 60 percent of the planet, these GOES satellites monitored solar flares and tracked climate change.(NASA, “NASA and NOAA’s GOES-O Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release 09-148, 27 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09148_GOES_O_Launch.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Marcia Dunn, “Sophisticated Weather Satellite Rockets into Orbit,” Associated Press, 29 June 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Rocket Launches Weather Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 June 2009.)
NASA successfully launched its PharmaSat nanosatellite at 7:55 p.m. (EDT) from its Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) aboard a four-stage U.S. Air Force Minotaur-1 rocket. The rocket also carried the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory’s TacSat-3 satellite, which was the primary payload, and other NASA CubeSat Technology Demonstration experiments—Aerocube 3, CP 6, and Hawksat 1—three 4-inch, cubed satellites developed by universities and industry to measure electron collection, radiation testing, and guidance and control systems. PharmaSat’s mission was to investigate the effects of antifungal agents on the growth of yeast in microgravity, to help scientists better understand how microbes might become resistant to drugs used to treat sick astronauts on long-duration flights. PharmaSat separated from the rocket approximately 20 minutes after launch and entered low Earth orbit at an altitude of 285 miles (458.7 kilometers). Following the checkout period, ground controllers planned to command PharmaSat to initiate its biological experiment, scheduled to last 96 hours. The satellite would transmit radio signals to Ground Control stations at two California locations and would send mission data to the NASA Mission Management Team at ARC. The satellite could continue to transmit this data for as long as six months.(NASA, “NASA Flight Facility Successfully Launches Nanosatellite,” news release 09-114, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-114_PharmaSat_Launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667; Matthew Jones, “Rocket May Launch a Promising Future for Wallops Island,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 20 May 2009.)
After receiving clearance to return home, astronauts aboard the orbiting Space Shuttle Endeavour successfully deployed two sets of small satellites. Endeavour had undocked from the ISS on 28 July in preparation for the return flight of STS-127. Endeavour’s crew first deployed a pair of small satellites from the Shuttle’s payload bay—the student-built DRAGONSAT (Dual RF Astrodynamic GPS Orbital Navigator Satellite), part of a study to demonstrate autonomous rendezvous and docking technologies, as well as GPS systems. The crew later jettisoned the two 19-inch (48-centimeter) spheres that comprised the Naval Research Laboratory’s ANDE-2 (Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment-2) mission. Although identical in size, each sphere had a different mass. Researchers planned to observe differences in the spheres’ orbits, as part of a study of the density of Earth’s atmosphere.(Tariq Malik, “Shuttle Astronauts Deploy Satellites Ahead of Landing,” Space.com, 30 July 2009, http://www. space.com/7078-shuttle-astronauts-deploy-satellites-landing.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
NASA’s GSFC announced the findings of a study that had investigated diminishing groundwater levels in India. Using data provided by the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), the research team, led by NASA hydrologist Matthew Rodell of GSFC, had found that, despite no shortage of rainfall, Indians were consuming groundwater in northern India faster than it could be replenished—primarily using rain to irrigate agricultural crops. The twin GRACE satellites, which NASA and the German Aerospace Center had launched in 2002, orbited
NASA launched its National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellite, NOAA 19, or NOAA-N Prime, aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 2:22 a.m. (PST). The successful launch occurred following two scrubs resulting from technical problems. The Lockheed Martin−built NOAA-N Prime was the latest and final spacecraft in the Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) satellite series. Lockheed Martin had been designing and building for NASA and NOAA since the first Television and Infrared Observational Satellite (TIROS) weather satellite, which had launched in April 1960. Replacing NOAA 18, NOAA-N Prime would become the primary “afternoon” spacecraft, a designation based upon the time a spacecraft’s orbit crosses the equator. NOAA-N Prime was carrying the same primary instruments that NOAA 18 had on board, with the addition of an Advanced Data Collection System (ADCS) and an improved Search and Rescue Processor. France’s national space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales (CNES) had provided the ADCS, a system designed to measure environmental factors such as atmospheric temperature and pressure, as well as the velocity and direction of ocean and wind currents. CNES had also provided the Search and Rescue Processor, designed to detect distress calls from emergency beacons on board aircraft and boats, as well as to locate people carrying devices in remote areas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664; NASA Spaceflight, “ULA Delta II Launches on Third Attempt with NASA’s NOAA- N Prime,” 6 February 2009.)
Astronomer Arthur D. Code died in Madison, Wisconsin, at the age of 85. A designer of space observatories, Code had worked with a team of scientists from NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory in 1968, to send into orbit a bat-shaped satellite—the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO 2). Although the original OAO craft had failed in its 1966 mission, OAO 2 had succeeded, yielding information about the composition of stars, comets, and galactic gases. Intended to last a year, the OAO-2 mission had remained operational until 1973. OAO 2 had sent back data indicating that young stars in the constellations Scorpius and Orion are far hotter than previously thought and, therefore, are likely aging more quickly than astronomers had previously believed. OAO-2 successor craft included OAO 3 and NASA’s HST. Following the OAO-2 mission, Code had taught at the University of Wisconsin, where he had refined his designs and had analyzed data retrieved from subsequent satellites. In 1990 he and a team of students had sent an ultraviolet-detecting telescope to orbit aboard Space Shuttle Columbia; the team had used the device to study polarized ultraviolet light. Code had served as president of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and had been a member of the NAS. NASA had awarded him its Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.(Jeremy Pearce, “Arthur Code, Astronomer and Professor, Dies at 85,” New York Times, 23 March 2009.)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the system’s artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Division’s Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASA’s Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
On the thirtieth anniversary of the Islamic Revolution, Iran launched its first domestically built satellite aboard a Safir-2 rocket. Iranian scientists had designed the research and telecommunications spacecraft, named Omid, or Hope, to orbit Earth 15 times each 24-hour period. Omid’s mission was to determine orbital measurements.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664, 1 March 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx664.html, 28 February 2011; Agence France-Presse, “Iran Puts First Home-Built Satellite into Orbit,” 3 February 2009.)
NASA announced that the MIB led by Arthur F. “Rick” Obenschain had completed its report about the cause of the unsuccessful 24 February 2009 launch of the OCO and released a summary of its findings and recommendations. The MIB did not make the complete text of the official report public because it contained information protected by U.S. International Traffic in Arms Regulations and company-sensitive proprietary information. The board’s report verified that the Taurus launch vehicle’s fairing—a clamshell structure that encapsulated the satellite as it traveled through the atmosphere—had failed to separate upon command, preventing the craft from reaching its planned orbit. The craft had crashed into the ocean near Antarctica minutes after launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The board had identified four possible causes of the fairing failure—a failure of the frangible-joint subsystem, a failure in the electrical subsystem, a failure in the pneumatic system, or a cord caught on a frangible-joint side- rail nut plate. The board had made recommendations to prevent future problems associated with those four hardware components.(NASA, “NASA Releases Orbiting Carbon Observatory Accident Summary,” news release 09-163, 17 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-163_OCO.html (accessed 10 August 2011); NASA, “Overview of the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) Mishap Investigation Results for Public Release,” http://www.nasa.gov/ pdf/369037main_OCOexecutivesummary_71609.pdf (accessed 16 August 2011); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, “Hardware Problem Blamed on NASA Satellite Crash,” 17 July 2009.)
