China signed a contract with Teresat, Inc. of New York to launch its first satellite for an American firm. The contract called for a Teresat WestarVIS satellite to be launched into orbit aboard a Chinesemade rocket in the first half of 1988. (LA Times, Jan 29/87). During January: The American journal Aviation Week & Space Technology reported two serious Soviet setbacks in space that were not acknowledged by Soviet authorities. The magazine claimed that on January 29 the Soviets deliberately destroyed a Cosmos 1,813 military reconnaissance satellite they had launched on January 15, 1987. When the satellite malfunctioned upon reentry, its selfdestruction system was activated to prevent it from striking a populated area or from falling into western hands. Also according to this source, a Soviet SL12 Proton booster rocket failed during launching on January 30, 1987. Its fourth and uppermost stage failed to ignite and the debris from the rocket and communications satellite it carried fell out of orbit a day later. C Trib, Feb 7/87; NY Times, Feb 7/87)
NASA's last AtlasCentaur rocket was extensively damaged in a launch pad accident. A $4million fuel tank was destroyed when it was hit by a work platform. Four General Dynamics Space Division workers were treated for minor injuries. The launch of a military satellite, scheduled for liftoff aboard the AtlasCentaur rocket in the fall of 1987, was grounded indefinitely. (LA Times, July 14/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful than the American Space Shuttle. According to the Soviet Tass News Agency, the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central Asia, fired correctly but a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a "twostage multipurpose launch vehicle" capable of putting into orbit more than 100 tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could carry. (LA Times, May 17/87; C Trib, May 18/87; W Times, May 18/87)
NASA reported that an 18inch telescope, aboard a nineyearold orbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite, was monitoring the intense emissions of ultraviolet radiation from recently discovered supernova in the Large Magellanic Cloud, a neighbor galaxy of our own Milky Way. (NASA Release 8720) During February: NASA's latest space technology led to new discoveries about ancient civilizations. Using Earth Observation Satellite and Earth Resources Observation Systems imagery and the Landsat 5 satellite, which has an advanced multispectral sensor Thematic Mapper, NASA's Ames Research Center scientists made first attempts to study Maya civilization settlement patterns, environmental settings, and natural resource use. (NASA Release 8715)
A military satellite was lifted into orbit by a Titan 34D, the Nation's largest untended booster rocket. The launch from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base was the first successful launch of a Titan 34D rocket since February 1985. C Trib, Oct 28/87; LA Times, Oct 27/87; W Times, Oct 28/87)
NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced that a Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOESH) would be launched sometime after February 23, 1987. The satellite would provide cloud cover images and atmospheric temperature profiles, collect space environment data, and conduct an experiment for detecting emergency distress signals on the ground from a geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release
Robert Lovell and Fred Flatow, NASA search and rescue mission managers, were awarded the Yuri Gagarin medal by a space delegation from the Soviet Union. The awards were in recognition of their outstanding contribution to COSPAS/SARSAT, an international search and rescue program that uses satellites to locate people in distress. (NASA Release 8717)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
The 10ton Soviet satellite Cosmos1871 plunged harmlessly into the Pacific Ocean west of Hawaii. Soviet news agency Tass reported that the satellite, launched into a polar orbit on August 1, 1987, carried scientific equipment for space exploration. (B H&Sun, Aug 11/87; W Post, Aug 11/87; W Times, Aug 10/87)
NASA scientists announced that they have direct proof that exploding stars produce most of the 90odd chemical elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. These elements are part of the composition of planets and moons in the solar system and also are found in plants and animals on Earth. The findings came from observations and analysis of the gammaray emissions from radioactive cobalt produced in the Supernova 1987a explosion. The observations were conducted by the Solar Maximum Mission satellite, which had been studying the supernova since August 1987, and two balloonborne experiments flown in October and November from Alice Springs, Australia, as part of NASA's Fall Supernova Observations Campaign. (NASA Release 87185; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 17/87; P Inq, Dec 20/87; W Post, Dec 17/87)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
The Soviet Union launched a 20ton, selfcontained astrophysical observatory whose mission was to dock with the orbiting Mir Space Station. Viktor Blagov, the deputy mission director, said that the observatory would "open a new chapter" in human space flight and would become a key building block of a permanently habitable scientific space complex. When docked with the Mir Space Station, the 19footlong observatory, with a 13.6 foot diameter, would double the working space available and would create a sort of a "high rise" structure in space. (P Inq, Apr 1/87; W Times, Apr 1/87) h)0*0*0*During March: India failed to launch an augmented satellite launch vehicle, developed by the Indian Space Research Organization, when the vehicle malfunctioned and fell into the Indian Ocean. The launch from Sriharikota, India, was the first of four such planned launches, and was to have placed a stretched Rohini series scientific satellite into a low Earth orbit. (AvWk, Mar 30/87)
American and Soviet scientists agreed to joint effort in a wide range of space research. Their first joint project called for a launch of a Soviet "space zoo" satellite containing monkeys, rats, fish, and other living organisms. The 14day flight of this satellite was to provide Soviet and American scientists an opportunity to study the impact of weightlessness on the vital functions of animals. Some 26 other experiments were approved by working groups from the United States and the Soviet Union meeting for a weeklong scientific conference in Moscow. The joint project was the first to be conducted under the terms of a fiveyear space cooperation agreement signed on April 15, 1987, by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and U.S. Secretary of State George P. Shultz. (C Trib, Aug 11/87; LA Times, Aug 11/87; P Inq, Aug
According to a news release from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, NASA would manage a major international experiment on the use of satellites to study our environment. The experiment, part of the International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project, would employ over 100 scientists from more than 25 institutions to study the interaction between the land system and climate system. Over 25 ground measurement stations would be set up on the Konza Prairie in Kansas for the experiment. Six research planes and five Earthorbiting satellites would also be used. (NASA Release 8795)
NASA announced that it would launch a seventh Department of Defense Fleet Satellite Communications spacecraft from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida, no earlier than March 26, 1987. (NASA Release 8740)
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
NASA announced that in the next three years it would reduce Shuttle use by launching only 19 space flights. During the same time, it would launch 49 satellites on untended rockets. About 30 nonmilitary payloads originally planned to be carried into orbit by the Shuttle through 1995, will now be carried on untended rockets. NASA said that it would launch five science missions in 1989, some with international cooperation. Four of these missionsthe Magellan, to map Venus; the Hubble Space Telescope, in cooperation with the European Space Agency; and the ASTRO1 ultraviolet observatory and Galileo, in cooperation with Germany to make a comprehensive survey of Jupiter and its moonswould fly on the Shuttle. A fifth mission, the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) toh)"0*0*0*investigate cosmic background noise, was to launch on a Delta. Another scheduled Shuttle launch was the cooperative ESA/NASA Ulysses mission to observe the polar region of the Sun. From 1990 through 1995, NASA expected to accelerate deployment of other space science missions by fully utilizing expendable launch vehicles. For example, NASA anticipated Delta launches of a Roentgen Satellite in February 1990 and the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer in August 1991. (NASA Release 87158; LA Times, Oct 23/87; NY Times, Oct 23/87; W Times, Oct 23/87)
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)
General Dynamics Space system Division was awarded a contract by NASA and the Department of Commerce for expendable launch vehicle transportation services for meteorological spacecraft GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellites). The GOES spacecraft provided nearly continuous, highresolution visual and infrared imaging of weather systems over large areas of the Earth. (NASA Release 87156)
General Dynamic Corporation announced it had been awarded a contract to launch between one and three European satellites by the European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT). The 26nation European consortium selected General Dynamic's AtlasCentaur rockets for the launching of its satellites because of their cost and reliability. The agreement called for a launch of a EUTELSAT2 communications satellite in early 1990 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with options for two additional launches. (LA Times, Sept 26/87)
The Air Force announced that it would purchase 20 rockets from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for launching navigational satellites. Modeled on the existing rockets used by NASA, the Delta 2 medium rocket boosters would also be used commercially for launching communications satellites. (UPI, Jan 21/87; USA Today, Jan 22/87; NY Times, Jan 22/87; W Post, 22/87)
NASA announced that within hours of its discovery on February 24, 1987, NASA scientists were monitoring the Supernova 1987a with the Earthorbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) and the Solar Max Mission (SMM) spacecraft. Subsequently, as previously announced, NASA began monitoring the supernova with a network of ground antennas. The major supernova science program mounted by NASA and the intense, worldwide scientific interest in the supernova resulted from the fact that the discovery of Supernova 1987a provided scientists the opportunity to study not only the death of the star, but also the resultant rebirth of matter. The explosion, shock waves, and tremendous energies of Supernova 1987a were expected to provide direct evidence of the creation of heavy elements such as silicon and nickel. This marks the first time a supernova has been so close to the Earth and so bright since the 1604 supernova, when the telescope had not yet been discovered. The advantageous circumstances allowed scientists to study the supernova in all radiation wavelengths from nearly the moment of its explosion. Scientists expected that the array of instruments and the variety of NASA'sh)0*0*0*methods of monitoring the supernova would not only yield a new understanding of the chemistry and physics of the comet, but also potentially would provide a better understanding of the creation of The supernova program was expected to extend at least over the next 21/2 years. It would consist of multiple, continuous satellite observations, balloon and sounding rocket missions, aircraft flights, and radio observations. A special computer communications network would allow scientists from NASA, American and foreign universities, and other international scientific organizations to analyze the great amount of data generated by the In addition to the IUE and SMM spacecraft, managed and operated by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, a Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the Supernova 1987a. The IUE satellite provided data from ultraviolet observations and monitored the overall brightness of the supernova. It also was expected to help define exactly which star in the Large Magellanic Cloud exploded creating the supernova. The SMM satellite, a sunobserving instrument, was used to monitor the expected gamma ray emissions from the supernova. The Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the supernova for Xray emissions. NASA's Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), a C141 jet transport stationed in New Zealand, was also used in supernova observations to measure infrared energy. It was expected to be involved in a number of flights through the spring of 1989, using new and increasingly more sophisticated instruments. (NASA Release
The Transportation Department announced that it has granted approval for Martin Marietta Corporation to launch private communications satellites. Within hours of the announcement,h)0*0*0*Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization to launch two Intelsat6 satellites into orbit on Martin Marietta's Titan 3 rockets. Launchings were scheduled for 1989 and 1990. The agreement between two private companies to launch private communications satellites was the first instance of the implementation of the Reagan administration's space commercialization policy. (B Sun, Aug 11/87; W Times, Aug 11/87)
NASA launched a GOES7 weather satellite aboard a Delta rocket. The satellite was first placed into an elliptical orbit. Ground command was expected to arrest the satellite in a stationary orbit 22,400 miles above the Atlantic Ocean by firing a booster rocket. GOES7 joined the already orbiting GOES6 weather satellite to provide weather information and patterns in an areah)0*0*0*stretching from the eastern Atlantic to the midPacific Ocean. (B Sun, Feb 27/87; P Inq, Feb 27/87; W Times, Feb 27/87)
A Soviet rocket burned like a huge fireball as it reentered the Earth's atmosphere, lighting up the skies over a broad area of the West and Midwest. The rocket was used in the launching of Soviet communications satellite Raduga 21 on December 10, 1987. (C Trib, Dec 14/87; LA Times, Dec 14/87)
NASA selected five American principal investigators and five Italian scientists for a joint U.S.Italian Tethered Satellite System (TSS1) project. The TSS1, a deplorable subsatellite to be 'tethered' to the Space Shuttle via a retractable cable, was expected to lift aboard Columbia in the fall of 1990. (NASA Release
Soviet and Japanese scientists confirmed the first positive detection of Xrays from an exploding supernova. Soviet scientists, using Xray telescopes aboard the Soviet astrophysics module Kvant, made the detection on August 10, 1987. Japanese scientists, using smaller Xray instruments aboard their Ginga satellite, first observed the Xrays from the supernova on August 15, 1987. (W Post, Oct 4/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Chairman ofh)0*0*0*France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales JacquesLouis Lions signed a memorandum of understanding for a joint satellite oceanographic mission. The mission, called TOPEX/POSEIDON, which would chart ocean topography and observe ocean circulation on a global scale, was scheduled for a late 1991 launch. The TOPEX/POSEIDON mission would be part of the international World Climate Research Program. (NASA Release 8741)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
In an effort to reduce reliance on the U.S. Space Shuttle, NASA would rely more heavily on untended rockets, declared Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. He said that the primary goal was to "accelerate the deployment of the Nation's backlog of spacescience missions." NASA hoped to launch as many as five satellites and space probes by untended rockets by 1992. WSJ, May 18/87)
NASA announced that researchers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, had successfully tested a passenger vehicle satellite antenna. The newly developedh)0*0*0*antenna, designed to be mounted on the roof of a passenger vehicle, was expected to play an important role in NASA's mobile satellite experiment program. This program and other technologies were expected to lead eventually toward a mobile satellite communications system. The first success in the program was achieved when researchers, using an antenna on moving passenger vehicle, were able to track an inorbit satellite. (NASA Release
NASA announced that the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite would be launched on a Delta expendable launch vehicle in early 1989 rather than on the Space Shuttle in July 1988, as originally planned. The change in schedule was caused by the backlog of science payloads awaiting launch on the Space Shuttle as a result of the Challenger accident. Designed to study the "Big Bang," COBE would be launched into a 560statutemile, sunsynchronous orbit from Vandenburg Air Force Base in California. Because of the switch from the Shuttle to Delta, COBE would be reduced in weight from 10,500 pounds to 5,000 pounds and in size from 15 feet to 8 feet in diameter. Scaling down the spacecraft would also require that COBE be redesigned. (NASA Release 871)
NASA launched a PalapaB2P, an Indonesian communications satellite, on a Delta 182 from Launch Complex 17B, Eastern Space and Missile Center, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida. The satellite, intended to serve Indonesia's 13,677 islands, was placed into an elliptical orbit ranging from about 115 miles to 23,000 miles above the Earth. The PalapaB2P satellite, built by Hughes Aircraft Company, was to be used as a backup for a failing relay station already in orbit. (NY Times, Mar 21/87; B Sun, Mar 21/87; P Inq, Mar 21/87; NY Times, Mar 22/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
NASA selected General Electric Company, Space Systems Division, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and Harris Corporation, Government Communication Systems Division, Melbourne, Florida, to negotiate contracts for Phase I system design studies of the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) ground terminal. (NASA Release 8729)
A 15story high Ariane 3 rocket, carrying two communications satellites, was launched into an Earth orbit from Kourou, French Guiana. The successful launch marked the reentry of Western Europe into the commercial utilization of space after a 16month hiatus. LA Times, Sept 16/87; NY Times, Sept 16/87)
NASA announced that scientists and researchers from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, would conduct, on March 2326, the first in a series of tests related to development of the mobile satellite communications system. The test in Erie, Colorado, would be part of the Mobile Satellite Experiment program. (NASA Release 8738)
NASA announced that an international team of researchers, coordinated by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, was using satellites to study how the Earth's tectonic plates move in the Caribbean Sea and Central and South America. The experiment, spanning several years, would allow researchers to chart the motions of dozens of land sites in 16 countries using signals from orbiting navigation satellites. Research teams carreied electronic receivers designed to pick up signals from seven NAVSTAR satellites operated by the U.S. Department of Defense, as part of the Global Positioning System (GPS) program. By locating receiver equipment at established survey markers in South America and the Caribbean, and collecting GPS data from up to four GPS satellites passing overhead, researchers calculated the location of receiving sites on the ground and are planned to compare measurements over time to determine tectonic displacement. The plates studied included the Caribbean plate, in portions of the southern Caribbean Sea; the Cocos plate, in the Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Central America; the Nazca plate, off the west coast of South America; and the South American plate, upon which lies most of the South American continent. The research was funded by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Earth Science and Applications Division. (NASA Release 8830)
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a longduration, humantended scientific satellite called the Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA's four proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would study highenergy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable information about these phenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic research in plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the various forms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determine whether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could be scheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatory would be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 1215 tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above the Earth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 881)
The European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched'*0*its first Ariane 4 booster from the Korou launch center in French Guiana. The Ariane 4, the latest and most powerful ESAbuilt booster, carried two European telecommunications satellites. The launch had been delayed by 24 hours because of a faulty sensor on the rocket's third stage. (FBISWeu88238, Dec 11/88; SSR 1988 109CD; NY Times, Dec 12/88)
A report released by an international panel of over 100 scientists assembled by NASA showed that the depletion of the Earth's ozone layer over the Northern Hemisphere had increased at a much faster rate than previously believed. The report, prepared over 17 months, provided definitive evidence showing that the ozone layer, which shields life on Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation, had been depleted by an average of about 2.3 percent, since 1969 over most of the United States, and by as much as 5 percent over the South Pole. The observed ozone loss was at least twice as large as scientists had predicted and was attributed primarily to the continued release of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). The NASA study group reexamined years of groundbased and satellite observations of the atmosphere in order to remove the normal biennial fluctuations of many atmospheric characteristics and the effects of the 11year solar cycle. The groundbased observations were limited to midlatitudes in the Northern Hemisphere because there were few stations elsewhere in the world. This was the first effort by scientists to separate the effects of solar and biennial fluctuations from the monthly data at different latitudes. The release of the study results followed ratification by the U.S. Congress of the Montreal Protocol, an agreement endorsed by 46 countries, which calls for a 50 percent reduction in emissions of CFCs by the end of the century. (UPI, Mar 15/88; NY Times, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 16/88; W Times, Mar 16/88; USA Today, Mar 16/88; WSJ, Mar 16/88;CSM, Mar 16/88;B Sun, Mar 16/88; P Inq, Mar 16/88; C Trib, Mar 16/88; LA Times, Mar 21/88)
In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senate approved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989$1.4 billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided only $200 million of the estimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic work on the Space Station program. An earlier House appropriations bill approved $902 million of the $967 million requested for the Station. Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if it lacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program. UPI, Jul 13/88; WSJ, Jul 14/88; W Times, Jul 14/88; USA Today, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 0** An Indianbuilt rocket carrying a weather satellite malfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after it was launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. The fivestage, 80foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled first stage boosters. This was the second failure of the new rocket, which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launch attempt in March 1987. The launch failure was interpreted by space experts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. (NY Times, Jul 14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Inq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88)
A DMSP F9 meteorological observation satellite was successfully launched at 9:53 p.m. aboard an AtlasE rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base Space Launch Complex3 in California. The 1,650pound Department of Defense (DoD) satellite was placed in a nearpolar orbit. (W Times, Feb 4/88; Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988, 171)
Two U.S. Navy navigation satellites were launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a 600mile circular polar orbit aboard a NASA Scout rocket. The two Oscar satellites were part of the U.S. Navy's longestablished, continuous allweather global navigation system. Made available to nonNavy users in 1967, the spacecraft had since been adapted for diverse civilian uses such as commercial shipping, charting of offshore oil and mineral deposits, and land survey projects. The system provided position information within onetenth of a nautical mile anywhere in the world. This marked Scout's 100th flight and followed closely on the heels of the Scout San Marco D/L launch, which took place on
An ESA Ariane 3 rocket carrying two communications satellites was successfully launched from the Korou Launch Center in French Guiana. The Ariane 3, launched at 7:12 p.m. EDT, carried two satellites belonging to India, and the European Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), into polar orbit. (UPI, Jul 22/88; W Times, Jul 22/88)
A NASA Delta 181 launch vehicle carrying a major Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) experimental payload was launched at 5:07 pm EST from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The 6,000 pound payload, the heaviest ever carried by a Delta rocket, consisted of a main orbiting sensor platform and fifteen subsatellites released from the main spacecraft during the first 4 hours of the 12hour experiment. The goal of the $250 million exercise was to test the ability of an orbiting sensor platform to detect and track the various components of Soviet Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) in flight. Four of the subsatellites were small solidfuel rockets whose exhaust plumes simulated the exhaust from the upper stages of Soviet ICBMs, whereas other test objects simulated real and "dummy" Soviet warhead reentry vehicles. During the mission, the main satellite and subsatellites were monitored by over 100 radar tracking stations, which simulated the groundbased component of an antimissile defense system. In addition, the exercise also included0*the detection, by sensors on the satellite, of a 40foot sounding rocket launched from Kauai, Hawaii. The experiment was declared a success despite the failure of an infrared sensor. The Delta launch, originally scheduled for February 4, was delayed five days because of an apparent valve malfunction on the Delta. Data gathered by the satellite during the 12hour exercise would be transmitted to Earth over a 10day period. (SSR 1988 008AD; UPI, Feb 9/88; NY Times, Feb 9/88; W Post, Feb 9/88; W Times, Feb 9/88; USA Today, Feb 9/88;
The Associated Press and United Press International news agencies reported that U.S. surveillance satellites had detected the explosion of a Soviet solid propellant plant 500 miles southwest of Moscow in the Ukraine. The Soviet Union confirmed that an explosion had occurredkilling three people and seriously injuring five othersbut denied that rocket propellants had been involved in the blast. U.S. intelligence officials claimed that the explosion destroyed several buildings at the plant and put a halt to all solid propellant manufacturing activities at the facility, which was the only source of solid propellant for the SS24 intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). Two weeks previously, a powerful series of explosions destroyed a solid propellant plant in Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring hundreds of others. Pentagon officials estimated it would take at least six months for the Soviet facility to resume production of ICBM propellants. (AP, May 18/88; UPI, May 18/88; W Post, May 18/88; WSJ, May 18/88; USA Today, May 18/88; W Times, May 18/88)
The Washington Post reported that the Martin Marietta Corporation agreed to launch communications satellites for the General Electric Corporation (G.E.) on untended Titan rockets during the next several years. According to the news account, the agreement to launch 15 satellites would establish Martin Marietta as the dominant company, developed in the two years since the January 28, 1986, explosion of the Challenger, in the domestic rocket business. The ageeement was expected to bring in revenues between $750 million and $1 billion for Martin Marietta through the0*early part of the next decade, one senior company official told the Post. Analysts told the newspaper that the G.E. agreement would make Martin Marietta dominant over two U.S. rivals in the commercial satellite launching businessMcDonnell Douglas Corporation, manufacturer of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, manufacturer of the Atlas Centaur rocket. (UPI, Jan
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Hiroyuki Osawa, President of the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), recently signed an agreement to allow NASA to directly receive data from Japan's Earth Resources Satellite (ERS1). The0*agreement would allow NASA to have access to realtime data from Japan's ERS1 synthetic aperture radar and optical sensor. NASA would receive the data at a ground station at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Data from the ground station would be provided to NASDA. Japan's ERS1 was scheduled to be launched by NASDA on the H1 launch vehicle in early 1992. (NASA Release 8812)
A classified Department of Defense payload was launched aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle from launch complex 40 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Sources quoted by the Associated Press said the rocket failed to carry its payload into the correct orbit. The payload was widely believed to be a Vortex reconnaissance satellite. (SSR 1988 077AC; UPI, Sep 2/88; Reuter, Sep 2/88)
A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 3 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Kourou Launch Center in French Guiana carrying two communications satellite payloads, including a U.S. satellite. The launching had been scheduled for December but was delayed for extra tests after abnormalities were detected in the oxygen and liquid hydrogen thirdstage engine. Twenty minutes after launch, the Ariane 3 released the French Telecom 1C and GTE's Spacenet III Geostar R01 communications satellites for autoboost into geostationary orbit, 22,554 miles above the Equator. The spacenet satellite was expected to begin its boost toward geostationary orbit at 87 degrees west longitude on Wednesday. (FBISWEU88049, Mar 14/88; SSR 1988 018AD; NY Times, Mar 13/88; W Post, Mar 12/88; LA Times, Mar 12; C Trib, Mar 13)
A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched at 7:58 p.m. EDT from the Kourou Launch Center in French Guiana. The 162foot threestage rocket successfully carried into orbit the 2,619pound Intelsat 5 commercial communications satellite which would eventually propel itself into a 22,300mile geosynchronous orbit. This was the 22nd launch of the Ariane series and the second Ariane 2 launch in 1988. A total of eight Ariane 2 launches were scheduled for 1988. (SSR 1988 040A; AP, May 18/88; UPI, May 18/88)
A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched aboard a Titan 2 launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Civilian experts said they believed the rocket was carrying a cluster of Navy recon naissance satellites known as "White Cloud." The Titan 2 launch followed an apparent failure of a Titan 34D rocket to launch a military reconnaissance satellite into proper orbit. (SSR 1988 078AB; NY Times, Sep 6/88; W Times, Sep 6/88; CSM, Sep 6/88)
NASA and the Department of Commerce awarded the first U.S. Government contract for commercial launch transportation services to a private firm. The two agencies contracted General Dynamics Space Systems Division, San Diego, California, to provide expendable launch vehicle transportation services for the Department's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). This contract marked the first time a contractor assumed systems performance responsibility for overall program and subcontractor0*management, vehicle design, production, testing and vehicletopayload integration, mission integration, launch services, system effectiveness, overall launch vehicle performance, and mission In a related matter, NASA's Kennedy Space Center recently entered into an agreement with General Dynamics that allowed the company to use NASA Launch Complex 36 and associated facilities for commercial launch operations of the Atlas/Centaur rocket. (NASA Release 8866; UPI, May 23/88; AP, May 24/88; B Sun, May 24/88; NY Times, May 25/88; C Trib, May 26/88)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
An ESA Ariane 3 launch vehicle carrying two U.S. communications satellites was launched from the Korou launch facility in French Guiana. The Ariane 3 was carrying the 1.3ton GSTAR 111 and 1.2ton SBS 5 telecommunications satellites, both designed for television, telephone, and digital data transmission. Upon reaching low Earth orbit, the GSTAR satellite failed to boost itself into its planned 23,000mile geosynchronous orbit. (FBISLat175, Sep 9/88; SSR 1998 081CD; AP, Sep 7/88; Reuter, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 9/88; NY Times, Sep 15/88; WSJ, Sep 15/88; W Post, Sep 15/88)
Israel launched its first orbital satellite aboard an Israelibuilt rocket. The Horizon I experimental satellite was launched from an Israeli launch facility in the Negev desert aboard what U.S. experts believed was either a Jericho II or a Comet launch vehicle. The Horizon I was expected to have an operational lifetime of one month in low Earth orbit. (SSR 1988 087AB; NY Times, Sep 20/88; W Post Sep 20/88; W Times, Sep 20/88; CSM, Sep 20/88; B Sun, Sep 20/88; LA Times, Sep 20/88)
NASA and the ESA announced the selection of scientific investigations to be conducted on two spacecraft as part of a joint NASAESA solar terrestrial research program. More than 130 U.S. scientists were scheduled to participate in the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and Cluster missions. Two spacecraft systems were to be built by ESA with instruments supplied by both ESA and NASA. The Cluster mission, involving a set of four satellites, was planned for launch on an ESA Ariane launch vehicle in December 1995. The Cluster would investigate the space plasma threedimensional microphysics phenomena in Earth's0*magnetic field environment, using four identical spacecraft in polar orbits. SOHO, planned for launch by NASA on the Shuttle or on an expendable launch vehicle in March 1995, would be placed at the EarthSun La Grangian point and investigate the physical processes that form and heat the solar corona and give rise to the solar wind. The SOHO and Cluster missions are an outgrowth of the International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) program, a major international program in solar and space physics organized in 1985 by NASA, the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), and ESA. (NASA Release 8848)
This date marked the tenth anniversary of the launch of0*NASA's Seasat Satellite, which ushered in a new era in space research focusing on unsolved questions of the world's oceans and weather. Launched on June 26, 1978, on an AtlasAgena rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, Seasat carried a payload of five scientific instruments unlike any package carried on previous remotesensing satellites. Among the experimental instruments Seasat pioneered were a synthetic aperture radar, which provided highly detailed images of ocean and land surfaces; a radar scatterometer to measure nearsurface wind speed and direction; a radar altimeter to measure the height of the ocean surface and waves; and a scanning multichannel microwave radiometer to measure surface temperature, wind speeds, and sea ice cover. The satellite also carried a passive visual and infrared radiometer to provide supporting data for the other four Seasat demonstrated how space sensors could be used in oceanography, serving as a protoype for a generation of international missions that could provide answers to some of the world's most baffling and threatening weather phenomena. (NASA Release 8884)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
China successfully launched its first experimental weather satellite, the Wind and Cloud No. 1. The satellite was launched by a Long March 4 launch vehicle from the Taiyuan launch facility in northcentral China. (FBISCHI8890, Sep 16/88; SSR 1988 080AB; AP, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 8/88)
An advanced Navy navigation satellite, NOVAII, was launched into polar orbit on a NASA Scout launch vehicle from Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC), California. This was the 111th flight of the 73foot long, fourstage, solid propellant Scout launch vehicles. (SSR 1988 052C; NASA Release 8875)
NASA announced it would testthroughout the montha new deepspace communications system with its Voyager 2 spacecraft, in preparation for the Voyager 2 flyby of Neptune in August 1989. As part of the new system, NASA added the 27 telescopes from the National Radio Astronomy Observatory's (NRAO) Very Large Array (VLA) facility to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's deep space network (DSN). This action more than doubled DSN's ability to capture the Voyager signal, which became extremely faint as it approached the vicinity of Neptune. Under an agreement between NASA and the National Science Foundation, NRAO sponsors, engineers installed new receivers and microwave horns, tuned to the Voyager XBand radio frequency, on all the 82foot dish antennas at the0*VLA. Special signalprocessing and communication equipment was added so that the VLA would be linked by satellite to the DSN's Deep Space Communication's Complex at Goldstone, California. (NASA Release 88102)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
The Italian space agency announced that its star mapper0*satellite, Hipparcos 1, failed to boost itself into the proper orbit. Hipparcos 1 was launched aboard an Ariane 4 launch vehicle on August 8. The satellite's designers said that they would seek funds from the European Space Agency to build and launch a replacement satellite. (SSR 1989 062 AD; NY Times, Aug 30/89)
A NASA AtlasCentaur vehicle carrying a Navy communications satellite was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. This was the last orbital launch of a launch vehicle by NASA, since responsibility for all future orbital launches was transferred to the private sector and the branches of the Defense Department. Since inception in 1958, NASA had launched over 400 untended orbital rockets. The AtlasCentaur carried a Navy Fleet Satellite Communications F8 (FLTSATCOM F8) relay station into a preliminary orbit on its way toward geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 89145, Sep 18/89; NASA Release, Sep 25/89; NASA: Atlas/Centaur68 FLTSATCOM F8 Launch Press Kit, Sep/89; AP, Sep 25/89; UPI, Sep 25/89; USA Today, Sep 25/89; NY Times, Sep 26/89; WSJ, Sep 26/89; LA Times, Sep 26/89; P Inq, Sep 26/89; B Sun, Sep 26/89; W Times, Sep 26/89)
The first attempt to launch a fully private funded rocket ended in failure when the 58foottall "Koopman Express" sounding rocket caught fire while still on the launch pad. The rocket was to have flown on a 15minute suborbital flight from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, during which it would have released a cloud of inert gas to test sensors on a military Delta Star satellite. The rocket was also scheduled to deploy an engineering model of a Parashield during reentry into the atmosphere. (NY Times, Oct 6/89; W Post, Oct 6/89; USA Today, Oct 6/89; W Times, Oct 6/89; B Sun, Oct 6/89)
At the request of the National Space Council, President George Bush restored funding for continued operation of two Landsat satellites and the launching of a third. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had earlier decided to deactivate the Landsats because of a shortfall of $5 million in fiscal year 1989 funding for the program. (WSJ, Jun 2/89)
The Soviet Union successfully launched a Proton launch vehicle carrying three satellites from the Baikonur launch facility in Kazakhstan. The Proton was carrying the Cosmos 2,022, 2,023, and 2,024 satellites. The Tass News Agency reported that the third stage of the booster failed to burn up completely in the atmosphere and that unburned fragments may have fallen to Earth in the U.S.Canadian border region near International Falls, Minnesota. (SSR 1989 039AH; UPI, June 2/89; AP, June 2/89; LA Times, June 3/89)0*June
An ESA Ariane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the Kourou launch facility in French Guiana. The Ariane 2 carried the TELEX Nordic communications satellite into a preliminary elliptical orbit, from where it subsequently boosted itself into a 22,300mile geosynchronous orbit. (FBISWEU89062, Apr 3/89; SSR 1989 027AB; UPI, Apr 1/89)
A European Space Agency Ariane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the Kourou launch center in French Guiana. The Ariane 2 carried a twoton IntelsatV telecommunications satellite. (SSR 1989 006AB; W Times, Jan 27/89)
The Space Shuttle Discovery was successfully launched at night from Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on mission STS33. Discovery carried a classified Department of Defense payload believed to be a $300 million surveillance satellite. The satellite was deployed from the Shuttle's cargo bay on November 23, and was scheduled to boost itself into a geostationary orbit. Several experiments of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) technology were also expected to be performed. Crew members for STS33 were Air Force Colonel Frederick Gregory (Commander), Air Force Colonel John Blaha (Pilot), and Mission Specialists Navy Captain Manley L. Carter Jr., F. Story Musgrave, and Kathryn C. Thornton. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on November 27. (NASA Release 8975, Nov 15/89; SSR 1989 090 A; AP, Nov 23/89; UPI, Nov 23/89; NY Times, Nov 23/89; W Post, Nov 23/89; WSJ, Nov 23/89; W Times, Nov 23/89; P Inq, Nov 23/89)
The Soviet Union successfully launched a COSMOS 2021 satellite. (AP, May 28/89; UPI, May 28/89) During May: Astronomers at Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, published results of a study which confirmed that Pluto is a planet and not an asteroid or a wayward natural satellite. William McKinnon, Associate Professor of Planetary Science at Washington University, asserted that his analysis of telescopic data and computer models showed that Pluto was formed independently in the outer solar system as a planet. (LA Times, May 29/89)
In civil proceedings against Rockwell International Corporation in a Los Angeles Federal court, prosecutors recommended that a $5 million fine be levied against the company, after pleading guilty to overbilling the Government on a satellite navigation contract. Rockwell had entered a conditional guilty plea for overbilling the Air Force by nearly $450,000 on contracts for the $1.2 billion NAVSTAR satellite system. (UPI, Feb 21/89; LA Times, Feb 22/89)
Iraq launched a threestage rocket capable of putting a satellite into space on a suborbital trajectory from the Al Anbar base in northern Iraq. The launch of the Iraqi rocket was confirmed by the U.S. and Israeli governments. (FBISNes89235, Dec 8/89; UPI, Dec 9/89; NY Times, Dec 9/89)
After five cancelled launch attempts, an Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR navigation satellite. The NAVSTAR was the second of a planned network of satellites known as the Global Positioning System, which would allow military units to determine their position anywhere on Earth within 50 feet. (SSR 1989 043D, 044A; W Times, Jun 12/89)
An Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, carrying0*the fourth NAVSTAR navigation satellite. The NAVSTAR would become part of an eventual 21satellite Global Positioning System (GPS) navigation network. (SSR 1989 085 AC; NY Times, Oct 22/89; W Times, Oct 23/89)
The Space Shuttle Discovery was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on mission STS29, the main objective to deploy the final Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS4). Discovery carried a crew of five on a 5day mission. Six hours into the mission, the 2.5 ton $100 million TDRS4 was successfully deployed into low Earth orbit where it subsequently boosted itself into a 22,300 mile geosynchronous orbit. Discovery also carried biological experiments that to conduct studies of the embryonic development of chickens and bone healing in rats in a microgravity environment. The STS28 crew would also photograph and film environmentally damaged areas throughout the world for later scientific analysis. Discovery's launch had been delayed a month because of cracks found in the main engine turbopumps. Replacement occurred on the launch pad. During the mission, a hydrogen tank supplying the Shuttle's fuel cells was temporarily shut down because of erratic pressure readings. The problem, which caused a temporary electricity shortage aboard the Shuttle, was resolved the following day, allowing Discovery to stay in orbit for five days as planned. Discovery successfully landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on March 19. (NASA MOR/Flight Operation Report, M9898829; SSR 1989 021A; AP, Mar 1319/89; UPI, Mar 1319/89; NY Times, Mar 1420/89; WSJ, Mar 1420/89; W Post, Mar 1420/89; W Times, Mar 1420/89; USA Today, Mar 1420/89; P Inq, Mar 1420/89; B Sun, Mar 1420/89)
The Solar Maximum (Solar Max) satellite tumbled out of orbit and reentered the Earth's atmosphere, spreading small amounts of debris over the Indian Ocean. The satellite had been launched in
The Soviet Union's Phobos 2 Mars observer spacecraft entered into Martian orbit after firing its braking engine. In addition to various instruments for remote observation of Mars, Phobos 2 carried a lander module to be deposited on Mar's moon Phobos in early April. Phobos 1 became inoperative in August 1988 after a flight command error disoriented the spacecraft and misdirected its solar power arrays. The schedule for Photos 2 was moved forward by several days because of electrical problems that might endanger the mission. (FBISSOV89018, Jan 30/89; NY Times, Jan 30/89; LA Times, Jan 30/88; P Inq, Jan 30/89) During January: Using data from the orbiting Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), astronomers at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor discovered several dim galaxies in an area of the universe previously believed to be devoid of large celestial objects. The discovery of seven dim galaxies in the "Bootes Void" challenges accepted theories of the structure of the universe, which is believed to consist of filaments or "bubbles" of matter surrounding less dense areas of relatively empty space. The Michigan astronomers said they planned to continue studying IRAS' infrared data in hopes of finding more dim galaxies. (W Post, Jan 16/89)
An Air Force Titan 4 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, carrying a classified military satellite. This was the first launch of the Titan 4, a new generation of heavy lift launch vehicles dedicated mainly to Department of Defense missions. The $220 million Titan 4 was believed to be carrying a $180 million advanced early (#warning satellite. (SSR 1989 046AE; NY Times, Jun 15/89; WSJ, Jun 15/89; W Post, Jun 15/89; USA Today, Jun 15/89; C Trib, Jun 15/89; LA Times, Jun 15/89; W Times, Jun 15/89)
The Japanese Science and Technology Agency announced a 10year plan to develop an untended space plane and a series of robots capable of assembling and repairing satellites in space. The Agency also said that Japan would begin preliminary research into a crew tended space shuttle. (UPI, Jun 28/89; W Times, Jun 30/89)
the Sun, the Earth's atmosphere, and deep space objects. In April 1984, Solar Max was retrieved by the Space Shuttle Challenger (Mission 41C) for inorbit repairs and redeployment. Solar Max's orbit had been deteriorating faster than expected over the past0*several months because of unusually high solar activity, which caused the Earth's atmosphere to expand and increase the amount of aerodynamic drag experienced by the satellite. (SSR 1980 014 A; AP, Dec 2/89; UPI, Dec 2/89; NY Times, Dec 3/89; W Post, Dec 3/89; P Inq, Dec 3/89; B Sun, Dec 3/8)
The Coloradobased Energetics Satellite Corporation announced that it had completed an agreement with the Soviet Union's civilian space agency, Glavkosmos, to launch two U.S.built commercial satellites on Soviet boosters. The contract provided for the launching of two geosynchronous satellites at a cost of $6.5 million each, with an option to add six more satellite launches in the future. The total potential value of the agreement was $54 million for the eightsatellite launch option. (W Post, Nov 16/89; NY Times, Nov 17/89)
An ESA Ariane 4 launch vehicle carrying a communications satellite and an orbital observatory was successfully launched from the Kourou space center in French Guiana. The payload consisted of a West German TVSAT2 communications satellite and the Hipparcos orbiting star mapper. (SSR 1989 062AD; LA Times, Aug 9/89)
After several delays, an ESA Ariane 4 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the Kourou launch center in French Guiana. The 195foot Ariane 4 carried Japan's first commercial communications satellite and a European weather station into low Earth orbits, from where the two satellites would later boost themselves into 22,300mile geosynchronous orbits. This was the third launch of the new Ariane 4 launch vehicle, one of the most powerful boosters available for commercial satellite launches. (SSR 1989 020AD; UPI, Mar 6/89)
The first major privatesector launch of a satellite was delayed by several months as a result of a launch pad accident that damaged the satellite. A communications satellite owned by the government of India was seriously damaged when it was accidentally struck by a lift hook connected to a crane. The satellite was being prepared for launch at a McDonnell Douglas facility at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (W Post, Jun 27/89; O Sent Star, Jun 21/89)
An Air Force Titan 34D launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, carrying a secret military payload into orbit. The 16story, $65 million Titan was believed to be carrying a pair of Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS) satellites. (SSR 1989 035AC; W Times, May 11/89; C Trib, May 11/89; B Sun, May 11/89; P Inq, May 11/89)
The National Weather Service's Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite6 (GOES6) ceased to function,0*creating a temporary gap in U.S. satellite weather coverage. The 6yearold GOES6, which had surpassed its expected operational lifetime by a year, was to be temporarily replaced by a similar satellite already in orbit. The GOES7 satellite was to be shifted eastward to cover the entire United States until a permanent replacement, GOESI, was launched in 1990. (UPI, Jan 23/89; W Post, Jan 23/89; W Times, Jan 23/89; NY Times, Jan 24/89)
The Space Shuttle Columbia was successfully launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, on mission STS28 to deploy a classified Department of Defense payload. This was the first launch of the Columbia orbiter in the three and a half years since the explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger. Various media sources reported that Columbia had deployed an advanced military reconnaissance satellite and performed tests of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) hardware. Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on Sunday, August 13. (SSR 1989 061A; NASA PFOR, 9898928; NASA MOR, E1998928; UPI, Aug 8/89; AP, Aug 8/89; NY Times, Aug 9/89; W Post, Aug 9/89; W Times, Aug 9/89; USA Today, Aug 9/89; LA Times, Aug 9/89; C Trib, Aug 9/89; P Inq, Aug 9/89; B Sun, Aug 9/89)
An ESA Ariane 3 launch vehicle carrying an experimental communications satellite was successfully launched from the Kourou launch facility in French Guiana. The 161foot Ariane 3 placed the European Olympus 1 satellite in a preliminary orbit from which it would boost itself into a 22,300mile geosynchronous orbit over the equator. (SSR 1989 053AC; UPI, Jul 12/89)
The U.S. Government released results of a sixmonth interagency study on orbital debris. The study, cochaired by NASA and the Department of Defense, cited satellite and rocket body fragmentation as the principal source of orbital debris and concluded that, left unchecked, the growth of debris could threaten the safe and reliable operation of crewtended and untended spacecraft in the next century. (NASA Release 8920, Feb 17/89)
The Air Force successfully launched the first of its new Delta 2 launch vehicles, carrying a $65 million NAVSTAR satellite into a preliminary elliptical orbit. The NAVSTAR, the first operational satellite of the Global Positioning System (GPS), subsequently boosted itself into an 11,000 mile circular orbit. The 21satellite GPS network was expected to provide very precise positioning data for U.S. and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) troops and vehicles throughout the world. The satellites would also broadcast precise positioning data to civilian users. (SSR 1989 013A; UPI, Feb 14/89; W Post, Feb 15/89; NY Times, Feb 15/89; LA Times, Feb 15/89; W Times, Feb 15/89; USA Today, Feb 15/89; P Inq, Feb 15/89; W Times, Feb 17/89)
The European Space Agency announced the Hipparchos 1 star mapper satellite had been reprogrammed to function in its current orbit. Hipparchos became stranded in a lower than expected orbit after its orbital booster rocket failed to ignite in August. P Inq, Nov 8/89)
A NASA Delta launch vehicle was successfully launched on this date from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, carrying the $160 million Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite into a 570mile polar orbit. Three instruments aboard COBE would record the background radiation left over from the "Big Bang" in unprecedented detail, allowing refinement of theories on the formation of galaxies and galactic clusters in the early universe. The Delta was the last launch vehicle in NASA's inventory. Hereafter all future NASA untended launches would occur on commercial or military boosters. (NASA Release N8974; NASA Cosmic0*Background Explorer (COBE) Press Kit/Release 89172; SSR 1989 AD; AP, Nov 18/89; UPI, Nov 18/89; LA Times, Nov 18/89; P Inq, Nov 19/89; C Trib, Nov 19/89; CSM, Nov 20/89)
An Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR navigation satellite. The NAVSTAR would be the fifth in an eventual network of 21 military and commercial satellites that would comprise the Global Positioning System. (SSR 1989 097 AC; AP, Dec 11/89; NY Times, Dec 12/89; USA Today, Dec 12/89; W Times, Dec 12/89; C Trib, Dec 12/89)
Astronomers from the University of California at Berkeley announced the possible discovery of a newborn pulsar at the heart of stellar debris from Supernova 1987a. A pulsar is an extremely dense sphere of neutrons less than a few miles in diameter but with a magnetic field trillions of times more powerful than the Earth's. The object at the heart of Supernova 1987a appeared to be spinning at a rate of 2,000 rotations per second. The observations were made by an international team of scientists working at the Cerro Tololo InterAmerican observatory in Chile. The frequency of the light emitted by the object was found to vary in a regular pattern, suggesting that it was part of a binary system, with a smaller object rotating around a larger twin. The discovery was announced in a circular sent to members of the International Astronomical Union. (UPI, Feb 8/89; NY Times, Feb 9/89; B Sun, Feb 10/89)0*February 10: The Soviet Union launched a cluster of six Cosmos satellites aboard a Cyclone launch vehicle, including an Antarctic observer spacecraft that was placed into nearpolar orbit, the Tass News Agency reported. The Cosmos 2000 satellite was described as a photoreconnaissance research satellite that would photograph unexplored regions of central Antarctica. (SSR 1989AG; UPI, Feb
In a major test of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a Delta Star SDI test satellite was successfully launched aboard a Delta launch vehicle at 4:51 p.m. from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The threeton satellite would be used to test remote sensing equipment used to detect rocket launches and laser beam emissions from Earth in conditions that would simulate the initial stages of a nuclear conflict. The threeton satellite carried a laser radar, seven video imaging cameras, and an infrared imager. The Delta Star was expected to carry out tests throughout the next six to nine months. (SSR 1989 026A; NY Times Mar 25/89; W `"Post, Mar 25/89; C Trib, Mar 25/89)
After an aborted attempt in August, an H1 launch vehicle carrying a GMS4 weather satellite was successfully launched by Japan's National Space Development Agency. (FBISEas89173, Sep 8/89; SSR 1989 070 AC; WSJ, Sep 7/89)
An ESA Ariane 4 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the Kourou launch facility in French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites. The 192foot Ariane 4 was carrying a SuperbirdA communications satellite owned by Japan and a West German DFS Kopernikus1 television relay satellite. This was the 27th successful launch by Arianespace and the fourth successful launch of the new Ariane 4 launch vehicle. (FBISWeu89107; SSR 1989 041AD; UPI, Jun 5/89; P Inq, Jun 6/89)
An Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle carrying a NAVSTAR satellite was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The 126foot Delta 2 placed the NAVSTAR navigation satellite in a preliminary orbit, from where it would boost itself into a 12,000mile circular orbit. The NAVSTAR was the third of an eventual network of 21 satellites that would comprise the Global Positioning System, a highly accurate navigation system for military and commercial users. (SSR 1989 064AC; AP, Aug 18/89; `"UPI, Aug 18/89; W Post, Aug 19/89; LA Times, Aug 19/89; W Times, Aug 21/89)
The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, selected Stanford Telecom for negotiations leading to a fiveyear, $30 million contract to provide systems engineering support for the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite and the Advanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin Marietta Corporation received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Force for modifications to space launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release C90aa)
For the first time, Soviet defense committee lawmakers visited the Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASA prepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classified satellite launch that, said sources, was to take reconnaissance photographs and intercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12day visit reflected a new openness in the Soviet Union, and the committee chairman, referring to the mission said, "We have no special secrets...I think you are wasting your money." (W Post, Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90)
A report from a panel convened by the National Research Council and released to the White House recommended smaller and simpler satellites to monitor the Earth's climate, as opposed to the $30 billion, six large satellites being planned by NASA. The expense of the Earth Observing System (EOS) could take funds away from other important studies and future budgets. It could result in a delay in launching the EOS spacecraft, the report warned. Noting that at least one large platform was necessary for a number of scientific instruments to be grouped together, the panel recommended that three of the large satellites be replaced by smaller ones. (NY Times, Aug 22/90; W post, Aug 22/90)
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, issued a call for proposals for design of a Satellite Servicer System flight demonstrator to show the ability to maintain satellites in polar and high inclination orbits. The onorbit flight demonstration would exercise rendezvous and docking, as well as orbital replacement unit exchange and fluid transfer. (NASA Release 9012)
A Delta rocket was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, successfully carrying an International Maritime Satellite Organization communications satellite into orbit. The satellite was intended to expand international telephone and facsimile services aboard ships, planes, trains, and other vehicles. (W Post, Oct 31/90) During October: Photographs sent back from the Magellan spacecraft since September 15 were ten times sharper than any seen before. The images "revealed a whole new planet" and "almost everywhere you look on Venus you see volcanic features," said scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California. (CSM, Oct 25/90)
An Ariane rocket carrying two Americanbuilt Japanese satellites exploded over the Atlantic Ocean shortly after liftoff from French Guiana; a fire in the rocket's propulsion system was suspected to be the cause of the explosion. Ariane had a record of 17 successful flights previous to this accident; it held more than 50 percent of the international market for commercial launches. (The European Space Agency later admitted that a cloth inadvertently left in the rocket had caused the failure by blocking water supplies to one of its first stage engines.) (FBIS Paris AFP in English, Apr 13/90; W Times, Feb 23/90; NY Times, Feb 23/90)
A Delta rocket carried two satellites into space from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to test laser technology planned for the Strategic Defense Initiative program. One satellite, the Relay Mirror Experiment, was to reflect a beam fired from a mountain top in Hawaii back to another nearby point on Earth using a mirror. The other satellite, the Low Power Atmospheric Compensation, was to correct laser strike distortions caused by dust, moisture, and gases. The media generally opined that success of the experiment might induce Congress not to slash the $4.5 billion that President George Bush had requested for further research into the project in budget year 1991. (W Times, Feb 15/90; NY Times, Feb 15/90)
Scientists, after taking their first long look at the Long Duration Exposure Facility recovered by Space Shuttle Columbia in January, said the varied surfaces of the satellite showed signs of pits, scars, and discoloration in some areas while being strangely unscathed in others. The surfaces revealed no "showstoppers" however. The satellite was an experiment meant to test materials for use in building spacecraft and the Space Station. (W Post, Feb 13/86; NASA Release 9023)
Government officials said that the mirrors attached to the Nation's next generation of weather satellites used to reflect images from Earth's atmosphere into internal sensors would warp from the Sun's heat, according to recent tests. NASA formed a team of nine experts from Ford and ITT, makers of the spacecraft, to correct the problem, in time to meet the 1992 launch date. A single Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite was in orbit at the time. Officials were worried that, if it failed, the Nation would have to rely on planes, radar units, and other satellites that were not capable of giving the comprehensive overview needed, for example, to follow storms.0*There were normally two satellites of this type in orbit, but one was destroyed in 1986 when a Delta rocket malfunctioned. Solutions for the GOESNEXT flawed mirrors ranged from repairing them, which would cause a sixmonth delay, to remanufacturing, and causing a delay of more than one year. (NY Times, Aug 8/90; W Post, Aug 9/90; W Times, Aug 9/90)
A NASA official announced that Mark Showalter, at the Ames Research Center in California, had discovered another moon orbiting Jupiter. He found it while doing analysis of images taken in 19801981 by Voyager 2. The smallest of the planet's known satellites was dubbed 1981S13. (B Sun, Jul 25/90; W Post, Jul 25/90; NASA Release 90103)
landing postponed for a day because of fog. The flight set a precedent both because of duration, 11 days, and because the aircraft was the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, a result of the captured cargo. The mission was without incident, save for a few minor problems involving a leaky dehumidifier, a smoke detector0*that went off unexplainably, a malfunction in one of the three Inertial Measurement Units (critical for reentry, but the Shuttle can land with only one functioning unit), and a small engine used by the automatic pilot for maintaining flight path that fired for no reason. The retrieved satellite remained in the Shuttle cargo bay and was scheduled to be flown to Kennedy Space Center in Florida atop a modified NASA jumbo jet later in the week. During reentry, two NASA experiments measured the aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics of the orbiter. One of the experiments, a Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing experiment, involved an infrared camera used to collect imagery from the left wing, an area that reached 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, a higher than usual temperature, on the STS28 flight. The second experiment involved the Shuttle Entry Air Data System, housed in Columbia's nose cap to gather "air data" to determine the orbiter's aerodynamic flight characteristics.(NY Times, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90; W Post, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90;C Trib, Jan 13/90;CSM, Jan 16/90; NASA Release 908)
Orbital Sciences Corporation successfully launched its Pegasus rocket from a NASA B52 aircraft to boost a 422pound payload into polar orbit over the Pacific Ocean. The experimental rocket deployed a NASA scientific satellite and a Navy communications satellite, opening a new avenue for launching small payloads. The elimination of a costly ground booster, said company president David Thompson, provided a means by which payloads could be delivered inexpensively. (W Post, Apr 6/90; WSJ, Apr 6/90; NY Times, Apr 6/90; LA Times, Apr 6/90)
NASA and Japan's Ministry of State for Science and Technology agreed on new areas of space cooperation during a meeting in Tokyo. NASA/Japan projects agreed upon were observation of the ozone layer from satellites, space environment monitoring (realtime solar wind data), Space Station solar terrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom, and space microgravity experiments aboard the Space Shuttle. Other areas discussed were the ongoing cooperation for building and utilization of the Space Station and joint projects in xray and infrared astronomy, cosmic ray research, the study of ocean dynamics, measurement of cloud height by satellite stereograph, reception of Japan's first marine observation satellite data, and satellite measurements of tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90106)
During January: NASA completed a facility to house the second ground station for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) system. Located at White Sands, New Mexico, near the existing terminal, the station was predicted to be fully operational by 1993. The equipment that the new terminal would house was to be technically superior to the communications network in the original building, but the two were to work together in a combination meant to reduce the likelihood for any loss of contact with the two TDRS satellites in orbit. (CSM, Jan 30/90)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS38, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite, probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would be assigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagon planned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the future. The satellite was deployed the following day. Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a continuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the 7mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the 3mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had not been used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixth time the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since the Challenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (NY Times, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; W Post, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA
NASA said it had received the go ahead from Intelsat to rescue the Intelsat 6 satellite put into a low orbit three months earlier. Plans called for lifting the satellite into a higher orbit sometime in 1992; sources said that the mission would probably be carried out during the inaugural flight of Shuttle Endeavor. (B Sun, Jun 14/90; W Times, Jun 14/90)
NASA was scheduled to launch two Multiple Access Communications Satellites (MACSATs) later in May aboard a Navy owned Scout rocket. The MACSATs were designed for a global storeandforward message relay. (NASA Release 9064)
The Air Force decided in September to convert the Space Launch Complex6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California for Space Shuttle liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets. The launch pad had been idle since the Challenger accident in 1986. (NY Times, Sep 30/90) Oct 1: The High Resolution Imager, an instrument for the study of cosmic Xrays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched last June, sent back its first light pictures to a ground station near Munich. The cooperative program between the United States, West Germany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited several international scientists. The pictures sent back represented a neutron star 3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova that occurred in this galaxy 320 years ago and 10,000 light years away, and a cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2156. (NASA Release 90133)
After three delays, NASA and General Dynamics Corporation launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $189 million satellite to study the Earth's magnetic and electrical fields. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects0*Satellite (CRRES), a joint effort by NASA and the Department of Defense, carried 24 canisters containing chemicals that were to be released in fall 1990 and become ionized by the sun's rays. Visible clouds would then spread along magnetic field lines, allowing scientists to see how electrical fields interact with normally invisible charged particles. The CRRES releases were to be augmented by chemicals released from 10 sounding rockets launched from Puerto Rico and the Marshall Islands. (P Inq, Jul 26/90; NY Times, Jul 26/90; NASA Release 9097; 9098)
NASA canceled a contract with TRW Corporation for the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, aka Space Tug, a spacecraft intended to lift satellites (specifically the Hubble Space Telescope and a proposed Xray telescope) into higher orbit. The reason given for the cancellation was recent budget pressure facing NASA. (WSJ, `"Jun 8/90; W Times, Jun 8/90; Sp News, Jun 1117/90; NASA Release
NASA announced a recently revised 1990 schedule for Space Shuttle launches that called for 9 flights instead of the previously announced 10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged0*on a threeweek delay to launch the Hubble Telescope, originally planned for deployment March 26, because of an unsatisfactory leak check of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster. This delay threatened the highpriority Ulysses mission scheduled for October 5. The mission had to be sent up within an 18day time period in order to slingshot Jupiter and head back toward the Sun, where it would achieve polar orbit around the star. The new agenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows: Jan 9: Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval of another. Feb 22: Atlantis; classified military satellite. Apr 18: Discovery; the Hubble Telescope.
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
NASA's Langley Research Center at Langley Field, Hampton, Virginia, and Honeywell's Space System Group, successfully concluded a joint flight research project that involved study of Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites for improved automated landing in spacecraft and aircraft. Fifteen GPS satellites were in orbit at the time of the test, and the group hoped to add nine more by 1993. Meanwhile, NASA and the Technical and Administrative Services Corporation signed a 2year agreement for the exchange of information associated with closed environment systems related to food production both on Earth and in space. The hydroponic technology sharing involved no exchange of funds. (NASA Release 90155, 90148)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS41, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida after a 5month dry spell; the fleet was grounded during much of this period because of hydrogen'!0*leaks. Ulysses, the craft's 814pound nuclear powered payload, was released later that afternoon, and a threestage solidfuel rocket began the craft on its long trip to Jupiter. Ulysses was to sling shot Jupiter in order to achieve polar orbit about 120 million miles from the Sun in May 1994. In order to escape an Earth orbit, the $750 million joint mission between NASA and the European Space Agency reached 34,130 mph, the greatest velocity yet required by an interplanetary probe for the task. The scientific mission also included a controlled fire to see how flames behave in weightlessness and release of the craft's 50foot robotic arm, which had a special material attached to estimate effects of deterioration on the Intelsat satellite, launched earlier this year into a low and useless orbit. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 10, ending a fourday, practically flawless mission. (W Post, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90; NY Times, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90)
President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budget spending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satellite program to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Jan 29/90)
China launched a communications satellite, AsiaSat 1, from Sichuan Province for an Australian firm and became the first thirdworld country to enter the commercial satellite launching business. China promised to follow fair pricing practices after President George Bush lifted a sanction, brought on the country for human rights violations, that barred them from launching the U.S.built satellite. The launch still drastically undercut U.S. and Ariane fees. (FBIS China, China Daily, Apr 7/90; CSM, Apr 9/90; W Post, Apr 8/90)
Shuttle program director Robert Crippen said that a Space Shuttle rescue of the errant satellite sent up earlier this month by Martin Marietta appeared possible. He could not say whether the Intelsat communications satellite would be lifted into a higher orbit or if the Shuttle would bring it back to Earth, but noted that either approach would require about one year for planning. (W Post, March 24/90)
Japan successfully tested its new H2 rocket, which promised to lift large, sophisticated satellites. The rocket using an LE7 engine, similar to the hightechnology propulsion system used by the Space Shuttle, was slated for service in March 1992. (AP, Mar 6/90)
President George Bush announced his plans for a cooperative effort with the Soviet Union in the humanassisted exploration of space, including voyages to the Moon and Mars. On a related note, Japan agreed to open its doors to foreignmade satellites by lifting its ban on government agencies and businesses that required them to buy only Japanese spacecraft. The Japanese law was created in order to help Japan's fledgling H&space industry. (NY Times, Apr 3/90; Apr 4/90; W Times; Apr 4/90; WSJ, Apr 4/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, which successfully carried a NAVSTAR satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was the eighth in a planned series of 21 that promised to give military units their locations to within 50 feet. (W Post, Aug 3/90)
A Delta 2 rocket carried a $654 million navigation satellite, NAVSTAR, into orbit from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. This was the eighth launch of the Air Force's Delta 2 rocket, designed for heavier payloads than the original Delta. It was number 7 of a planned 21 satellite constellations that were to help ground units, ships, and aircraft locate their precise positions. (UPI, Mar 26/90)
The military reconnaissance satellite launched from Atlantis in February malfunctioned and was slowly spinning from orbit, said White House intelligence officials. The satellite, "vital for START (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) verification," was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere in April. (W Times, Mar 19/90; W Post, Mar 19/90)
The European Space Agency successfully sent up an Ariane 4 rocket from its launch site in French Guiana and its payload, a SPOT 2 observation satellite and six smaller satellites, that included four tiny U.S. spacecraft for education and science. It was the first 1990 launch for ESA, the thirtyfirst since 1979. All seven satellites were successfully deployed. (UPI, Jan 22/90)
The official Soviet Tass News Agency reported that their most advanced rocket, a Zenit booster, had blown up seconds after liftoff and destroyed much of the launch pad in the Kazakhstan Republic. The payload, said Western analysts, was likely a recon naissance satellite. The rocket had earlier been promoted for sale in the West and had been used to fly some versions of the Soviet Space Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 12/90)
A Chicago Tribune article reported on the progress of commercial space launch ventures that were born out of the Challenger disaster in 1986. McDonnell Douglas and Martin Marietta made their first successful launches of satellites in0*1989, and Orbital Sciences and General Dynamics were expected to follow this year. Hundreds of millions of dollars were invested by the corporations, and a backlog of missions was seen until 1995 when Japan, Russia, and China were predicted to compete with U.S. and European systems. The threat of so much competition was unnerving for the industry, but the promise of U.S. military contracts offered enough compensation for the continuation of their projects. (C Trib, Feb 19/90)
Soviet cosmonauts ended a 22week mission when their Soyus TM8 capsule touched down on the Kazakhstan Steppe, southeast of Moscow. The fifth mission involving a crew living aboard the 20ton Mir Space Station included dozens of scientific experiments and testing of a "space motorcycle," a oneman vehicle designed for servicing satellites. (FBIS Moscow, Tass (Eng trans) Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90; P Inq, Feb 20/90)
A German scientific satellite, ROSAT, scheduled for NASA launch on a Delta II rocket, in early summer, arrived at Cape0*Canaveral, Florida, on this date from the Federal Republic of Germany aboard a 747 cargo plane. The spacecraft was to perform "all sky" surveys with two xray imaging telescopes, after which it would focus on detailed xray sources. (NASA Release 9027)
Contel Federal Systems transferred title of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System to NASA, effective July 1, 1990. Contel transferred the system 42 months earlier than called for, saving the Government $16 million. (NASA Release 9086)
A Delta rocket carried a British television broadcasting satellite, Marcopolo 2, and put it into orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The only problem for the ninth U.S. commercial launch of a payload into orbit was a twohour delay0*caused by thunderstorms in the area. (AP, Aug 18/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $65 million NAVSTAR Global Positioning System satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was 10th in a series of 21 that the United States hoped to have `"in orbit by 1992. (W Post, Nov 27/90; USA Today, Nov 27/90)
NASA launched the first of 10 expected Shuttle flights in 1990 (flight STS32) from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a 10day mission to orbit a Navy communications satellite and to retrieve another. The liftoff, originally scheduled for December 18, had been delayed three times because of problems with the renovated launch pad and once because of low clouds. The Navy satellite was deployed January 10. On January 12, the spacecraft closed in on and retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), an 11ton satellite, into the cargo bay, using a 50foot robotic arm. The LDEF was sent up with Space Shuttle Challenger in April 1984 to provide vital information on the design of spacecraft and NASA's Space Station, as well as other experiments. The orbiting laboratory was scheduled to be recovered 10 months after its deployment, but the nearly 5year postponement caused by scheduling problems and the Challenger accident resulted in a decaying orbit that was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere by March of 1990. The 57 experiments aboard the 30footlong cylindrical satellite included an array of potential space building materials being tested for reactions to radiation, extreme temperature changes, and collisions with space matter. Also tested for prolonged space exposure were optical fibers, pure crystals for use in electronics, and a student experiment involving tomato seeds. Interstellar gases and cosmic radiation were also trapped in an attempt to find clues into the formation of the Milky Way and the evolution of heavier elements. For the remainder of the mission, astronauts carried out other scientific and engineering work. Columbia landed on a concrete runway early in the morning on
Orbital Communications Corporation requested Federal approval for deploying a global satellite system for data transmission, 20 small satellites that would mostly be used for emergency services. Orbital planned to deploy them, beginning in April with its Pegasus rocket, launched from a B52 aircraft. (W Times, Mar 6/90; NASA Release N9018)
On this date, China put its fifth relay satellite into space on a Long March 3 rocket sent up from the Xichang center in western China and announced that it was ready to launch foreign satellites. China had scheduled launches for Hong Kong and Australian companies who wanted to send up three Americanbuilt satellites beginning in April of 1990. (Beijing Xinhua domestic service in Chinese, Feb 20/90; W Times, Feb 5/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
The United States and the Soviet Union signed an agreement in which NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) would fly on a Soviet Meteor3 spacecraft sometime in 1991. A TOMS instrument had monitored ozone concentrations from a Nimbus7 satellite since 1978, focusing on the southern hemisphere and the development of the Antarctic ozone hole. This satellite, however, had already performed well beyond its designed lifetime, and the TOMS/Meteor3 mission was slated to replace it. Another TOMS satellite was scheduled to be aboard a U.S. spacecraft in 1993; two or three years subsequent to that mission another TOMS was scheduled for a Japanese ADEOS satellite. (NASA Release 90105)
After five delays because of the Shuttle Commander's' 0*head cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather, Atlantis (STS36) lifted off under dark skies from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to deliver a 37,300pound classified military satellite into orbit. The postponements tacked on an additional $2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Truly reiterated NASA's policy that meeting launch schedules was secondary to safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its $500 million military payload the following day at an orbit inclined 62 degrees north of the equator, allowing it to fly over every major populated and industrialized center in the Soviet Union. An even higher inclination orbit would have been preferred. A polar orbit was considered ideal for a recon naissance satellite, but the Shuttle base at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, from where such an orbit could have been safely achieved, was not operational; the weight of the larger satellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle. Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California on March 4. No problems were reported during the brief 41/2 day mission, the Space Shuttle's 34th mission and the 6th mission dedicated solely to the military.W Post, Mar 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 5/90; Feb 28/90; NY Times, March 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; P Inq, Mar 5/90))
A satellite launched by Martin Marietta from Cape Canaveral, Florida, failed to reach a useful orbit because of a wiring problem that did not allow separation from the Titan 3 rocket's second stage. Ground engineers successfully took the craft to a higher, but still useless, orbit, so that it would not be as likely to reenter the atmosphere. One plan offered by Orbital Sciences Corporation in Virginia was to attach a rocket' 0*to the satellite via the Space Shuttle so it could obtain the necessary 23,000 mile orbit. Martin Marietta, which had only two remaining contracts, believed it was in jeopardy of not getting any more contracts because of the incident. (WSJ, Mar 15/90; W Post, Mar 17/90; NY Times, Mar 16/90)
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)
Martin Marietta Corporation successfully launched a Titan 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on this date that carried a replacement satellite into orbit for the Intelsat 6 stranded in March. The new communications satellite was to join 14 others in September and would transmit 3 television channels and 120,000 telephone calls simultaneously. (P Inq, Jun 24/90; W Post, Jun 24/90)
NASA said that it would rescue the uninsured communications satellite that Martin Marietta Corporation boosted into a useless orbit last March 14. The cost was set at $1 million to either retrieve it or attach rockets, that would send it into a higher orbit, in 1991 or 1992. Intelsat said that it would consider the cost at its next board of governors meeting. W Times, May 16/90)
The Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico issued a report concerning an electric gun, the coil gun, that could thrust payloads into orbit. Hoping one day that the device would launch small satellites, Bill Cowan, director of the project, predicted that objects could be hurled into space at 2.8 miles per second at 1 percent of the cost of conventional rockets. The gun accelerates projectiles by pulling them through successive, interacting magnetic fields created by electric currents passing through coils of wire. According to Cowan, obstacles such as damage to the payloads and launchers themselves and the heat generated by projectiles rapidly propelled through the atmosphere would eventually be overcome. (NY Times, (Jan 30/90)
NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta II rocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craft was to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth's night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release
A hydrogen leak similar to the one that scrubbed Columbia's mission late in May was discovered in the Space Shuttle Atlantis as it was being readied on the launch pad. Engineers determined that Atlantis would need to return to the hanger where it could be separated from its external fuel tank for repairs. Officials said that the flight, originally scheduled for midJuly, would be delayed at least several weeks and noted that the entire fleet was grounded until the problem could be ascertained. Finding the cause of the leak had proven difficult. If the final analysis pointed to a design flaw, grounding might have been stretched to months or even years. (NASA Release 9089; W Post, Jun 30/90; NY Times, Jun 30/90; WSJ, July 2/90; CSM, Jul During June: NASA awarded a $1.3 million contract to Martin Marietta Corporation to study design concepts for a space based "service station." The system would service satellites beyond the range of the Space Shuttle, provide them with fuel as well as replace certain components. (W Times, Jun 7/90)
An Ariane rocket carrying both a French and a German TV satellite was successfully launched from French Guiana. The rocket was identical to the one that exploded shortly after liftoff last February 22. (W Post, Jul 25/90; WSJ, Jul 25/90)
Astronauts who retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility in early January said, in a press briefing, that the satellite was in worse shape than engineers had expected after its nearly 6year orbit. The conclusion was that materials used for the planned Space Station would require greater scrutiny. (W Times, Jan 31/90)
President George Bush said he would allow U.S. commercial satellites to be launched by Soviet rockets. The rockets would be fired from a projected site in Australia, an advantageous position for orbits, located just 12 degrees south of the equator. (FBIS Sov, Jul 9/90; NY Times, Jul 9/90)
A Titan 4 rocket blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a classified payload outside experts believed was a $180 million advanced missile warning satellite. It was the third launch of the Titan 4 and followed a 2month delay caused by undisclosed technical problems. The satellite, they added, would likely observe Iraq. The Space Shuttle Atlantis, which occupied a nearby launch pad for liftoff on the November 15, also had a (#classified cargo aboard thought to be for the same purpose. (W Post, Nov 13/90; W Times, Nov 13/90)
The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
The media reported engineers were studying a possible problem connected with a $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) to be launched by Shuttle Atlantis. The problem involved the motor that deployed a boom carrying a six-foot-wide antenna. The main TDRS antennas are folded for launch, but once the satellite is in orbit, the antenna booms rotate outward and the antennas open up like umbrellas. On June 24, NASA manager of the project Nicholas Chrissotimos, stated that the problem was resolved. (UPI, Jun 21/91; AP, Jun 22/91; C Trin, Jun 25/91)
An ongoing NASA project released a lithium canister from a satellite, producing a red sphere. Rick Howard, one of 40 scientists working on the project, said the purpose was to try to inject an artificial lithium plasma cloud to see if precipitation can be increased. (AP, Feb. 12/91)
NASA's Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Experiments Program Manager Dean Olmstead expressed NASA's pleasure that the U.S. Army had joined NASA to conduct various ACTS experiments. ACTS forms the center of NASA's satellite communications research and development efforts. (PR Newswire, Aug 20/91)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was slowly hauled to its launch pad for a scheduled November 19 blastoff, according to UPI. NASA announced its mission was to deploy a Defense Support Program satellite designed to detect nuclear detonations, missile launches, and space launches from a geosynchronous orbit. A number of other experiments are to be performed during the 10-day flight. (NASA Release 91-176; UPI, Oct 24/91)
Discovery astronauts captured amazing aurora observations and continued to try to fix the two faulty recorders. After releasing the retrievable SPAS-2 satellite, using Discovery's 50-foot robot arm, the astronauts had difficulties getting the satellite oriented properly to observe the Shuttle. Discovery was to play the role of an enemy missile, repeatedly firing one of its two orbital maneuvering system rockets as instruments on the SPAS-2 recorded visible light, infrared, and ultraviolet emissions. (W Times, May 1/91; P Inq, May 1/91; AP, May 1/91; UPI, May 1/91; LA Times, May 1/91)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed by the California Institute of Technology for NASA, feared it might be necessary to send a communications satellite to Jupiter to relay Galileo's discoveries to earth. It would take three years for such a satellite to reach Jupiter, assuming funding were available. However, the engineers still hoped to resolve the problem of the failure of Galileo's high-gain antenna to open properly. Six nearly identical antennas were used on NASA's primary communications satellites without encountering problems. (LA Times, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 28/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; NY Times, Apr 30/91)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems awarded Hercules Aerospace of Magna, Utah, a contract to continue production of graphite epoxy solid rocket motors (GEMS) for the Delta II expendable launch vehicle. (PR newswire, Mar 28/91)
The rocket-launching site at Poker Flat, Alaska, is near the North Pole, has a high success rate for suborbital, scientific launches, and lacks military red tape, being university owned. These factors caused commercial ventures to inquire about possible commercial satellite launches into polar orbits from Poker Flat. Glenn Olds, Commissioner of the state Department of Commerce and Economic Development, believed a launch might occur in 1993. (AP, Apr 29/91)
NASA announced that early results from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) confirmed the link between the presence of chlorine monoxide and the depletion of ozone in Earth's upper atmosphere. The UARS was launched by Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12, 1991. (NASA Release 91-199)
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) ordered an independent engineering review of NASA's plans for the Earth Observing System to study global climate change. An Administration official said OMB wanted an assessment of the advisability of large, complex satellites and of the specific sensors and launch plans. (AvWk, Feb 18/91)
The Baltimore Sun commented at length on an article on galactic studies appearing in the April 20 issue of The Astrophysical Journal. The article described work done by a group of scientists using the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), a scientific satellite operated by NASA and the European Space Agency. The yearlong work required 60 observations with the IUE studying the cores of rare galaxies. (B Sun, May 19/91)
NASA announced that in January 1991, it would conduct experiments from an orbiting satellite to test the possibility of creating an artificial aurora. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) was to release clouds of barium and lithium vapor in the Earth's magnetosphere, the region above the atmosphere.
Navy Commander Ken Reightler, a Marylander, was scheduled to fly on September 19 on the Shuttle Discovery. A Naval Academy graduate and a test pilot, Reightler will be a pilot on the five-day mission that was to deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. (B Sun, Apr 4/91)
Representative Howard Wolpe wrote in a space trade journal concerning the GOES-NEXT weather satellites. He commended Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher's statement that although GOES-NEXT would not be launched on schedule, it would meet original specifications. He continued to be concerned about a possible five-year gap without a weather detection system and stated that firm commitments of assistance must be obtained from Europe and Japan. He also criticized NASA for lacking a planned prototype instrument for GOES and for its ineffective cost controls. (SP News, Oct 14-20/91)
The media reported that the Air Force had launched an unmanned Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral July 3. The rocket contained a $65 million satellite that joined 10 advanced Global Positioning System spacecraft already circling the globe in order to assist military forces on the ground, at sea, and in the air to determine their location. (UPI, Jul 4/91; W Times, Jul 5/91)
According to the media, engineers waited out the storm at Cape Canaveral and then hauled Shuttle Atlantis to its launch pad. The Shuttle was scheduled to launch a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite to replace the Indian Ocean relay station. (UPI, Jun 25/91; NY Times, Jun 26/91; W Times, June 26/91; USA Today, Jun 26/91; C Trin, Jun 26/91)
The media covered extensively final preparations leading up to the evening launch of Discovery in its 13th flight, a record. Biographic data were given concerning members of the mission as well as descriptions of the satellite to be launched to gather ozone information. (B Sun, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 12/91; USA Today, Sep 12/91; P Inq, Sep 12/91; LA Times, Sep 12/91; AP, Sep 12/91; UPI, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91; B Sun, Sep 13/91; P Inq, Sep 13/91; W Post, Sep 13/91; WSJ, Sep 13/91; USA Today, Sep 13/91; W Times, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 13/91; AP, Sep 13/91; UPI, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 14/91)
The U.S. Space Surveillance Network, inside Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado, originally designed to serve as an early warning system against missile attacks, was described. The organization now mainly is engaged in tracking 7,000 pieces of orbiting space debris, to which some 240 new pieces were added each year. Efforts were being made internationally to develop new technologies to track space debris. In all, more than 100 spacecraft fragmented while in orbit, including at least 12 satellites deliberately destroyed by the United States and the Soviet Union during weapons testing. (P Inq, Dec 26/91)
A $40 million communications satellite was launched by a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The satellite was owned by GTE Spacenet Corporation of McLean, Virginia. The satellite was scheduled to take over the work of the present Westar spacecraft in June and increase GTE's transponder capacity for relaying information. (AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; CSM, Apr 15/91)
An editorial raised the fairness issue with regard to NASA's anchor tenancy contracts to help the commercial space business. To date Spacehab, American Mobile Satellite Corporation, and Orbital Sciences Corporation have such contracts. The editorial advocated that other agencies, such as the Department of Justice in the case of mobile services and environmental and ocean agencies in the case of fish research, should reimburse NASA for these costs. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
NASA announced that David Reasoner, Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would chair the May 28 meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. At the session, results of the CRRES artificial Earth auroras experiment would be discussed. (NASA Release 91-77)
NASA announced that the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) would resume experiments after four successful chemical releases in the past week. The releases should aid in studying the way that charged particles interact with the Earth's magnetic and electric fields by creating artificial auroras. (NASA Release 91-9; Time, Jan 21/91)
Whereas NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York plans to announce that 1990 was the hottest year ever recorded, NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, says 1990 was only the fourth hottest year since 1979. The difference is accounted for by the fact that Goddard uses ground-based thermometers to record local heat while Marshall uses satellites, which broadly measure atmospheric temperature world-wide. In addition to the global temperature analysis, the World Resources Institute released two related studies. One was by Richard Heim of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Global Climate Laboratory. (WSJ, Jan 8/91; W Post, Jan 10/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; LA Times, Jan 10/91; CSM, Jan 16/91; NY Times Magazine, Feb 3/91)
The Los Angeles Times covered the fifth annual Conference on Small Satellites, held at Utah State University. Most of the scientists and engineers attending favored NASA using smaller satellites for specific goals rather than larger spacecraft, which they believed to be NASA's trend. (LA Times, Sep 2/91)
Stanley G. Rosen, retired director of long-range planning for the US Air Force Space Division in El Segundo, California, and vice president for public policy of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said the Persian Gulf War demonstrated the need for radar satellites. Such satellites could penetrate clouds and battlefield smoke as well as monitoring all troop movements and could possibly detect Scud missile launchers. (LA Times, Feb 18/91)
According to Aviation Week and Space Technology, quoting the Earth Observing System (EOS) Engineering Review Panel, NASA's plans for EOS satellites A and B "should be completely reconfigured." The panel also stated that the EOS Data and Information System was incorrectly configured and lacked central control of data archiving and distribution. NASA released the report on September 23. The same issue of the magazine reported that NASA was discussing with Martin Marietta reintroducing the Titan 3 booster to launch the EOS spacecraft into polar orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, in the late 1990s. (AvWk, Sep 16/91; NASA Editor's Note N91-64)
Robert C. Cowen, a science writer for the Christian Science Monitor, wrote of a recent article in the journal Science by Compton J. Tucker and Wilbur W. Newcomb of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Technical University in Lubbock. They used American polar-orbiting weather satellites to show the shifting sands of the Sahara Desert. (B Sun, Aug 30/91)
NASA solicited proposals for establishing additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These centers were to specialize in the commercialization of advanced satellite communications technologies and other space-based telecommunications technologies. NASA's current CCDS specialize as follows: materials processing, 5; life sciences, 3; remote sensing, 2; automation and robotics, 2; space propulsion, 1; space structures and materials, 1; and space power, 2. (NASA Release 91-58)
NASA General Counsel Edward Frankle announced that Johnson Space Center's Leo Monford was NASA's Inventor of the Year. The award, to be presented March 28, was for a docking alignment system called Targeting and Reflective Alignment Concept, or TRAC. Used in combination with another of Monford's inventions, a Magnetic End Effector, it could change the shape of future robot arms, satellites, and Space Stations.
NASA announced that the German Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) began a new phase of operation on February 8. It started pointed observations of x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high energy phenomena. The US ROSAT Science Data Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, will process and distribute ROSAT pointed data and provide facilities for the scientific analysis of the data. Britain is also cooperating in this venture, which involved the original ROSAT launching from Cape Canaveral, Florida on June 1, 1990 on a Delta expendable launch vehicle. (NASA Release 91-23)
NASA announced that the Ohio State University's Center for Mapping, Columbus, one of 16 NASA Centers for the Commercial Development of Space, had developed a system that would reduce the amount of time and money needed to gather information on highway conditions. The system uses both positioning data from the Defense Department's Navstar Global Positioning Satellite Systems and images taken from a pair of video cameras mounted in a standard van. The system would help locate roads needing repair and other hazardous conditions, including the location of fatal accidents. The 18-month project, called the Global Positioning System for Transportation Planning, involved the Federal Highway Administration, 38 state transportation departments, and the Canadian province of Alberta. The states had contributed $565,000 to the project, and NASA had given $280,000. The system also is ideal for mapping and the mobile unit enables digitizing to be done immediately. (NASA Release 91-16)
According to the Wall Street Journal, Telesat Canada planned to file a $240 million insurance claim because of the failure of its Anik E2 communications satellite launched in April to deploy one of its two antennae. (WSJ, May 24/91)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch on September 12, would deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) 350 miles above Earth. The UARS is to study humankind's effect on the planet's atmosphere and its shielding ozone layer and is the first major flight element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 91-136)
The Government Accounting Office issued a study criticizing NASA's system of testing spacecraft before launching. It called the system poorly organized with testing practices varying from one center to another because NASA lacked uniform policies. The study dealt with the Hubble Space Telescope and the weather satellites, as well as Space Shuttles. (AP, Sep 23/91; UPI, Sep 23/91; LA Times, Sep 23/91; NY Times, Sep 24/91; USA Today, Sep 24/91; WSJ, Sep 24/91; W Times, Sep 24/91)
UPI reported that General Dynamics concluded from its investigation that a piece of debris sucked into a pump apparently triggered an engine failure April 18 that sent a commercial Atlas-1 rocket tumbling out of control. The rocket was carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation. (UPI, Jun 27/91)
NASA announced that based on satellite observations of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, researchers from NASA and Geo Eco Arc Research in La Canada, California, had located a "nearly perfect" semicircular ring of sink holes forming a crater more than 125 miles in diameter. The scientists believed that this evidence of an impact crater formed by a comet or asteroid might have caused the extinction of dinosaurs and other species about 65 million years ago. The findings were being published in Nature magazine. (NASA Release 91-71; UPI, May 9/91: LA Times, May 10/91; San Francisco Examiner, May 10/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, May 11/91; LA Times, May 27/91; W Times, May 31/91)
Steve Piacente, Washington correspondent for the Charleston Post-Courier, wrote "Weather Service Modernization: No Goes" describing problems of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA with launching new weather satellites. Lack of effective supervision of contractors and poor engineering workmanship were among the shortcomings. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
NASA announced that September 12 was set for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery and its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. The announcement followed completion of the Flight Readiness Review. (NASA Launch Advisory, Aug 28/91; CSM, Aug 28/91; UPI, Aug 28/91; DPA, Aug 28/91; P Inq, Aug 29/91; W Times, Aug 29/91; NY Times, Aug 29/91; USA Today, Aug 29/91; LA Times, Aug 29/91; AP, Aug 29/91)
NASA announced that its latest target in efforts to understand the global climate and predict future patterns are the cirrus clouds. In mid-November, atmospheric scientists from NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, to lead were researchers to Coffeyville, Kanasas, where ground, airborne, and satellite measurement platforms were to conduct intensive cirrus cloud investigation for 25 days. (NASA Release 91-187)
NASA announced that July 23 would be the launch date for Space Shuttle Atlantis, which was to deploy the fifth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. (NASA STS-43 Launch Advisory)
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) chief scientist William Kinard of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, revealed that 200 experimenters in nine countries were analyzing the data gathered by the LDEF satellite that Space Shuttle Columbia rescued in 1990. The plan was to retrieve LDEF after 11 months, but delays and loss of Challenger stranded LDEF for five years and nine months. Nevertheless experiments were conducted and interesting findings were being discovered. (CSM, Feb 8/91)
NASA announced that researchers from its Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, would use satellite and airborne instruments to measure the surface elevation of polar glaciers. The program was designed to aid scientists determine ice buildup or melting resulting from global climate change. The program is to occur in Greenland between August 23 and September 16. (NASA Release 91-133)
Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science announced that Japan had successfully launched a solar flare observation satellite, designed to analyze X-rays and gamma rays from solar flares. (DPA, Aug 30/91)
The media discussed plans for NASA's next Shuttle flight, that of Discovery in September to deploy a satellite to study the ozone layer in Earth's upper atmosphere. Discovery was moved to the launch pad, and various systems were connected to prepare for a practice countdown. (UPI, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 13/91; USA Today, Aug 13/91)
An experimental rocket motor being tested for the Air Force Titan 4 rocket exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California. No one was injured in the explosion. The Titan 4, the largest unmanned rocket in the US fleet, was scheduled to replace NASA's manned Shuttle in flying photo reconnaissance spy satellites and other heavy military payloads. (UPI, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
The media reported on hearings of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology regarding the U.S. weather satellite. The General Accounting Office (GAO) found that the program for a new satellite, GOES-Next, was more than three years behind schedule and costs more than doubled because of mismanagement by NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and poor workmanship by contractors. The GAO report considered the problem originated when NASA neglected to have a critical engineering review of the feasibility of the program's objectives at the beginning of the project. (UPI, Jul 25/91; AP, Jul 25/91;  NY Times, Jul 26/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, the Soviet space program was facing a difficult future. The main elements of the Soviet space program were concentrated in three republics: Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. Rockets were built primarily in Ukraine, control centers and instrument manufacturing plants were mainly in Russia, and the principal launch facility, the Baikonur Cosmodrome, was in Kazakhstan. Marcia S. Smith, the Soviet space expert on the staff of the Congressional Research Service, said those three republics agreed in early October they could operate by themselves. However, the economic situation became worse, causing increasing criticism. Nevertheless, communications satellites were essential to produce foreign investments and maintain a link with the outside world. Space research had technological spinoffs in areas such as computers, transportation, communications, and propulsion. Therefore, U.S. experts did not believe the former Soviet states would allow the space program to die. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
The Los Angeles Times quoted National Hurricane Center director Robert C. Sheets as being concerned about the "precarious situation" with regard to hurricane forecasting. The GOES-7, the only U.S. weather satellite in orbit, was nearing the end of its five-year life expectancy and no replacement was available in the near future. Among possibilities were buying a satellite from Japanese or European makers. (LA Times, Jul 16/91)
NASA announced its launching of the NOAA-D environmental satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The satellite was to collect meteorological and environmental data and ultimately would replace NOAA-10, which was nearing the end of its life. (NASA Release N91-36; W Times, May 15/91; USA Today, May 15/91)
Daniel DeVito, manager of the Central Data Handling Facility (CDHF) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, commented on the way the use of CDHF in the forthcoming NASA Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite mission might lead to similar systems on larger NASA projects. CDHF was a new concept that both the International Solar Terrestrial Physics project and the Earth Observing System mission were looking at to handle data more efficiently and distribute data to scientists through a multiple network. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
NASA announced its Mixed Fleet Manifest for the Space Shuttle and expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) for the next three years. Of the 26 Space Shuttle flights, 18 would be for NASA payloads or joint NASA/international payloads. The Shuttle was to focus on a variety of space science activities supporting life sciences, materials science, and astrophysics investigations. The remaining flights would consist of two international Spacelab missions, two flights of the commercially provided Spacehab module, the retrieval and reboost of a stranded commercial communications satellite, and three Department of Defense (DOD) missions. Seven Space Shuttle launches were planned for 1991, eight in 1992, and 11 in 1993.
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) had discovered a new, distant object that astronomers described as the most luminous object ever seen in the universe. Findings were published in the British science journal Nature, indicating it was a massive dust cloud that radiated 99 percent of its light in  the infrared part of the spectrum. Astronomers speculated it might be a massive galaxy in the process of formation or a quasar in a massive galaxy. (NASA Release 91-98; P Inq, Jun 29/91)
The media reported the launch of the Soviet Meteor-3 weather satellite carrying the NASA-built Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS). The Meteor was to view the hole in the ozone over Antarctica in September and October; the United States and the Soviet Union were to share ozone information gained. (AP, Aug 15/91; UPI, Aug 15/91; P Inq, Aug 16/91; W Post, Aug 16/91; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
According to the New York Times, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration was completing arrangements to get exclusive use of the European weather satellite Meteosat-3. The purpose would be to move it further west to cover the United States more thoroughly if the U.S. weather satellite, GOES-7, were to fail. NASA was several years behind in the development of new U.S. weather satellites, the GOES-NEXT, originally scheduled to begin operating in 1989 but now probably late 1992 at the earliest. Subsequently, several newspapers reported arrangements made for the United States to borrow at least one and possibly more European weather satellites. (NY Times, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91)
The first release of barium vapor, creating a green cloud, by the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite occurred the evening of January 12, NASA announced. The second release consisted of lithium vapor the night of January 13, causing a red cloud. (P Inq, Jan 14/91; USA Today, Jan 14/91; NY Times, Jan 14/91; AP, Jan 13/91; UPI, Jan 12/91; W Post, Jan 13/91)
According to UPI, an Orbital Sciences Corporation winged Pegasus rocket, carrying seven Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency "Microsat" research satellites, was launched on July 16 from a B-52 jet. However, controllers lost track of the payload after a possible malfunction. On July 18 Orbital Sciences heard signals from space and learned that the satellites were functioning but had entered a flawed orbit, limiting their lives to less than three years but sufficient to test a new military communications system. (UPI, Jul 17/91; USA Today, Jul 18/91; WSJ, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; W Post, Jul 19/91; USA Today, Jul 19/91; P Inq, Jul 19/91; W Times, Jul 19/91; LA Times, Jul 19/91)
NASA announced that the first flight of a NASA ozone instrument on a Soviet spacecraft would occur in August. NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) was to be flown on a Soviet Meteor-3 meteorological satellite to be launched August 15 from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Soviet Cylone rocket. (NASA Release 91-127; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
At a news conference at Goddard Space Flight Center, researchers from NASA and from the Soviet Central Aerological Observatory near Moscow announced the success of the first U.S.-Soviet space effort in 16 years. The engineer's model of the first Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS--U.S. technology-transfer laws prohibited the launch of a state-of-the-art TOMS aboard a Soviet satellite) was launched aboard a Soviet satellite August 15, and was sending back "high-quality data", according to Soviet deputy director Vyacheslav Khattatov. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; NY Times, Nov 23/91)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle, research physicist Michael S. Briggs reported finding a second huge source of gamma rays in the Milky Way. The Soviet satellite Granat and a gamma detector aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory were to be used to observe the new source. (LA Times, May 30/91)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, awarded a $145 million contract to Loral Infrared and Imaging Systems, Lexington, Massachusetts to design and build the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS). This instrument would fly on NASA's first Earth Observation System (EOS) satellite flights in 1998. AIRS would be a global thermometer in space to study the effects of increased greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. The main goal of EOS-A satellites is to study the effects of potential global warming through long-term observations. AIRS would operate continuously for five years. (NASA Release 91-61; WSJ, Apr 23/91)
The crew of Shuttle Discovery prepared for a 38-hour "space ballet" with a satellite that will study Discovery's exhaust plumes. With two recorders not working, the astronauts turned to other instruments. The satellite launch was delayed to allow the crew to complete as many observations as possible of Earth's aurora before the coolant for the telescope ran out. (B Sun, Apr 30/91; W Times, Apr 30/91; W Post, Apr 30/91; USA Today, Apr 30/91; LA Times, Apr 30/91; AP, 30 Apr 91; UPI, 30 Apr/91)
The media reported an article in the journal Science, indicating that despite reports of global warming and African drought, the Sahara desert shrank markedly since 1984, following a substantial expansion over the preceding four years. Two NASA scientists, Compton J. Tucker and William W. Newcomb, at NASA's Laboratory for Terrestrial Physics in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Tech University's International Center for Arid and Semi-Arid Land Studies, conducted the research. Satellite measurements of vegetation on the ground were used to calculate the extent of the desert. (AP, Jul 18/91; NASA Release 91-114; W Post, Jul 21/91; P Inq, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91)
NASA announced that the next Shuttle launch, scheduled for late February, would be delayed until early March in order to replace three thrusters used to steer the ship in orbit. During the eight-day flight, the 44 thrusters would be used to maneuver the ship into unusual positions. The ship's re-entry engines also would be fired so a satellite temporarily placed in orbit could observe the rocket exhaust plumes. The aim was better identification of the plumes of missiles aimed against the United States in future wars. NASA also displayed the Gamma Ray Observatory scheduled to be carried into orbit in early April. (P Inq, Jan 30/91; B Sun, Jan 30/91; USA Today, Jan 30/91; AP, Jan 30/91; NY Times, Jan 31/91)
The findings of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite have caused astronomers to question part of the Big Bang theory, according to a report by Dr. Will Saunders of Oxford University and his colleagues in the journal Nature. The cold dark matter model cannot explain the giant superstructures and companion supervoids found in galactic surveys. These structures appear too vast to have formed since the Big Bang. (NY Times, Jan 3/91; W Post, Jan 6/91; LA Times, Jan 4/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
The scheduled launch of Atlantis on August 1 was delayed by false alarm over a pressure valve and then by bad weather, the media reported. The launch was rescheduled for August 2. The astronauts' first task after takeoff was to launch the $120 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, which was done successfully. Various onboard experiments were begun, together with some medical research experiments designed to test the effects of weightlessness. (B Sun, Aug 2/91; USA Today, Aug 2/91; NY Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; UPI, Aug 2/91; P Inq, Aug 3/91; NY Times, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 3/91; AP, Aug 3/91; UPI, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 4/91; NY Times, Aug 4/91; UPI, Aug 4/91; C Trin, Aug 4/91; B Sun, Aug 5/91; W Times, Aug 5/91; USA Today, Aug 5/91; P Inq, Aug 5/91; C Trin, Aug 5/91; LA Times, Aug 5/91; AP, Aug 5/91; UPI, Aug 5/91)
General Thomas S. Moorman, Jr., commander of Air Force Space Command at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado, said orbiting satellites were integral to mid-air and ground operations in the Persian Gulf War. He spoke at a conference at Tufts University on "The United States Air Force: Aerospace Challenges and Missions in the 1990s." (CSM, Apr 12/91)
President Bush barred the export to China of parts for a domestic communications satellite, known as Dong Fang Hong 3, citing concerns about possible proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Bush approved export of components for two Western projects, an Australian communications satellite and a Swedish weather satellite, to be launched from China, for which the United States was assured of strict safeguards. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
An article on interactive computer graphics and the virtual reality system they involve stated that NASA's Visualization for Planetary Exploration project might use such technology. It would enable the creation of environments of the moon and planets that would use data gathered by space probes and satellites to allow users to feel they were visiting those bodies. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
Fred Gordon, spacecraft operations manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that NASA officially had retired the Dynamics Explorer-1 (DE-1) satellite on February 28, 1991, after nine years of collecting scientific data. The decision was based on an evaluation of the costs for DE-1's operations compared to the expected value of the science gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the program, the spacecraft's cameras could see an entire Auroral zone, and the quality and quantity of data produced by the two DE spacecraft far exceeded expectations. DE-2 ended operations February 19, 1983. (NASA Release 91-42)
Scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that the ozone hole over the South Pole did not appear to be improving. The ozone loss in 1990 equaled the previous low detected in 1987 in "depth, duration, and area." The findings were based on NASA's satellite observations of a complete cross section of the ozone layer. The findings complemented measurements at certain altitudes taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sounding balloons. (UPI, Feb 22/91)
According to AP, the House subcommittee on Science, Space, and Technology planned to examine NASA's "midlife crisis," referring to the agency's "management failures" and "loss of leadership." The report mentioned NASA's recent series of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, the GOES weather satellite, the postponements in the Space Shuttle launch, and the Galileo space probe's jammed antenna. (AP, Jul 31/91)
According to the New York Times, Japan was reassessing its decision that preserving good trade relations with the United States was more important than quickly developing a competitive space industry. Because its own heavy-lift rocket program ran into endless problems and delays, Japan turned to foreign companies to launch its satellites. But the two satellite accidents, of which the most recent was the loss of the Atlas Centaur rocket launched from Cape Canaveral by General Dynamics Corporation earlier in 1991, caused considerable Japanese concern. The loss had major impact on Japan's high-definition television projects, which were developing rapidly.(NY Times, May 22/91)
NASA's next Shuttle mission is to be that of Atlantis, scheduled for launch in July to release a giant Tracking and Data Relay Satellite intended to link Shuttles and other low-orbiting spacecraft with the ground. Conrad Nagel, the NASA manager responsible for the launch preparation, raised the possibility that Atlantis might be launched earlier than July 25. (Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 15/91)
The Washington Post quoted John Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which includes the National Weather Service, as saying that "We can no longer assume that a NASA-built satellite will serve our needs." The statement referred to NASA's plans to launch GOES-NEXT, the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites. NASA tests indicated that two of the main instruments to be used on the satellites: an imager and a temperature-humidity sensor called a sounder, were defective. UPI indicated that Knauss announced the appointment of a task force to consider alternative courses of action regarding a weather satellite, such as leasing a Japanese or European satellite. (W Post, Jun 28/91; UPI, Jun 28/91; NY Times, Jun 29/91; Time, Jul 1/91)
NASA further announced the selection of two additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These were the Center for the Commercial Development of Space in Satellite and Hybrid Communication Networks, University of Maryland Systems Research Center, College Park, and the Space Communications Technology Center, Florida Atlantic University Research Corporation, Boca Raton. In an unrelated action, NASA and Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, agreed to discontinue the Center for Space Processing of Engineering Materials because of decline in research by metals producers. (NASA Release 91-166; B Sun, Oct 10/91)
A space policy analyst for a major aerospace company in California questioned the lack of activity concerning the Strategic Environmental Research Program (SERP). Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat from Georgia, sponsored the program in 1990 to bring vital data and skills from the Defense and Energy departments to bear on problems of environmental research and global warming. The proposal was to select some classified defense satellite data with potential usefulness in global change research, declassify them, and make them available to researchers in global warming. Congress authorized $200 million for SERP in the 1991 Defense Authorization Act, but nothing further was heard. (SP News, Mar 25/91)
Jerry Ross and Jay Apt fixed a stuck satellite antenna in NASA's first unscheduled repair in space, showing the value of the human element in space flight. Thereafter they remained outside for three more hours to test equipment. A further spacewalk was scheduled before return to Earth. (USA Today, Apr 8/91; B Sun, Apr 8/91; AP, Apr 8/91; UPI, Apr 8/91; C Trin, Apr 8/91; CSM, Apr 9/91; W Post, Apr 9/91; Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr 9/91; Birmingham News, Apr 12/91)
A Journal of Commerce editorial analyzed the factors relating to NASA and the Federal Communications Commission's licensing of a private communications consortium joint venture to develop a mobile satellite to provide clear voice communications in remote U.S. areas. In early 1991, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia challenged the FCC's authority to form the joint venture and license it, with the result that Congress cut NASA's proposed $56 million contribution to the project. The companies feel cheated and the editorial advised that NASA should not be involved. (Journal of Commerce, Jun 21/91)
The Christian Science Monitor discussed the cases of Ulysses, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), and Hipparcos, an ESA satellite. Ulysses, which was designed to study the environment over the north and south poles of the sun, developed a wobble that threatened its usefulness, but the problem was resolved. Hipparcos was designed to measure the positions, motions, and distances of more than 100,000 stars. It also developed orbit problems but to date measured more than 1 million stars. (CSM, Feb 13/91)
According to AP, NASA and the Pentagon were undecided how much information they would give about the next Shuttle mission, the November launch of Atlantis, intended to release a satellite designed to spot an enemy missile attack. (AP, Sep 18/91)
An editorial commended NASA for considering a plan to decrease the risk of space experiments by using a larger number of small satellites, with smaller numbers of instruments. This would increase flexibility in the space program, making it more efficient and possibly cheaper. (SF Chron, Aug 16/91)
According to the Washington Times, Eosat, based in Lanham, Maryland, a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Company and General Electric Company, defeated its competitor and gained the contract for distributing images from the new Soviet Almaz satellite. (W Times, Aug 9/91)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with Columbia Communications Corporation, Honolulu, to delay for up to six months the start of operations under Columbia's lease of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) C-Band capacity. NASA leased to Columbia the C-Band transponders on two geostationary TDRSS satellites to serve commercial international telecommunications customers in the Atlantic and Pacific coastal regions. (NASA Release 91-181)
Astronauts on Space Shuttle Discovery aimed a research satellite at rocket fuel spewed in space, then captured the satellite and put it back in the Shuttle's cargo bay. (W Post, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91; LA Times, May 3/91; AP, May 3/91; UPI, May 3/91)
A spy satellite monitoring center, officially known as the Onizuka Air Force Base, near Sunnyvale, California, needed no longer to be considered top secret. The center controlled 80 Pentagon military and spy satellites but this responsibility was gradually being transferred to the Consolidated Space Operations Center at Falcon Air Force Base in Colorado. According to a government report, the transfer would not be complete until 1993. (LA Times, Dec 2/91)
The Wall Street Journal discussed the January 1989 offer by Nikolai Ponomarev-Stepnoy, leader of a Soviet design team that built a top secret military spy satellite, the Topaz-2, to sell, for a few million dollars, the Topaz-2 with the satellite's lightweight nuclear reactor. Moscow had no money to develop the reactor for commercial use but the paper deplored the U.S. delay in taking up the offer. The above discussion followed up on a statement by the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Office, reported on December 11, that the office stopped its share of funding for a space-based nuclear reactor projected to cost $1.6 billion by 2002. The reactor program, called SP-100, was shared by NASA and the Department of Energy. Instead the Pentagon office was inclined to go with the Soviet-style process represented by the Topaz, for which it earmarked $15 million. (WSJ, Dec 11/91; WSJ, Dec 17/91)
Several newspapers commented on the study by a panel of experts, headed by Edward A. Frieman of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, released by the Federation of American Scientists. The report recommended that NASA scrap plans for six huge scientific platforms to gather data for studies of global warming as part of the Earth Observation System. Instead, experts urged that NASA use smaller satellites that could provide critical data more quickly and more cheaply. (LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; Time, Sep 16/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91)
On the night of November 19, NASA delayed the launch of Atlantis for at least five days because of the malfunction of a navigation unit in the satellite rocket that provided liftoff. (P Inq, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; W Post, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 20/91; LA Times, Nov 20/91; AP, Nov 20/91; UPI, Nov 20/91)
Scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico developed a new technique of "clustering" to speed the analysis of satellite images. The technique was being adapted for use in crop forecasting, land-use studies, pollution monitoring, and mineral and oil prospecting. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
Washington Technology carried two articles on NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS). The first discussed the possibility of the EOS instrument payload being divided among three launch vehicles while still maintaining its "simultaneity." The second quoted NASA officials Lennard Fisk and Shelby Tilford as addressing the EOS Engineering Review Panel in La Jolla, California. They said NASA had devised a restructured plan to remove several of the EOS satellite sensors and replace them with "ballast" of thousands of pounds of lead to maintain payload balance. (Washington Technology, Aug 8/91)
Ivan Bekey, a NASA space power expert, was quoted by the New York Times in connection with an article on solar power from space. Bekey said that power beaming was not a problem. Rather, the difficulty was getting a large enough satellite into orbit. Currently large satellites ran between 20,000 to 30,000 pounds whereas a satellite to enable developing solar power would need to be some 100 times larger than that. Another possibility would be to mine the silicon for the solar cells and the aluminum for the structure from the moon. Those materials might make up 90 percent of the mass, meaning less weight would need to be launched from Earth. Bekey foresaw that developing power from space would be 20 or 30 years away. (NY Times, Dec 25/91)
Extensive media coverage preceded the scheduled launching of Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12. The countdown was planned to begin on September 9, but the discovery of a leak in the orbital steering system might delay the mission. The flight was to be the first in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program and was to place into orbit the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). The UARS was to carry 10 scientific instruments, of which four would study the ozone layer. (AP, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 8/91; W Post, Sep 8/91; NY Times, Sep 8/91; P Inq, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 9/91; W Times, Sep 9/91; USA Today, Sep 9/91; C Trin, Sep 9/91; B Sun, Sep 10/91; NY Times, Sep 10/91; P Inq, Sep 10/91; W Times, Sep 10/91; LA Times, Sep 10/91; AP, Sep 10/91; UPI, Sep 10/91)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the NIMBUS-7 satellite, indicated that a 4,800-mile-long cloud of sulfur dioxide was spread across the tropical Northern Hemisphere from the major eruption of Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines. (NASA Release 91-96; UPI, Jun 26/91)
A senior U.S. trade official, on condition of anonymity, stated that Japan had drafted a plan to subsidize the entry of several Japanese companies into the commercial satellite-building industry but abandoned the plan under U.S. pressure. Hiroshi Hirabayashi, economics minister at the Japanese Embassy in Washington, confirmed the existence of such a plan but said if implemented it would probably be limited to research satellites. (NY Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91)
UPI reported the practice countdown of the crew of Shuttle Atlantis for its flight July 23. NASA announced that Atlantis would put NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite into orbit on its mission in order to update the satellite tracking network. (UPI, Jul 3/91; unnumbered NASA General Release, undated)
An Atlas-2 rocket boosted an $85 million European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) 2 communications satellite into orbit from Cape Canaveral. The satellite was the third in a series of French-built relay stations designed to route television and radio telephone signals across Europe. (UPI, Dec 7/91)
Hughes Communications Galaxy is suing NASA because it refused to launch Hughes' satellites from the Space Shuttle after the Challenger accident. Edward Frankle, NASA general counsel, said the contract foresaw that Hughes might not get the service it signed up for. (B Sun, Mar 23/91; AP, Mar 25/91; W Times, Mar 26/91; W Post, Mar 26/91; P Inq, Mar 26/91; AP, Mar 26/91)
NASA announced information about the flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis scheduled for launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center. The Shuttle was to deploy NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) into orbit to update the satellite tracking network. Details of the TDRS, its size, capacities, and capabilities, were provided. (NASA Release 91-97)
A U.N.-sponsored study, the committee for which was co-chaired by Robert Watson, a NASA scientist, provided the first evidence of a summertime thinning of the Earth's protective ozone layer over parts of the Northern Hemisphere, including the United States. The findings were based on both ground and satellite data, according to Watson in a briefing. Evidence showed 3 percent of the summertime ozone layer and 6 percent of the wintertime ozone layer were lost over the middle-latitude regions during the 1980s; similar results were expected for the 1990s.
NASA announced that its newest Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, launched from Atlantis on August 2, 1991, was operational. This expanded the communications capability required by the increasing number of scientific spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-164; Business Wire, Oct 9/91)
NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), through its Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped the distribution of nitrogen throughout our galaxy. The COBE team reported this information at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measurements are unencumbered by atmospheric and instrument emission and enable astronomers to understand better the processes occurring throughout the Milky Way. Scientists can measure the wavelength of emissions from ionized nitrogen atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of three instruments aboard COBE, NASA's first satellite primarily designed for cosmological studies. The data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
NASA announced that November 19 had been set for the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis, which would carry a full load of military and scientific experiments during its 10-day mission. Of major importance would be its deployment of the latest in a series of Defense Support Program reconnaissance satellites (NASA Launch Advisory; AP, Nov 7/91; UPI, Nov 8/91)
AP quoted President Bush's science adviser, D. Allan Bromley, as saying that declassification of Star Wars technology would enable NASA to begin a $30 billion study of Earth's environment earlier and cheaper. Bromley added that the Defense Department and the Department of Energy would allow the use of some of their inventions for non-military purposes. The most important was a technology that allowed pointing an instrument from space with greater accuracy to a given spot on Earth and holding it, as well as a technique to fly individual satellites, bring them together, and lock them into formation so several satellites can look at the same spot on Earth. (AP, Oct 22/91)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
NASA stated that an artificial aurora borealis lasting from five to 15 minutes would be created by its satellite's release of chemicals the evening of January 10. The faux aurora is part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project of NASA and the Air Force, probing the Earth's magnetic field. (W Post, Jan 11/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; AP, Jan 11/91)
NASA announced that the second mission of the Pegasus air-launched space booster was scheduled for July 17. Pegasus was to be launched from below the wing of a NASA B-52 aircraft based at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Pegasus was to carry seven small Defense Department satellites for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and put them into low Earth orbit. (NASA Release N91-49)
NASA announced that the first demonstration of digital radio broadcasting via satellite to a mobile vehicle, would occur December 2-6 in Washington, D.C. The presentation represented a joint effort of NASA and the U.S. Information Agency's Voice of America. (NASA Release 91-196)
NASA announced that as a result of the work of its Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the arcjet thruster technology had been selected for station keeping use on AT&T's Telstar 4 communications satellites. Arcjet systems offer a significant improvement in propellant use over chemical and other electrically augmented thrusters, thus increasing the satellite's on-orbit lifetime or payload mass. (NASA Release 91-40)
The media reported that the National Space Council decided that the new Landsat satellite to study environmental changes on earth and military movements, Landsat VII, would be funded by NASA and the Defense Department. Landsat VII was to resemble Landsat VI, which was scheduled for launch in late 1992. NASA Administrator Richard Truly testified at a congressional hearing on the subject November 26. (WSJ, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; W Times, Nov 27/91)
UPI quoted the publication Aviation Week and Space Technology as saying that a huge Soviet SL-16 Zenit rocket carrying a spy satellite exploded shortly after launch on August 30. (UPI, Sep 7/91)
NASA announced the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite was scheduled to be launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on May 28, 1992. The delay in the originally scheduled launch time was caused by the need for Modular Antenna Pointing System acceptance testing, which was completed, and software/hardware verification, which remained to be completed. (NASA Release 91-207)
The Soviet Union launched a large new space satellite, Almaz-1, using a giant Proton booster rocket. Tass said Almaz-1 was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. The radar satellite would survey territory of the Soviet Union and other countries "in the interest of geology, cartography, ecology, and agriculture." The Almaz-1 was the first Soviet satellite to provide commercial services for the American market under long-term contracts. One of its principal customers was to be the US Defense Mapping Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed images of the Earth. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; LA Times, Apr 2/91)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite appeared to confirm aircraft and ground-based research about the chemical processes leading to ozone depletion. (NASA Release 91-155)
The United Nations (U.N.) reported that the world's ozone layer, particularly over the Antarctic, was thinner than ever and the "hole" over the Antarctic was increasing. However, U.N. scientist Ruman Bojkov said the U.S. Space Shuttle Challenger had not significantly contributed to the situation. Readings were taken by NASA satellites and ground-based spectrometers and the data analyzed by international scientists convened by the U.N. Environment Program and the World Meteorological Organization. Subsequently Environmental Protection Agency Administrator William K. Reilly said "The problem is more serious than we believed." (UPI, Oct 22/91; P Inq, Oct 23/91; W Post, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; WSJ, Oct 23/91; CSM, Oct 23/91; W Times, Oct 23/91; B Sun, Oct 23/91; LA Times, Oct 23/91)
According to Florida Today, a group of Florida universities hoped to attract a five-year, $5 million NASA grant to set up a commercial space development center. The center would focus on the commercial potential of advanced satellite communicatios technology. (Fla Today, Jun 16/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to Discovery's maneuvers as it conducted missile-detecting experiments for the Pentagon. The scientific satellite, which it launched previously, captured with infrared sensors and television cameras engine exhaust plumes and plumes from smaller steering jets. (B Sun, May 2/91; W Post, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; USA Today, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91 AP, May 2/91; UPI, May 2/91; CSM, May 3/91)
NASA issued a summary fact sheet on its earth science research programs. Past NASA satellite missions used various remote-sensing instruments to study parts of the Earth system. The Coastal Zone Color Scanner on Nimbus-7 observed the biological productivity of the oceans. The Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), on the same satellite, returned 12 years of data on global ozone levels and helped identify the Antarctic "ozone hole." In the 1990s, NASA was to study the interaction of all environmental factors air, water, land, and biological life, that make up the Earth system--to help decision makers understand global environmental trends and protect the planet.
Officials of the European Space Agency and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that scientific teams concerned with the Ulysses mission to the poles of the sun were preparing for physics investigations during Ulysses's forthcoming encounter with Jupiter. Ulysses was expected to reach Jupiter and its satellites on February 8, 1992, and make a two-week sweep past the planet. (NASA Release 91-82)
Paul Hays, scientist in charge for NASA of one of 10 instruments on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS), launched by Discovery on September 15, said the UARS discovered surprisingly violent, continent-size 200-mile-per-hour windstorms in a rarely studied part of the atmosphere known as the mesosphere. (AP, Dec 12/91; C Trin, Dec 13/91; P Inq, Dec 14/91; W Post, Dec 16/91; LA Times, Dec 16/91; NY Times, Dec 17/91)
An unmanned $45 million Delta 2 rocket carrying a $110 million NATO communications satellite to replace an older military spacecraft was launched on January 7 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The rocket was built by McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company and was the 202d launch of a Delta. The satellite, which would enable political and military leaders in the NATO area to communicate with one another, was the first of two advanced NATO 4 satellites built by British Aerospace. (AP, Jan 7/91; NY Times, Jan 9/91)
A solar flare, a strong release of energy from a small area of the sun, created the most intense geomagnetic storm on Earth since 1989. Such events increase radiation levels near Earth and affect electrical power systems, satellites, space missions, and communications and navigation systems. (UPI, Mar 27/91)
NASA's launch of the UARS satellite to study the ozone layer was covered extensively by the media. The launch was slightly delayed by communications hitches between ground and the satellite and communications difficulties continued after the launch. Later reports, however, indicated controllers had succeeded in getting the faulty data receiver to work. On September 16 the Discovery temporarily had to move to a lower orbit to avoid possible collision with an old Soviet rocket. (NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91; P Inq, Sep 15/91; W Post, Sep 15/91; AP, Sep 15/91; UPI, Sep 15/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 16/91; USA Today, Sep 16/91; W Post, Sep 16/91; W Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91; P Inq, Sep 17/91)
According to UPI, reporting from Soviet television, a small satellite launched from Mir Space Station had not operated since it was lifted one week previously. (UPI, Jun 23/91)
NASA announced that Franco Malerba would be Prime Payload Specialist and Umberto Guidoni Backup Payload Specialist for the Tethered Satellite System mission on Space Shuttle Atlantis in the summer of 1992. This is a cooperative mission between NASA and Italy's space agency, Agenzia Spaziale Italiana. (NASA Release 91-154)
In an article in the Science section, Time discussed the theory that a giant comet that struck the earth was responsible for killing off dinosaurs. In this connection, the findings of a team of scientists led by Charles Duller at NASA's Ames Research Center were mentioned. The team discovered from satellite photos of Yucatan the semicircle that might indicate a huge buried crater of an asteroid. (Time, Jul 1/91)
Thirteen European countries--Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland--met to discuss European Space Agency plans that were threatened by Germany's lack of funds. The German research budget was short $930 million because of an economic slowdown and the huge costs of German unification. The space agency's German Ariane rocket boosted at least 17 satellites into space and according to Germany's ZDF television network, was assured of funds. The question of funds for other projects, for which Germany and France were major funders, remained unclear. (AP, Nov 18/91; Science and Technology, Nov 25/91)
Orion Network Systems of Rockville, Maryland, has been gradually creating a private satellite communications network for businesses in the United States and Europe. It was awaiting approval for its financing from the Federal Communications Commission. The satellites were to be built by British Aerospace Limited and the launch was to be handled by General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services of San Diego, which would use Atlas rockets. (W Post, Feb 2/91)
According to UPI, a French Ariane rocket successfully boosted the first in a new series of advanced European environmental remote sensing satellites into orbit from the European Space Agency's jungle complex on South America's northern coast. The satellite, with a three-year life, had a radar system and other equipment to study Earth's oceans, ice packs, and land areas in great detail. (UPI, Jul 16/91; P Inq, Jul 18/91)
According to the Press Trust of India, quoting the Indian Space Research Organization, India's second remote-sensing satellite, launched on August 29 by a Soviet rocket from the Baikonur cosmodrome, sent back its first pictures August 30. (AP. Aug 30/91)
The Baltimore Sun discussed a cooperative program between NASA and the Italian Space Agency, which was to supply the satellite. The program involved a tethered satellite, a concept developed by engineers at Martin Marietta Corporation. Martin Marietta developed the boom that was to deploy the satellite, which would be connected to the Shuttle by a long "string" or cable. The first mission was to include an electrodynamics test in which the satellite and tether were to be used to generate electricity. (B Sun, Nov 28/91)
UPI reported that the NOAA-D spacecraft developed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA was scheduled for launch on May 14. The satellite, which was to measure temperatures on Earth's surface, including oceans, and gathering data on solar radiation, might help scientists better predict floods and understand the causes of droughts. (UPI, May 10/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the National Weather Service's one weather satellite was nearing the end of its life. However, NASA's next generation of satellites, one of which was to replace it, were three years behind schedule and $500 million over budget. The atmospheric sensor of the new model reportedly tested poorly, but NASA planned to launch it nevertheless. AP quoted Joan A. Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as saying that meanwhile there were contingency plans to use both NOAA and Defense Department polar orbiting satellites and a European weather satellite to watch hurricanes in the Atlantic and Caribbean.(P Inq, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91)
NASA announced that two additional releases, one of barium and one of lithium, would be made during February as part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CCRES). CCRES was a joint NASA-US Air Force program to study the Earth's magnetic fields and the effect of space radiation on spacecraft components. (NASA Release 91-22; AP, Feb 7/91)
According to the New York Times, the Space Studies Board of the National Research Council recommended that NASA move quickly to develop and deploy a system of Earth-monitoring satellites with the intention of studying climate. The proposed Earth Observing System called for six large, heavily instrumented orbiting platforms and smaller supplemental satellites, to cost $30 billion over the next 30 years. (NYT, Jul 14/91)
Hughes Aircraft Company said its Space and Communications Group had signed a $300 million contract to build three communications satellites for Alpha Lyracom, a private global communications satellite operator. The first satellite was scheduled for launch in May 1994 and is to serve the Pacific Ocean region. (WSJ, Nov 5/91)
The Washington Post reported on growing congressional hesitations about supporting NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program. Legislators recently realized the mission would cost almost as much as the Space Station although it would carry only robots, not people. The Senate recommended cutting $50 million from the administration's 1992 Earth Observing System (EOS) budget request. The EOS, which would involve a series of large, sophisticated satellites, is to be the centerpiece of the mission. The House cut $145 million from the proposed budget request. Meanwhile, a panel of aerospace experts is reviewing the EOS engineering design and posing difficult questions. (W Post, Aug 9/91)
Later in the 1990s, NASA will launch the Satellite Test of the Equivalence Principle (STEP) to compare the inertial and gravitational mass of two objects suspended in orbit. The launch relates to an international effort to study gravity and proposals for locating the National Science Foundation's $211 million Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory. (W Post, Mar 17/91)
NASA announced it would resume active space physics experiments by conducting several chemical releases in July and August with the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite. Barium vapor releases in the Caribbean area were involved. (NASA Release 91-107)
The European organization EUTELSAT selected the Ariane launch vehicle of Arianespace, Inc. for the fifth telecommunications second generation satellite EUTELSAT II-F5. This satellite is a Spacebus 100 spacecraft developed by Aerospatiale and MBB in Germany, with a payload provided by Alcatel. The satellite would provide full coverage of the European continent, parts of North Africa and the Middle East. (PR newswire, Mar 27/91)
NASA Combined Release and Radiation Effects satellite released a barium canister to gain data about the magnetosphere and more reliable predictions of magnetic disturbances in space. (AP, Feb 17/91; W Times, Feb 18/91)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement between the United States and Canada to participate in a five-year RADARSAT Earth-observation satellite mission. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly was one of the United States signers. RADARSAT was scheduled for launch in June 1994 using an expendable launch vehicle provided by NASA. RADARSAT would collect valuable economic and scientific data on ice and ocean surveillance and natural resource management, including surveillance of natural disasters. (NASA Release 91-34)
According to the press, Senate budget leaders expressed concern over NASA's ability to launch the GOES-NEXT weather satellite in time to meet weather monitoring needs. They urged that the National Weather Service buy a $100 million backup satellite, possibly obtaining one from Japan. NASA Administrator Richard Truly said NASA accepted responsibility for the delays and cost overruns in the construction of the new satellites. (W Post, Jul 11/91; NY Times, Jul 11/91; C Trin, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91)
NASA announced adjustments to the February 1991 Mixed Fleet Manifest as a result of the cracks discovered on Space Shuttle Discovery. Space Shuttle Atlantis was to fly in April; after repairs, Discovery (STS-39 mission) was to fly in May as was STS-40/Spacelab Life Sciences Mission aboard Columbia. The Tracking Data Relay Satellite Mission originally scheduled to fly on Discovery in July was to be on Atlantis in August. The Defense Support Program mission remained on Atlantis but was moved from August to December with the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. The International Microgravity Laboratory mission planned for December 1991 would become the first flight in 1992. The mixed cargo flight of the Tethered Satellite System and the European Space Agency's European Retrievable Carrier, originally scheduled for February 1992 on Discovery, would move to August 1992 on Atlantis. Other mid-1992 flights would remain as scheduled earlier. (NASA release 91-44; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91)
Joel S. Levine, a senior research scientist in the Atmospheric Sciences Division of NASA's Langley Research Center, commented on NASA's role in researching the contribution of fires to the "greenhouse effect." He indicated that the oil well fires in Kuwait could be the largest single contributor to this effect. However, forest fires and agricultural burning actually provided more carbon dioxide. NASA scientists studying the problem use satellite findings in their analyses. (Daily Press, Mar 10/91)
According to AP, two congressmen, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, and Sherwood Boehlert, Republican of New York, urged that the United States "borrow" or buy a GMS-5 weather satellite being built by the U.S. firm Hughes for Japan. This would allow NASA time to fix the problems with the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-Next. In connection with GOES, Washington Technology reported in some detail on the "troubled history" of the weather satellite and its contractors and congressional criticism of the program. The Christian Science Monitor reported on lessons learned from GOES-Next, including not to cut corners in developing sophisticated technology and the importance of sharing weather data globally. (AP, Aug 7/91; Washington Technology, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 20/91; H Post, Aug 21/91)
An editorial in a space publication criticized NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for its handling of GOES meteorological satellites. The magazine maintained that the two agencies failed "in their effort to balance the risk of buying new technology with the need to provide assured satellite service." (SP News, Oct 7-13/91)
According to AP, a communications satellite needed to transmit long-distance telephone calls made in Alaska was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. (AP, May 29/91; W Post, May 30/91)
NASA satellite observations indicated that Earth's protective ozone layer was thinning twice as fast as previously believed. The Environmental Protection Agency made the announcement. Richard S. Stolarski, a research scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, found a 4 percent to 5 percent average decrease over the 11-year period he studied. During the winter, the depletion was 8 percent to 9 percent of the layer. Several scientists have stressed the importance of the public developing "good sun habits" in relation to the ozone depletion and reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).(B Sun, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; WSJ, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; CSM, Apr 9/91)
Ariane 44L, the most powerful rocket of the Ariane series of Arianespace, the commercial branch of the European Space Agency, blasted into space the night of January 15 from the northeast coast of French Guiana in South America. The rocket carried two European communications satellite: Italsat I, the first experimental communications satellite of the Italian Space Agency, and Eutelsat II-F2, the second communications satellite of the European satellite organization. (W Times, Jan 16/91)
The upper stage of a commercial Atlas rocket made by General Dynamics Corporation carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation failed after liftoff from Cape Canaveral. Ron Maehl of General Electric Aerospace Group, which made the satellite, refused to state the cost for the spacecraft and the launch, saying only that the rocket cost slightly more than the satellite. The accident was described as a major setback for General Dynamics whose Atlas program lost $300 million in 1990. Details of the stages of the Atlas-Centaur rocket and its intended use to replace the satellite destroyed in the explosion of a European Ariane rocket in February 1990 were given. (NY Times, Apr 19/91; B Sun, Apr 19/91; WSJ, Apr 19/91; UPI, Apr 19/91; AP, Apr 19/91; NY Times, Apr 20/91; W Post, Apr 20/91; P Inq, Apr 20/91)
In repositioning one of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites, TDRS-3, on October 22, it came near a Hughes Communications' Galaxy 1. On October 23 it disturbed GE Americom's Satcom 1R. The result was that cable television nationwide was disrupted. NASA Associate Administrator Charles T. Force said engineers suspected a hardware failure on TDRS caused the problem. (AvWk, Nov 4/91)
According to UPI, an Atlas-2 rocket built by General Dynamics Corporation was seriously damaged during a fueling test at the launch pad on August 25. As a result, the rocket's launch, which was to ferry a Defense Satellite Communications System satellite into orbit for the Pentagon, was postponed till November. (UPI, Sep 4/91)
Scientists studying data from the Magellan radar-mapping satellite around Venus concluded that Venus is not a twin of the Earth. Magellan has produced images 10 times sharper than any seen before of more than 97 percent of the planet's surface. Magellan's images show Venus to be as geologically active as the Earth, but whereas Earth's crust is shaped by continuous recycling, Venus' surface appears to evolve by building crust vertically as lava flows out of volcanoes or meteorite craters. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
NASA said the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite Conference '92, co-sponsored by NASA, Comsat Laboratories, Harris Corporation, and MITRE Corporation, scheduled for November 18-19 in Washington, D. C., would focus on pioneering communications technology developments to provide better service, lower cost, greater convenience, and improved reliability. The conference marked another of NASA's partnerships with industry in developing advanced technologies that create new markets and commercial applications. (NASA Release 92-206)
NASA's Tethered Satellite System Investigative Board released its report, presenting the panel's finding on problems which had prevented full deployment of the satellite during Space Shuttle mission STS-46. The report identified causes for four of five problems that occurred and made recommendations for actions to prevent similar occurrences in the future. (NASA Release 92-196; UPI, Nov 6/92)
Weather satellite officials at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration expressed concern about the heightened danger from hurricanes because of delays in modernizing the U.S. weather satellite system. The delays forced the use of antiquated and poorly positioned satellites that raised the risk of forecasting errors. Two hurricanes, Andrew and Iniki, showed the limits of the antiquated satellites. Replacement satellites were stymied by a series of technical failures, delaying the first launching from 1989 to 1994. In the meantime, the United States was borrowing surplus satellites from Europe. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Nov 15/92)
NASA announced that satellite measurements showed that the ozone hole over Antarctica was now the largest on record, being almost three times as large as the area of the United States. Measurements by the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer instrument aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite last Wednesday showed that the south polar territory under the depleted ozone area extended to about 8.9 million square miles, about 15 percent larger than the ozone hole measured in 1991. (NASA Relese 92-159; W Post, Sept 30/92; Time, Oct 5/92; AP, Sept 30/92; UPI, Sept 30/92)
NASA announced that astronomers using a new NASA satellite had detected a powerful, exotic object 2 billion light-years beyond the Milky Way Galaxy. The radiation source was observed by the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Spacecraft launched on June 7. (NASA Release 92-169)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA officials had scheduled an unprecedented spacewalk by three Shuttle astronauts to rescue a satellite. The agency decided to undertake the third and final three-man rescue attempt upon the request of Shuttle Endeavour's commander. (WSJ, May 13/92; USA Today, May 13/92; W Post, May 13/92; W Times, May 13/92; NY Times, May 13/92; LA Times, May 13/92; P Inq, May 13/92; AP, May 13/92; UPI, May 13/92)
NASA announced that the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) had resumed full science operations following the resolution of problems with the satellite's solar array drive. Flight controllers had turned off the satellite's instruments June 2 after observing that the solar array drive was not operating smoothly and that the solar array itself was not properly tracking the sun. UARS was launched September 12, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Discovery. It was designed to study the chemistry, dynamics, and energetics of the Earth's upper atmosphere, focusing particularly on ozone depletion. UARS was the first major satellite element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-117)
NASA's funding remained flat as Congressional appropriations committees completed work on NASA's 1993 budget. Although some high-profile programs such as the Space Station and a  constellation of environmental monitoring satellites emerged virtually unscathed, newer or less visible efforts suffered setbacks. An advanced series of tracking satellites, robotic missions to the moon, and a new generation of launchers were among the efforts put on hold for at least the next year. Spending on space research and technology was reduced by 13 percent. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
An Atlas 1 rocket tumbled out of control after one of two Centaur second-stage engines failed to ignite, destroying a cable television satellite in a $150 million failure for General Dynamics' commercial-launch business. It was the second catastrophic failure in seven flights for General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego, California, which was trying to overtake the European consortium Arianespace for control of the world's commercial launch market. Lost with the Atlas 1 was a  Galaxy 1R cable television relay station, a satellite built by Hughes Aircraft Company. (UPI, Aug 22/92; WSJ, Aug 24/92; LA Times, Aug 23/92)
The U.S. Defense Department announced that it had no further plans to use the Space Shuttle for major payloads after launch of a classified military satellite during a Shuttle flight in November. The Pentagon, which once had planned to be a prime user of the Space Shuttles, was to be relegated to a minor and occasional Shuttle customer. In place of the Shuttles, the Pentagon planned to rely much more heavily on expendable launch vehicles for military payloads. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA officials scheduled the next Shuttle launch for July 31, three weeks after the Shuttle Columbia returned from its record-breaking two-week mission. Atlantis' seven-day flight was slated to troll an Italian satellite on a 12-mile-long tether and to launch Eureca, a European satellite, on a one-year mission. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 26/92; W Times, Jul 27/92; NY Times, Jul 28/92)
Shuttle Columbia astronauts carried out experiments designed to ease reentry from space. They pedalled furiously on a stationary bicycle and floated in a depressurization sack to draw blood from the top of the body to the legs. They also grabbed an aluminum panel with the Shuttle's arm and swung it about the spacecraft's cargo bay to test a Canadian robotic vision system. A day earlier, they deployed the Lageos II geodynamics satellite. (NY Times, (Oct 25/92; W Post, Oct 25/92; P Inq Oct 24/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
Reuters reported that two telecommunications satellites worth more than 350 million dollars were placed into oribt for Japan and the Arab League after launch from a European base in French Guiana. (Reuters, Feb 26/92)
Albert Parry, 92, a professor emeritus of Russian civilization and language and founder and former chairman of the department of Russian studies at Colgate University, died in Los Angeles. In 1954, Dr. Parry warned in an article that the Soviets would soon be able to launch a space satellite, and in another article published in July 1957, he predicted the launching would occur on September 17. The Soviet Union launched Sputnik I on October 4. (NY Times, May 8/92)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
According to a released congressional study, a three billion dollar U.S. space agency satellite programme to monitor the environment would be useless without massive new computer technology. The study said that NASA would need the new technology to store and distribute the information its satellite programme gathers. The Earth Observing System (EOS) was designed to take continuous measurements of ozone depletion, global warming, polar ice melt, depletion of rainforests, and other environmental developments. But the study also indicated that the data collected by EOS would require vast new ways to store information and make available to a wide range of researchers. (Reuters, Feb 25/92; AP, Feb 25/92)
NASA managers set January 13 as the launch date for the first Shuttle mission of 1993. Designated STS-54, the flight was to have two primary objectives--deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-F) and astronomical observations of invisible x-ray sources within the Milky Way Galaxy with the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer. The crew was to be comprised of John Casper, commander, Don McMonagle, pilot, and three mission specialists, Mario Runco, Greg Harbaugh, and Susan Helms. (NASA Release N92-110; C Trib, Dec 23/92; AP, Dec 22/92; UPI, Dec 22/92)
The Shuttle Atlantis landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending a mission that deployed a European scientific satellite but that failed to complete an experiment with a tethered satellite. (USA Today, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 8/92; P Inq, Aug 9/92; W Post, Aug 9/92; The Sun, Aug 9/92; W Times, Aug 9/92; NY Times, Aug 9/92; CSM, Aug 10/92; WSJ, Aug 10/92)
NASA announced that its Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite had detected an object emitting extreme ultraviolet radiation located outside the Milky Way galaxy through interstellar dust and gas, once thought to block this source of radiation. EUVE also had detected a new source of extreme ultraviolet radiation coming from the corona of a star much like the sun located about 16 light-years from Earth. The EUVE satellite, now six weeks into a survey of the entire sky in extreme ultraviolet wavelengths, was intended to provide astronomers with their first detailed maps in multiple extreme ultraviolet energy bands. (NASA Release 92-138)
Shuttle Atlantis' astronauts unreeled a tethered satellite in a risky electrical experiment never before tried in space, but the effort immediately ran into difficulties. Four hours and about a dozen tries were needed to free the satellite from the Shuttle. Then the unreeling tether line jammed twice, and the satellite ended the day about 850 feet instead of twelve and one-half miles from the Shuttle. NASA added an eighth day to Atlantis' mission because of problems with the Eureca and tethered satellite experiments. (W Post, Aug 5/92; The Sun, Aug 5/92; LA Times, Aug 5/92; WSJ, Aug 5/92; USA Today, Aug 5/92; NY Times, Aug 5/92; P Inq, Aug 5/92; W Times, Aug 5/92; APn, Aug 5/92; UPI, Aug 5/92; C Trib, Aug 5/92; Time Magazine, Aug 17/92)
A 15-story unmanned Atlas rocket was launched into space with a military communications satellite intended to link the White House with U.S. forces around the world during nuclear attacks or other crisis. In peacetime, the $130 million satellite was to serve as a switchboard for the Defense Department personnel. (B Sun, Feb 11/92; AP, Feb 11/92)
The North American Air Defense Command said that it was tracking nearly 7,000 spacecraft and pieces of debris bigger than a square yard that were in orbit around the Earth. The proliferating use of satellites has resulted in a ring of several hundred of the spacecraft around the Earth's equator, most in low-Earth to mid-Earth orbit. As a result, concerns were being raised about possible interference from one satellite to another and about the need for adequate distance between satellites in view of plans for more satellites in the 1990s. (W Times, Jul 19/92)
A Russian space capsule containing a cut-glass replica of the Statue of Liberty and greetings from Russian President Boris N. Yelstin splashed down in the Pacific Ocean off Washington state. The Resource 500 satellite was billed as Russia's first private space launch and honored the 500th anniversary of the voyage of Columbus in 1492. (The Sun, Nov 23/92; P Inq, Nov 23/92 and Nov 25/92; W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; USA Today, Nov 23/92; UPI, Nov 23/92; LA Times, Nov 25/92)
Astronauts on the Shuttle Atlantis cleared a snag in the tether cord linking the Italian-built satellite to the Shuttle and safely reeled the satellite back into the Shuttle's cargo bay, averting the need for an emergency space walk. The satellite flew above Atlantis for 24 hours, never going higher than 850 feet on the tether, far short of the twelve-and-one-half mile target. Even though the experiment fell short of its goal of generating electricity with a tethered satellite, the exercise showed that tethered vehicles probably can be reliably controlled in space. (LA Times, Aug 6/92; P Inq, Aug 6/92; W Post, Aug 6/92; W Times, Aug 6/92; NY Times, Aug 6/92, Aug 9/92; USA Today, Aug 6/92; WSJ, Aug 6/92; APn, Aug 6/92, Aug 8/92; UPI, Aug 6/92, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 6/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
NASA announced that more than 200 scientists from 13 countries were participating in a science expedition, spearheaded by NASA, to investigate newly discovered concentrations of harmfull ozone over large regions of southern Africa and Brazil. The ozone pollution was recently uncovered by satellite analysis. (NASA Release 92-155)
U.S. scientists solved a 20-year-old mystery about the nature of Geminga, one of the brightest emitters of high-energy gamma rays in the sky. Using data from two different spacecraft, scientists now know that the power plant in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern of Columbia University and Dr. Stephen Holt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center reported that they had observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga using data from the German/American Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT). These observations firmly establish Geminga as a close cousin of the Crab and Vela nebulae, which also have pulsating neutron stars at their cores. The rotating neutron star produces focused beams of radiation much like the periodic flashing or pulsating lighthouse beacon. (NASA Release 92-69)
A task group looking into issues concerning future satellite rescue and repair said NASA should continue to perform such missions but only when they "produce genuine benefits to U. S. interests in view of the inherent risks to the Shuttle and its crew." The task force also recommended that NASA should charge higher fees for the risky and expensive work of retrieving commercial satellites with the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 92-197; The Sun, Nov 7/92; AP, Nov. 6/92; W Post, Nov 7/92; Space News, Nov 16-22/92)
NASA announced that a Board of Investigation had been formed to assess the problem of the fouled tether that prevented the successful release of the Tethered Satellite System during Shuttle Atlantis' just-completed flight. NASA officials said that any decision about reflight of the $380 million tether system would depend in part on a quick determination of what went wrong and how much it would cost to solve the problem. NASA set an August 28 deadline for the board to report its findings. (NASA Release 92-129; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92, Aug 17/92)
Chinese engineers blamed a faulty ignition circuit for botching the launch of an Australian communications satellite. Investigators checking the Long March-2E rocket that failed to blast off on March 22 found a fault in the ignition system circuits that led to an emergency engine shutdown. According to Chinese officials, the launch will be attempted again later during the year. (P Inq, Mar 30/92)
NASA set a December 2d launch date for the year's eighth and last Shuttle flight, a military mission, designated STS-53. Five astronauts, all military men, will release a classified satellite, thought to be a Lacrosse radar-imaging satellite from the Shuttle Discovery. Crew members are David Walker, commander; Robert Cabana, co-pilot; James Voss, Guion Bluford, and Michael Richard Clifford. (W Times, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
NASA set an October 22 launch date for Space Shuttle Columbia's satellite-delivery and research mission. The six-member crew was to release the Itlian Space Agency's Laser Geodynamic Satellite, or Lageos, then conduct spacecraft tracking experiments and mechanical and medical tests. (NASA Release N92-88; LA Times, Oct 7/92)
A U.S.-French satellite roared into orbit aboard a European Ariane 4 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. The $706 million Topex-Poseidon satellite carried a $30 million altimeter designed for NASA by Johns Hopkins University scientists to measure ocean topography to within 1.2 inches or less from 830 miles in space. During the next three to five years, scientists hoped to use the altimeter to make a comprehensive map of ocean currents, aiding the study of how they pump heat from the tropics to the poles. NASA said the research could eventually improve long-range climate forecasts and predict large-scale weather patterns, such as the El Nino warming trend in the eastern Pacific Ocean, and help in understanding the impact of green-house gases on climate. Also in the payload were a small South Korean communications satellite and a French technological satellite. (The Sun, Aug 10/92; USA Today, Aug 11/92; AP, Aug 10/92; LA Times, Aug 13/92)
NASA launched a rocket carrying a Japanese scientific satellite called "Geotail" that will swing by the moon and be flung by lunar gravity nearly a million miles into space. The satellite was intended to explore the effect of the solar wind on the tail of the magnetosphere, a comet- shaped region surrounding Earth and containing radiation belts. The $160 million, four-year mission was a joint project between NASA and the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science. (W Post, Jul 25/92; APn, Jul 24/92)
The Delta launch team at Cape Canavaral Air Force Station reported that the McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company group was gearing up for two launches in the next 25 days. The first, a mission to deploy an Indonesian communications satellite, and the second, a mission during which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer would be hurled into orbit, was scheduled for launch June 4, 1992. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
The Associated Press reported that Japanese space officials recently had travelled to Russia for two weeks of talks and tours of previously off-limits space facilities. During the trip, the officials discussed a space cooperation treaty that would grant Japan access to Russian manned spaceflight data for use in medical research and to remote-sensing technology for use on satellites. (AP, Aug 9/92)
A satellite launched to study oceans and global climate was maneuvered into position Monday for months of tests before beginning its mission. The Topex-Poseidon, the first major space mission conducted jointed by the United States and France, was launched August 10 from French Guiana. (AP, Sept 21/92)
Scientists from the United States and Australia announced completion of the Southern Ocean Waves Experiment. From June 6 through June 18, the scientists observed how ocean winds and waves affect one another off the coast of Australia. Project findings were expected to improve the reliability of ocean wave forecasting and to improve measurements from the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite. This satellite, a joint U.S./French venture, was scheduled for launch in August 1992 and was to study ocean topography and circulation, leading to better understanding of the oceans' role in global climate change. (NASA Release 92-109)
Congressional investigators said that the space agency's Earth-observing satellite program was flawed because of risky plans for gathering information from the satellites. (NY Times, Feb 27/92)
The Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science announced in Washington, D.C., that scientists from the United States, Japan, Russia, and Europe were mounting a coordinated, multi-mission effort in solar-terrestrial science during the next four years. The effort began with the launch of Japan's Geotail satellite in July 1992 and was to continue with the 1993 launch of NASA's WIND spacecraft and missions from Russia in 1993 and Europe in 1995. NASA's Interplanetary Monitoring Platform and Japan's AKEBONO spacecraft were to provide important data as well. (NASA Release 92-193)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
India launched a research satellite into orbit using local technology in what officials called an important milestone in the country's ambitious space program. The 750-foot rocket blasted off from an island off the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. Nine minutes into the flight, the $7 million rocket propelled a research satellite into orbit 280 miles above earth. The flight was pronounced a total success. (W Times, May 21/92)
A team of scientists using two satellites in orbit announced they had solved the puzzle of a mysterious source of high-energy gamma rays, located in the direction of the constellation Gemini and known as Geminga. According to a report in the journal Nature, the gamma rays were flowing from a spinning 300,000 year old  neutron star or pulsar. Scientists do not understand why Geminga favors gamma rays over other wavelengths. Two other bright sources of gamma rays already known to be pulsars, buried within the Crab and Vela supernova remnants, emit radiation in x-ray, radio, and optical wavelenghts. (W Post, May 26/92; P Inq, May 22/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed at Cape Canaveral, ending a 10-day journey during which the crew released a laser-reflecting satellite and tested a robotic eye. (NY Times, Nov 2/92; P Inq, Nov 2/92; W Post, Nov 2/92; W Times, Nov 2/92; AP, Nov 2/92; UPI, Nov 2/92; The Sun, Nov 2/92)
Astronaut Kathryn Thornton became the second woman to walk in space when she floated into the open cargo bay of Endeavour and tested techniques for building a Space Station. Thornton was accompanied by Thomas Akers, one of three men who had captured a wayward satellite the day before. (C Trib, May 15/92)
NASA scientists were baffled by a brownish discoloration, representing some kind of growth, on the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) satellite. The LDEF was retrieved by a Space Shuttle in January 1990. Whatever the growth, it had formed in space and despite high ultraviolet radiation and the corrosive power of atomic oxygen. (W Times, Sept 9/92)
NASA scientists began a new attempt to open the stuck antenna on the Galileo space probe by rotating the satellite to point the antenna toward the sun. They hoped the warmth would expand the metal fittings and release the stuck mechanism. If this maneuver fails, they were prepared to turn the antenna's electric motors on and off at rapid intervals to "hammer" the jammed mechanism in a final bid to overpower what they believed were stuck pins and pop open the antenna. (W Post, Dec 26/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; The Sun, Dec 26/92, Dec 30/92, Dec 31/92; USA Today, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; UPI, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; P Inq, Dec 31/92; W Times, Dec 31/92)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
Three American astronauts took a historic spacewalk using their gloved hands to make a last-ditch rescue of a wayward satellite. It was the first time so many astronsuts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands. All previous salvage operations had mainly used some type of high-technology hardware. At 230 miles above the Earth, the three astronauts of the Space Shuttle Endeavour grabbed the wobbling 4.5 ton, 17 foot satellite and stopped its rotation, holding it motionless for about a minute while sloshing fuel settled down. (NY Times, May 14/92; B Sun, May 14/92; USA Today, May 14/92; W Times, May 14/92; W Post, May 14/92; P Inq, May 14/92; AP, May 14/92)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported last week that Hermes, the ESA's spaceplane program, already scaled back to an unmanned demonstrator, would have to be downgraded to a technology development program because of budgetary constraints. On another project, ESA's scientists were evaluating data from a test of inter-satellite communications conducted by Eureca, ESA's large, retrievable satellite. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
The countdown for the December 2 launch of the Shuttle Discovery began, the 10th and allegedly the last Shuttle mission dedicated to U. S. Department of Defense work. Aside from releasing a secret military satellite, astronauts were to conduct a number of military experiments, such as testing a Shuttle laser system and releasing of metal balls to be tracked by space debris researchers. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 28/92 and Nov 29/92; W Times, Nov 28/92; Nov 29/92, and Nov 30/92; CSM, Nov 27/92; P Inq, Nov 30/92; USA Today, Nov 30/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
The Pentagon, bowing to congressional pressure, revealed the existence of the super-secret agency that buys and operates the nation's spy satellites and its other airborne espionage systems. The National Reconnaissance Office's mission is to ensure that the United States has the technology and spaceborne and airborne assets needed to acquire intelligence worldwide, according to the Pentagon. (P Inq, Sept 1992; C Trib, Sept 18/92)
Associated Press reported that a military satellite capable of guiding warplanes, ships and tanks with an accuracy of 50 feet or better circled Earth Monday after a ride on a Delta rocket. (AP, Feb 24/92)
The countdown began for the launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia on a research and satellite delivery mission. (NY Times, Oct 20/92; UPI, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, said it had won a $13.5 million contract from Brazil's civilian space agency to launch a remote-sensing and date-relay satellite in 1992. (W Times, Sept 2/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Astronauts had to wait more than two hours before debarking because of toxic fumes from a leaking thruster. The main mission, the deployment of a secret Pentagon satellite, occurred soon after launch in what was the last Shuttle mission for the U. S. military. The day before, the Shuttle had to swerve in orbit to avoid a four-inch piece of space junk, the third such incident in two years. (The Sun, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; UPI, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; NY Times, Dec 10/92; WSJ, Dec 10/92; P Inq, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 13/92; USA Today, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 11/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off on a secret mission for the Pentagon, carrying what analysts surmised was a spy satellite to monitor troop movements in Eastern Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. Several days of technology and medical experiments were also scheduled for the week-long mission. The launch was delayed 85 minutes while the sun melted a thick coat of ice from its fuel tank. This eighth and last Shuttle mission of 1992, the 52d for NASA's program, concluded NASA's busiest year since 1985, when nine Shuttles flew. It was also the last to carry a classified military cargo.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed an agreement with International Technology Underwriters (INTEC) to explore ways that the insurance industry can assist in financing human and robotic satellite rescue and repair missions. INTEC would also look at options for providing incentives in the construction of commercial satellites to make them easier to rescue and repair if problems develop. "We need to consider new approaches to salvaging satellites that will encourage the further commercialization of space, such as robotic rescues in high and lower orbits," Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-99)
During the Soviet period, Ukrainian scientists and industry were an integral part of the Soviet space program, which employed over 250,000 people. When the breakup of the Soviet Union fragmented its space program, Ukraine gained one of the world's most advanced aerospace industries, capable of producing everything from rockets to satellites. However, without the Soviet Union to pour money into space exploration, Ukraine was looking for new ways to keep its aerospace industry working. (LA Times, Apr 24/92)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
NASA ground controllers said they had reactivated two key scientific instruments aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and hoped to revive the other eight in coming weeks following two major glitches with the motors that drive the solar power array. The problems had sent the satellite into a quiescent safe mode June 1 and 2. The Microwave Limb Sounder, which helps measure ozone depletion, and the Cryogenic Limb Array Etalon Spectrometer, which has a limited lifetime, were restored to service.  (Space News, Jul 7/92)
NASA scientists at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco said that a NASA satellite had provided overwhelming evidence that industrial pollutants were responsible for the hole in Earth's protective ozone layer above Antarctica. The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, launched in 1991, also had produced evidence that the Antarctic ozone hole may act as a "sink," sucking in and destroying ozone from much of the Southern Hemisphere. (AP, Dec 10/92)
NASA announced that it expected to launch a radar satellite in August that would sweep above the Bering Sea off Alaska and beam down a detailed radar snapshot giving the location of every fishing vessel. The project was intended to be the beginning of a foolproof system to police the world's fishing grounds against pirate trawlers. NASA expected to spend $650,000 as its share of a program to transfer its sophisticated technology to commercial uses. (P Inq, Jul 9/92)
Lockheed Corporation formed a joint venture with Russian aerospace firm Krunichev Enterprise to market the Russian-built Proton rocket for commercial satellite launches, a move that could help make Russia one of the dominant forces in the world-wide commercial launch business. Lockheed was to be responsible for marketing the Russian rocket to Western customers and would provide payload integration. Rockets were to be launched from the Baikonur site in Kazakhstan. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; LA Times, Dec 29/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
NASA launched the first of its new, low-cost spacecraft, the Solar, Anomalous, and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer satellite (SAMPEX) aboard a four-stage Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The spacecraft was designed to study anomalous cosmic rays in an effort to improve understanding of the evolution of the sun, the solar system, and the Milky Way Galaxy. (NASA Release 29-102; The Sun, Jul 4/92; P Inq, Jul 4/92; W Times, Jul 4/92; W Post, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Company to build a data and information system for the Earth Orbiting System. The program, which would collect environmental data from satellites, was expected to cost NASA about $3 billion. (NASA Release C92-16; NY Times, Sept 30/92; WSJ, Sept 30/92; W Post, Sept 30/92; AvWk, Oct 5/92)
The Argentine weather service reported that the outer edge of the "ozone hole" has shifted for the first time to a populated island in Tierra del Fuego off the southern tip of the South American mainland. Data from NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer on the Nimbus 7 satellite confirmed that the area of depleted ozone extended for some 8.9 million square miles over the south polar region, an increase of about 15 percent from 1991, the largest ozone hole ever observed. (W Times, Oct 11/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; P Inq, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92)
The countdown began for the Space Shuttle Atlantis on a mission to test an Italian satellite linked to the Shuttle by 12 miles of electricity-generating cord. NASA officials said there was a 90 percent chance of acceptable launching conditions on July 31. (NY Times, Jul 29/92, Jul 31/92; CSM, Jul 29/92; UPI, Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; AP Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; The Sun, Jul 31/92; W Post, Jul 31/92; LA Times, Jul 31/92; P Inq, Jul 31/92)
The Air Force test-fired a new booster for the Titan IV rocket and said it was the second successful test since an explosion ruined a firing last year. The new booster would allow Titan IVs, which launch U. S. spy satellites, to carry heavier payloads. (AP Oct 16/92)
NASA launched a small satellite on a $19 million mission to help the Pentagon develop its strategic missile detection system. A Scout rocket lifted the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration-1 satellite into orbit. The satellite carried miniaturized cameras and sensors designed to detect an attack by medium-and short-range missiles. (W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; AP, Nov 21/92; P Inq, Nov 22/92)
The first meetings of the National Space Policy Assessment Task Group took place on October 1 and 2 in Washington, D. C. The group was considering policy changes to military, civilian, and commercial space efforts and ways to make them work more in tandem now that the Cold War had ended. At the meetings, government officials urged the group's members to privatize the weather satellite system, to call for revamping commercial space rules, and to decry missile proliferation. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
According to some scientists, recent observations by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) have shown exceptionally high levels of chlorine monoxide (CIO) at high northern latitudes, raising the possibility of enhanced ozone depletion over populated areas of the Earth. UARS's Microwave Limb Sounder (MLS) detected elevated levels of CIO over large areas of Europe and Asia north of about 50 degrees latitude. Dr. Joe Waters of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that high CIO levels were observed over Scandinavia and Northern Eurasia, including the cities of London, Moscow and Amsterdam. These CIO levels, approximately 1 part billion by volume, are comparable to levels observed within the Antarctic ozone hole. Waters said that sustained levels of CIO could lead to significant ozone destruction over the northern hemisphere and perhaps even lead to an ozone hole over the Arctic. (NASA Release 92-18)
The Eureca satellite that failed to enter proper orbit after being released from the Shuttle Atlantis responded to commands to boost itself into a higher orbit. The reusable satellite held experiments using shrimp eggs, seeds, crystals, bacteria spores, solar monitors, cosmic dust catchers, and a telescope. Its was slated to remain in orbit for several months before being retrieved and returned to Earth for study. (P Inq, Aug 7/92; LA Times, Aug 7/92; NY Times, Aug 7/92; W Times, Aug 7/92; USA Today, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 7/92; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
It was reported that Martin Marietta Corporation had abandoned the six-year venture into the commercial satellite launching business that it started in the summer of 1986, seven months after the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. The original plan was to build 20 Titan rockets for commercial launches. That number was reduced to 12, and the company charged $90 million to fourth-quarter earnings in 1988 for a reserve to help finance the launch venture. Martin eventually built only four commercial Titans, the last of which was scheduled for launch in September 1992, carrying a payload to map the surface of Mars and look for possible landing sites on that planet. (B Sun, May 8/92)
Loral Corporation became the first U.S. aerospace company to win government approval to buy advanced space technology from the former Soviet Union. The Defense Department authorized Loral's space systems division in Palo Alto, California, to import tiny electric satellite thrusters that are used to position satellites in space. Loral's Russian partners are Fakel Enterprises of Kaliningrad, which makes the so-called Hall thrusters, and the Research Institute of Applied Mechanics and Electrodynamics of Moscow. (WSJ, Apr 2/92)
Results from a recently completed U.S. multi-agency aircraft study indicated that the ozone shield of the Northern Hemisphere was increasingly vulnerable to depletion by man-made chemicals. Dr. James Anderson of Harvard University, the study's Mission scientist, and 80 other scientists of the second Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE II) used two NASA aircraft to examine the ozone-related chemistry and air motions of the lower stratosphere from early October 1991 through late March 1992. The extensive measurements, combined with satellite and meteorological data, provide the first detailed picture of the factors that drive changes in the Arctic ozone layer from fall, through winter, and into spring. (NASA Release 92-55; NASA Release 92-56)
During Space Shuttle Columbia's upcoming mission, scientists planned to test a theory which may have applications ranging from hurricane dynamics to superconductivity . The Lambda-Point Experiment was to study the strange behavior of helium at its critical temperature of 2.177 degrees above absolute zero. Other experiments were to study the effects of gravity on metals and semiconductors as they solidify on Earth and in orbit and vibrations in the Shuttle as the vibrations affect the other two experiments. The Shuttle crew was also scheduled to deploy the Laser Geodynamics Satellite, an Italian satellite to study the movements of the Earth's crust and other phenomena. (NASA Releases 92-175 and 92-176; LA Times, Oct 2/92)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
NASA announced that it had selected 31 experiments from the public and private sectors for inclusion in the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Program. Scheduled for launch in early 1993, this national communications facility was to operate as an orbiting testbed for the next generation of commercial communications satellites. A two-year experiment, the ACTS program was designed to offer a unique opportunity for commercial, governmental, and academic organizations to experiment with and to validate new communications satellite technologies. (NASA Release 92-134)
A spokesman for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization said a 23,000--pound rocket motor clamped to the marrooned Intelsat 6 satellite by the crew of Space Shuttle Endeavour fired fllawlwssly at 1:25 p.m. EDT while both were orbiting about 230 miles over Africa. The 122-nation consortium, based in Washington, owns and operates the $150-million satellite. (LA Times, May 15/92)
Two astronauts at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that they had evidence of planets or other bodies around eight stars they had studied in a star-forming region of the Milky Way Galaxy, 450 light years from Earth. The scientists, Drs. Kenneth Marsh and Michael J. Mahoney, said their discovery of unseen companions around low-mass stars in the Taurus-Auriga region of the Milky Way had resulted from the study of data from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in 1983 and data from ground-based observations acquired mostly from 1981-1983. (NASA Release 92-87)
Scientists reported that the eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines last June sent massive amounts of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, which in turn was contributing to erosion of Earth's protective ozone layer and to warming in the tropics. While the depletion could amount to 5 or 10 percent, the researchers expected the effect to be temporary.   Detailed observations of the ozone layer were being made by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite launched last year. (UPI, Aug 27/92)
Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis released the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, but it encountered immediate problems with its steering system and remained in too low an orbit. Engineers at the European Space Agency's control center in Darmstadt, Germany, struggled to understand the problem, hoping to boost the satellite into its proper orbit 320 miles above the Earth within  a day or two. (W Times, Aug 3/92; WSJ, Aug 3/92; The Sun, Aug 3/92; LA Times, Aug 3/92; NY Times, Aug 3/92; P Inq, Aug 3/92; APn, Aug 3/92; UPI, Aug 3/92)
Russia faced a new dispute over the famed Baikonur spaceport in Kazakhstan. Russian President Boris Yeltsin revealed that Kazakhstan had prevented the liftoff of a satellite at the Baikonur cosmodrome. "Kazakhstan was playing games. It wanted to show that there has to be a Russian-Kazakhstan agreement on Baikonur," Mr. Yeltsin said. Mr. Yeltsin said he would propose to Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev either joint financing of the famed spaceport, Russian purchase of the property, or a form of joint venture with the Kazakhstan republic. (W Times, Apr 30/92)
NASA reported that the TOPEX/POSEIDON satellite would be launched aboard an Ariane IV launch vehicle from the Guiana Space Center (CSG) in Kourou, French Guiana. The satellite, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, was to study ocean circulation and its role in regulating the global climate. (NASA Note N92-50)
Space Shuttle Endeavour touched down on Rogers Dry Lake, California, ending a historic, nine-day maiden voyage. The public's response to Endeavour's mission, which featured an unprecedented three-astronaut capture of a stranded communications satellite, was the most enthusiastic since the Shuttle program resumed in 1988, NASA officials said. A crowd of an estimated 125,000 turned out in the desert to watch the landing. (LA Times, May 17/92; P Inq, May 17/92; AP, May 16/92; W Times, May 17/92; B Sun, May 16/92; W Post, May 17/92)
NASA and several other U.S. and Canadian agencies announced selection of an international team of more than 200 scientists to study the relationships between northern forests and the atmosphere and how those relationships affect the global environment. The study, the Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study, was intended to conduct ground-based, air-borne, and satellite measurements in a four-year, $30-million program. NASA's component is part of Mission to Planet Earth, the agency's long-term effort to study the Earth as a global environmental system. (NASA Release 92-215)
Milton B. Ames Jr., 78, an aeronautical engineer who was mission director for the Pegasus satellite launches using Saturn rockets and who was a recepient of numerous NASA awards, died of heart failure at Mount Vernon Hospital, Alexandria, Virginia. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
The Tethered Satellite System Investigative Board presented an interim report on the cause of the failure of the tethered satellite experiment on the Shuttle Atlantis' mission earlier this month. Preliminary findings indicated that a bolt one-quarter of an inch in diameter got in the way of a reel of cord, causing it to jam. The bolt was part of a structural change made earlier this year to strengthen the tether system's attach points to withstand better the rigors of launch and landing, NASA said. Italian scientists hope to retry the experiment. A complete report was expected in about a month. (AP, Aug 29/92; API, Aug 28/92; UPI, Aug 28/92; NY Times, Aug 30/92; C Trib, Aug 30/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
NASA announced that a group of Alaskans had started a three-year experiment in the use of a small emergency radio transmitter known as a Personal Locator Beacon to communicate with a 10-year-old search and rescue satellite system that up to now had been used primarily for aircraft and ship emergencies. The locator beacon has the potential to save lives when used in emergencies in remote areas. The experiment was being carried out by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U. S. Air Force, and the U. S. Coast Guard. (NASA Release 92-115)
It was reported that in the upcoming flight of the Shuttle Endeavour, NASA would try for the first time to revitalize a crippled satellite while in orbit. During a four-day procedure, Endeavour's crew were to rendezvous with Intelsat 6, pull the satellite into the spaceship's cargo bay and mate it to a new solid rocket motor. Intelsat 6 then would be released and its rocket motor fired to send it into a 22,300 mile-hight orbit. The hope was that then, for the next 14 years, Intelsat 6 would relay trans-Atlantic telephone calls and television shows from Europe to North America and South America. (W Times, Apr 18/92)
NASA began assembling Space Shuttle Discovery for launch in December on a mission to deploy a secret Department of Defense satellite. Liftoff was scheduled for December 2, nearly a month behind schedule because of problems with a faulty steering engine. (P Inq, Nov 4/92; W Times, Nov 4/92)
In another article in Nature, scientists from NASA and Hughes STX Corporation in Lanham, Maryland, said that the uppermost part of Earth's protective ozone layer was about seven percent thinner in 1989 than it was in 1980. The conclusions were based on observations taken by the Nimbus-7 environmental research satellite launched in 1978 and refined by a calibration device on a Space Shuttle mission in October 1989. The new observations were consistent with previous projections of ozone depletion. (UPI Jul 9/92;
The United States and France recently announced plans to increase civil space program cooperation. The two countries said they were also prepared to invite Russia to join with them in new cooperative endeavors. The focus of this new cooperation was the monitoring of the global environment and bringing France and Russia in with the United States as major partners on the Mission to Planet Earth program. The August 10 launch of the U. S./French Topex-Poseidon ocean survey satellite laid the foundation for the U.S/French initiative. (AvWk, Aug 17/92)
Thomson Consumer Electronics, owned by the French electronics concern Thomson SA, said that it would help launch a satellite-to-home television broadcasting system through a venture with the Hughes Electronics division of General Motors Corporation. The system, called DirecTV, would be capable of providing more than 100 channels to 18-in-diameter outdoor satellite dishes. (B Sun, Feb 5/92)
A TRW unit was served with a whistle-blower lawsuit alleging that the firm made fraudulent claims for payments on government satellite contracts. The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, alleged that TRW's Space and Technology group in Redondo California Beach, used improper design standards for the spy, communications, and scientific satellites, then billed the government for the cost of correcting the errors. (LA Times, Mar 26/92)
A research arm of John Hopkins University was chosen to design a spacecraft intended to take the first close-up look at the kind of asteroid that could one day collide with Earth. Hopkin's Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, was given a $450,000 contract by NASA for preliminary work on the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous satellite, called NEAR. If NASA and Congress approved costruction of the compact $150 million spacecraft, it could begin orbiting an asteroid called "nereus" in January 2000. (B Sun, May 9/92)
It was reported that a Delta 2 rocket carrying a $65 million military navigation satellite was launched into space. The Global Positioning System "Navstar" satellite is the 12th in a globe-spanning network of such spacecraft that allow military forces on the ground, at sea and in the air to determine their location and altitude to within 53 feet anywhere in the world. After a flawless boost into space, the satellite was released into a preliminary orbit about 25 minutes after liftoff. On-board rockets were scheduled to fire later to put the satellite in a circular 12-hour orbit 12,5000 miles up. (UPI, Feb 23/92; B Sun, Feb 24/92; W Times, Feb 24/92; USA Today, Feb 24/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
NASA said that it was collaborating with Cray Research, Inc., of Eagan, Minnesota, to conduct joint research and development activities using the company's Cray T3D supercomputer. NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory expected to use the T3D system for applications that require high-power computers, such as turning planetary data from spacecraft into three-dimensional animations and analyzing Earth satellite data. (NASA Release 92-205; NY Times, Nov 17/92; WSJ, Nov 17/92; W Post, Nov 17/92)
NASA started a countdown toward test-firing the Space Shuttle Endeavour's main engines. Endeavour's three main engines were to be fired for 22 seconds. If all goes well, launch teams would begin preparing the Shuttle for a satellite rescue mission in early May 1992. (W Times, Apr 4/92; AP, Apr 4/92; UPI, Apr 6/92)
An article in the Washington Post discussed the failed launch of the 14-story Atlas-Centaur rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida on March 25. The rocket partially lost power 24 seconds after liftoff and sent its military communications satellite into a useless orbit. This was the third problem-filled General Dynamics launch in two years. Future launches were placed on hold until completion of investigation of the failed launch. (W Post, Apr 6/93)
Satellite research supported by NASA found that far fewer trees had been cut in the Amazon rain forest than previously assumed. However, the same study also found that three times as many animal and plant species were being killed or were near extinction than previously had been estimated. (AP, June 6/25; W Post, June 25/93; RTw, June 24/93; NY Times, June 29/93)
Shortly after Space Shuttle Endeavour's launch later this month, technicians and engineers from GTE Government Systems Corporation were to establish an almost continuous communications link with the Shuttle. The space link to earth would come through a system of tracking and data relay satellites (TDRS), which would be supplemented by a satellite carried by Endeavor. (Business Wire, Jan 5, 93).
Analysis of measurements from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE) satellite confirmed that Mount Pinatubo's eruption in the Philippines in June 1991 had resulted in a temporary cooling of the Earth that equated to a decrease in global surface temperature of approximately 1 degree Fahrenheit (0.5 degree Celsius). The data provided the first conclusive evidence of a significant change in global energy caused by a volcanic eruption. (NASA Release 93-41; P Inq, Mar 5/93; B Sun, Mar 5/93; NY Times, Mar 9/93)
NASA reported that Space Shuttle Discovery's astronauts had retrieved the $6 million satellite, called the Spartan, that they had released into space two days previously. When the Shuttle came to within 35 of the satellite, astronaut Ellen Ochoa grabbed it with the arm of the Space Shuttle's robot and placed it in its cradle in the Shuttle bay. The Spartan spent about 50 hours as a free-flying satellite with two automated telescopes gathering data about the sun and the solar wind streaming from it. (AP, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 13/93; W Times, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93; W Post, Apr 14/93; B Sun, Apr 14/93; P Inq, Apr 14/93; UPI, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; USA Today, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93, Apr 15/93; C Trib, Apr 15/93)
NASA said that satellite controllers had lost contact with the NOAA-13 satellite on August 21, and preliminary indications were that the spacecraft's power system was not working.  NOAA was the newest in a series of polar-orbiting weather satellites. Designed to monitor the Earth's ocean and atmosphere, it collects meteorological and ocean data for direct transmission to users around the world and to central data processing centers. (NASA Release 93-151)
New software, the New Spectral Imaging Processing System (NEWSIPS), was giving researchers a remarkably improved look at data from NASA's International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), the space agency's longest-running astronomical satellite in Earth orbit. (NASA Release 93-164)
According to the Wall Street Journal, five aerospace companies were proposing to revive planning for a advanced new rocket to carry satellites and other commercial payloads into space. The companies had asked NASA to join in planning and researching the project; they anticipated that it would help the U.S. gain a greater share of the commercial launch business now dominated by Arianspace, a European joint venture. (WSJ, May 6/93)
A two-ton chunk of a Chinese reconnaissance satellite launched earlier this month fell into the Pacific Ocean 1,000 miles west of Peru, the U.S. Space Command said. (USA Today, Oct. 28/93, Oct 29/93; P Inq, Oct 28/93, Oct 29/93; W Post, Oct 28/93, 29/93; NY Times, Oct 26/93)
NASA announced that sea surface measurements taken by the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite have confirmed that conditions are ripe for development of an El Nino even in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean this winter. (NASA Release 93-205; USA Today, Nov 10/93)
The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)
NASA announced that it had received a request from Russian physicians treating victims of the recent emergency in Moscow for medical assistance from U.S. clinicians.  The medical consultations were to use a previously established U.S./Russian satellite telemedicine program known as "Spacebridge to Moscow." NASA first became involved in satellite telemedicine programs in the 1970s when a NASA satellite was used for medical consultation and health care delivery to remote sites in Alaska. (NASA Release 93-183)
NASA said that the U.S.-French Topex-Poseidon satellite had revealed that sea levels dropped 12 inches off the East Coast during the period between October 1992 to March 1993 as cold winter air chilled the Atlantic Ocean and made the water contract. The satellite also found that sea levels rose 12 inches in parts of the Southern Hemisphere, where warm summer air heated the oceans and made the water expand.
Brazil was scheduled to begin a campaign in July  to fight the burning of the Amazon rain forest.  The months from July  to November make up the dry season in the Amazon, and clearing of the rain forest through burning largely occurs in that period.  NASA has agreed to monitor fires through its satellites and other equipment.  (Reuters, Jul 16/93)
NASA announced that NASA scientists had direct evidence that red supergiants--the largest stars known--end their existence in massive explosions known as supernovae. Until this week, astronomers could only speculate that these explosions represented the death of such stars. NASA's international Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite obtained the new evidence through observations of a new supernova on March 30. (NASA Release 93-63)
According to officials at NASA, a bad lot of batteries made by Gates Aerospace Battery Company, might shut down several satellites, including the $3633 million Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) sooner than expected. To make sure that UARS would finish its minimum 18-month mission, NASA scientists had to adjust the satellite's hardware. Instead of gathering extra data from UARS for 10 to 12 years as expected, scientists now estimate that contact with the satellite would last only four or five years. (Science, Feb 12/93)
NASA selected Allied-Signal Technical Services Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at $40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The contract was to directly support Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The SLR technique measures the round-trip flight time of very short laser pulses from ground-based stations to retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release C93-n)
According to news reports, Russia was scheduled to launch an Israeli-made communications satellite in 1995. This was the first such agreement between the two countries. (AP, Apr 21/93)
NASA announced that flight tests with a NASA research aircraft last week had demonstrated the first precision automatic approaches and landings using Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) navigation satellite signals.  The procedures were carried out without using complex processing techniques. (NASA Release 93-165)
Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
After making a final series of engine maneuvers that brought it within reach of the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca), a free-flying platform of science experiments, the commander of Shuttle Endeavour plucked the satellite out of space and stowed it in the Shuttle's cargo hold for return to earth.
NASA contracted with Stanford University to do additional work on the Gravity Probe-B experiment. The experiment tests predictions of the general theory of relativity. Gravity Probe-B determines how space and time are warped by the presence of the Earth and its rotation by measuring small changes in the spin of four gyroscopes in a satellite at 400 miles altitude in a Earth polar orbit. The first Shuttle test flight was scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release C93-b)
NASA and the seven Central America nations began a program to study, preserve, and protect the  region's rain forest by expanding the use of satellite data by Central American scientists. Under an agreement with the Central American Commission for Environment and Development, NASA would train and provide equipment to scientists from all the Central American countries. By using data from the Advanced Very High-Resolution Radiometers flying aboard several U.S. weather satellites, the scientists would be able to estimate the amount and type of vegetation cover and forest cover in the region and to conduct costal studies. (NASA Release 93-47)
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology( MIT) and NASA reported that water that evaporates on the equator flows towards the Earth's poles in airborne "rivers" of vapor that can equal the volume in the Amazon. Reginald E. Newell of MIT said that researchers were trying to determine how and why these atmospheric rivers occurred and what role, if any, they played in cyclones and other phenomena. The rivers were discovered using data collected in 1984 and 1991 by NASA's Measurement of Atmospheric Pollution by Satellite program and analyzed by the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. (LA Times, Jan 22/93; B Sun, Jan 22/93; AP, Jan 22/93; W Post, Jan 25/93; NY Times, Jan 26/93)
A $220 million Landsat 6 Earth Observation satellite was launched into the wrong orbit, and ground controllers were unable to make contact with the satellite, according to a mission spokeswoman for Earth Observation Satellite Company (ESAT). The satellite was supposed to go into orbit over the poles during a five-year mission studying the Earth's environment. An ESAT official said that the company hoped to get the satellite into the proper orbit by the end of the week.  (W Post, Oct 6/93; USA Today, AP, Oct 6/93)
A satellite was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying a military satellite designed to improve the accuracy of radars that track planes, missiles, space junk, shuttles, and other spacecraft. (AP, June 26/93)
After back-to-back failures, rocket-maker General Dynamics successfully launched a booster with a military communications satellite built to survive nuclear attack.  The 15-story Atlas blasted of from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (P Inq, Jul 20/93)
European space officials in Paris announced that Western Europe's Ariane rocket had deployed a U.S.-built television satellite on Wednesday after a launch from French Guiana. (RTw, May 11/93)
The Washington Times reported that a Russian communications satellite had been lost in a low orbit after the booster rocket apparently ran out of fuel. (W Times, May 29/93)
Fourteen scientists, most of them from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that world ozone had dropped to its lowest levels since scientists began monitoring the protective layer. The drop might be a delayed effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The scientists emphasized that the findings did not mean that the Northern Hemisphere was experiencing an "ozone hole" like the one that forms over the South pole, and that the ozone hole did not pose a significant health threat. The new findings were based on observations by several Earth-orbiting satellites operated by NASA and NOAA and confirmed by ground-based ozone monitoring instruments. (NASA Release 93-74; AP, Apr 22/93, Apr 23/93; USA Today, Apr 23/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; WSJ, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93)
The AP reported that the nonprofit group SatelLife, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, last year had launched a low-orbiting satellite that "talks" to the Internet and coordinates the Healthnet message-relay service connected with the satellite. The service makes it possible for remote regions of the world to receive much-needed medical advice. (AP, May 24/93)
NASA announced that a 12-member panel of experts from NASA and NOAA had been named to investigate the failure of the NOAA-13 meteorological satellite. (NASA Release 93-154)
Thirteen high school students from Laurel, Maryland, took control of a 400-pound, $20 million satellite as it beamed information for a solar particle study to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. To be on the safe side, a team of engineers stood by to make sure nothing untoward happened.
The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.
Western Europe's Ariane 42P rocket deployed an American communications satellite into space on June 24. The rocket, which was launched from French Guiana after a long series of delays, was owned by the Los Angeles based Hughes Space and Communications Company. (RTw, June 24/93)
An article in New Scientist suggested that many failures in space are not the fault of electronics or software, but something more fundamental--the mechanics.  The article identified a number of space missions that had problems caused by mechanical failures. Examples include the mission involving the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca); Germany's TVSAT1, a direct broadcast satellite launched in November 1987; and the Hubble Telescope. (New Scientist, Oct 30/93)
NASA announced that it had restructured the agreement under which Columbia leases the commercial C-band capacity on board two of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS)
NASA reported that NASA's Shuttle Mission, STS-57, scheduled for launch in early June, would highlight the beginning of a new era in the commercial development of space. The Endeavour's six-person crew was scheduled to retrieve a European satellite and also was scheduled to use experiments designed by and for students, operate a payload that might improve crystal growth techniques, and demonstrate possible on-earth refueling techniques. (NASA Release 093-78)
NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of the deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, are the principle data source providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms.  NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) were cooperating on a project to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning system. (NASA Release 93-213)
A $67 million weather satellite to track storms, floods, and environmental damage went into orbit aboard an Atlas-E-rocket.  It also was scheduled to be used to pinpoint the sites of plane crashes and shipwrecks.  The NOAA-13 satellite reached its 541-mile-high orbit on schedule.  The new satellite, which eventually was scheduled to replace the aging NOAA-11 satellite, was to circle Earth every 103 minutes and view the entire planet twice daily. (NY Times, Aug 10/93; RTw, Aug 10/93
Computers halted Shuttle Discovery's countdown only 19 seconds before launch when they sensed a problem with one of the spaceship's two booster rockets.  NASA said that the flight could not be rescheduled until sometime in the first week of August, after engineers had replaced a bad hydraulic power unit in the booster.  It was the second launch delay.  Five astronauts aimed to deploy an experimental communications satellite during the mission. (Rtw, Jul 24/93; AP, Jul 24/94; UPI, Jul 24/93; W Post, Jul 25/93; NY Times, Jul 25/93; W Times, Jul 25/93; USA Today, Jul 26/93)
Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)
A Titan 4 rocket carrying an expensive military spy satellite system exploded minutes after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base.  This, the first failure of the four-year-old Titan 4 program, was a $2-billion accident, said John Pike, director of the space policy project at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, a liberal group that researches classified aerospace projects. Pike consistently has criticized U.S. spy satellites. The accident wiped out most of the savings Congress took from the intelligence budget during the year. (RTw, Aug 2/93; AP, Aug 3/93; USA Today, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; LA Times, Aug 3/93; W Times, Aug 3/93; NY Times, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93)
As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use.
A study by James W. Elkins of the National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration found that worldwide emissions of the two worst ozone-destroying chemicals were slowing sooner than researchers had expected, and the gradual repair of Earth's ozone layer could begin by 2000. This news came as NASA satellite data indicated that the stratospheric ozone layer that shields the Earth from cancer-causing ultraviolet radiation had dropped to its lowest levels ever. A NASA official said that even with the peak in emissions of chlorofluorocarbons by 2000, it would take about a century for the ozone layer to recover to what it was before ozone-destroying chemicals began to be widely used in the 1960s and 1970s. (AP, Aug 25/93; USA Today, Aug 26/93; W Post, Aug 26/93; NY Times, Aug 30/93)
A Pegasus rocket launched from a B-52 bomber flying eight miles above the Atlantic Ocean propelled a Brazilian environmental satellite into orbit. The Pegasus was dropped off the wing of the B-52, which was modified by NASA. After five seconds of free fall, the rocket motors were fired one by one and lifted the satellite into an orbit about 470 miles high.
NASA announced that June 3, 1993 had been set as the target date for the STS-57 mission of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The mission would be highlighted by the retrieval of the European observation satellite EURECA and the first flight of Spacehab, a commercial spacelab facility. (NASA Editors Note N93-28)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)
Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)
Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, George Smoot, an astrophysicist at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley, California, described his cosmic research work  Using the space-time ripples that were discovered a year ago, Smoot and his group want to explore backward in time toward the universe's origin and forward to the universe of today. In its investigation, the group uses one of the instruments on the Cosmic Background Explorer Satellite to study the microwave radiation that permeates the cosmos. Cosmologists now have what Smoot compares to "a baby photograph of the universe at about five hours into a human lifetime."  That snapshot contains enough information to allow investigators to work backward and forward in time. (CSM, Mar 3/93)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
U.S. space pioneer William H. Pickering was the first recipient of the $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, the largest of its kind.  As director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Pickering prepared the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, for launch in just 83 days following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957. (W Post, Oct 7/93)
Government officials reported that a high-altitude weather satellite borrowed from Europe had been positioned to monitor the weather over the United States. It joined the GOES-7 U.S. weather satellite, which had been working alone since its companion satellite failed in 1989. The addition of the European satellite  restored the normal system of having two weather satellites in orbit, one each over the East and West Coasts. (NY Times, Feb 25/93)
NASA announced that an American satellite had detected the most intense flash of gamma radiation observed in the two years of its operation. The burst, known as "the super bowl" event because it occurred on the day of this year's National championship game, appeared to produce 10 times more energy than any previously observed gamma-ray burst. The burst also led scientists to say that the bursts were not the product of merely hot "cooking objects, but of particles being accelerated to near the speed of light and being emitted in focused beams, or jets. The new findings suggested that the bursts originated far beyond the Milky Way galaxy. (NASA Release 93-72; Reuters, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; APn, Apr 4/23)
At a recent meeting in St. Louis, astrophysicists discussed the mystery of blasts of gamma rays that appear every few days from somewhere, but never from the same place. After reviewing new satellite observations and discussing various theories, experts could not even determine where the gamma ray bursters, as they are called, were coming from.
NASA reported that an explosive designed to free a satellite aboard Space Shuttle Discovery accidentally detonated while the Shuttle was in orbit last month, hurling shrapnel though the cargo compartment.  The five astronauts were never in any danger, a NASA official said. The damage would not delay Discovery's next flight in January. (RTw, Oct 7/93; AP, Oct 8/93; Fla Today, Oct 11/93, Oct 14/93)
NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched on a satellite-deployment mission after two months of delays.  The liftoff had been postponed five times for equipment failure, payload problems, and a meteor shower.  After a short delay caused by a minor communications problem, astronauts on board successfully deployed the $363 million Advanced Communication Technology Satellite (ACTS). The satellite could one day shrink the diameter of satellite dishes to one and one-half feet.
NASA scientists reported that ozone-destroying forms of chlorine had  existed for much longer in the Arctic stratosphere this winter than last. Northern Hemisphere ozone abundance also was observed to be some 10 percent below that measured during the same period last year, with some areas 20 percent lower. NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) provided the information. (NASA Release 93-068; NY Times, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 14/93)
NASA announced that the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and California wine growers would use aerial and satellite images to battle an insect problem encountered by California's wine industry. Sensitive electronic scanners on aircraft and satellites would help a group from government, industry, and several universities map and analyze root louse damage in northern California's wine growing region this summer. (NASA Release 93-55; UPI, Mar 31/93; SF Chron, Mar 31/93; P Inq, May 2/93)
An official of Japan's Science and Technology Agency announced that it would spend $4.6 billion developing an unmanned Space Shuttle that would repair satellites, act as a space transporter, and serve as a laboratory for micro-gravity experiments. (Rtw, Jul 7/93)
Over the next two decades, NASA planned to launch more than two dozen satellites for its "Mission to Planet Earth." These satellites were scheduled to collect information about clouds, ocean circulation, and ice and pollution in order to help scientists refine their predictions of global warning. (Newsweek, Sep 20/93)
Europe's Arianespace Inc announced that it had signed a launch contract for two intelsat VIII satellites. The satellites were to be built by General Electric Corporation's Astro Space Division and launched in 1996 from a site in French Guiana. (W Times, Mar 5/93)
The New York Times reported that astronomers were worried about growing light pollution, which makes it very difficult for even the strong 200-inch telescope on Mount Palomar in California to pick up faint galaxies. Some cities, hoping that brighter lighting would deter crime, were installing white street lights as opposed to low-pressure sodium lamps, which are easily filtered from telescopes. In addition, a Georgia company announced plans to put a one-mile-reflective panel into space some time in 1996; the satellite, which would appear nearly as large as the moon, would add to the light pollution. (NY Times, May 9/93)
Florida Today reported that NASA was launching a new type of air-launched Pegasus rocket that activates only after being released from the wing of an aircraft. The winged vehicle, which was developed by Orbital Sciences Corporation, has a solid-fuel rocket that gives it the ability to put small satellites into orbit at a bargain price. Plans called for the Pegasus to carry a Brazilian remote sensing satellite. (Fl Today, Jan 4/93)
NASA announced that new information on the El Nino ocean current would be discussed at a briefing on the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite mission on February 26. The satellite was launched in August 1992 to map circulation of the world's oceans and study the oceans' role in climate. (NASA Release N93-08)
NASA announced that the location of a third radiation belt of cosmic rays had been pinpointed several hundred miles above the Earth. A NASA satellite, orbiting 375 above the Earth, had mapped a portion of the new belt. (NASA Release 93-94; AP, May 25/93; B Sun, May 26/93)
NASA announced that during the first six months of their mission scientists using the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanographic satellite had recorded the most accurate measurements to date of global sea level changes. Oceanographers would use the data to calibrate computer models that help forecast future climate changes. (NASA Release 93-122)
French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said that European countries should attempt to cooperate on space projects because progress in technology was a way to assert themselves on the world stage. He made the comment after talking by satellite link with a French cosmonaut who was on a joint Franco-Russian mission.  (RTw, Jul 7/93)
NASA ground crews began final preparations to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite delivery mission.  The liftoff was scheduled for August 12.  Discovery was to carry two satellites.  Five astronauts were scheduled to put one satellite in orbit to conduct advanced communications experiments.  The other, a telescope, was to be let out of the cargo bay for several days of celestial observations, then captured and returned to Earth.  (Rtw, Aug 9/93; AP, Aug 9/93, Aug 10/93; W Post, Aug 10/93; UPI, Aug 8/93)
Reuter reported that Arianespace had signed a contract for the launching of an Israeli Amos-l telecommunications satellite by an Ariane rocket in 1995. (RTw, May 28/93)
NASA reported that the new joint U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite  had observed giant waves measuring up to 40 feet high in the North Atlantic on March 14. The satellite's mission was "to study the dynamics of the currents of the world's oceans by measuring the sea level using a radar altimeter." (W Post, Apr 5/93)
NASA announced that scientists had found water molecules frozen in the surface ices of Jupiter's moon Io. According to Dr. Farid Salama, University of California, Berkeley, who led the project at NASA, "This is the first strong evidence of solid water on the surface of this satellite." (NASA Release 93-107; NY Times, June 15/93)
U.S. and European space officials announced that they had postponed a planned rocket firing intended to move the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) to a position where it could be retrieved by a Space Shuttle next month. An apparent gyroscope problem aboard the orbiting research satellite forced the postponement. (RTw, May 18/93)
August marked the tenth anniversary of the first use of NASA's Tracking Data and Relay Satellite System (TDRSS).  The system consists of several satellites plus a ground station at White Sands, New Mexico. (Onset Magazine, Aug 2/93)
The Washington Times reported that a group of five investors, headed by retired Navy Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, had signed a joint venture agreement with Russia's Association for the Conversion of Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles. The group planed to use Russian missiles to put satellites into low orbits to transmit telephone calls or computer data or carry out scientific experiments. (W Times, May 4/93)
The Danish industry ministry announced that Denmark was scheduled to take part in a scientific satellite project in cooperation with NASA in 1995. The project involved the launch of a small Danish satellite into orbit to study Earth's magnetic field. (RTw, June 21/93)
The magazine Science reported that some researchers were complaining that NASA was overselling its satellites' products. They cited as an example news stories that fueled excitement about images of what NASA called black holes. Referring to an image featured on the front page of a November issue of the New York Times, one expert said that labeling the pictured cloud of dust a black hole was largely wishful thinking on the part of the observers and the backers of the space telescope. Science noted that outside astronomers often criticized NASA press releases, charging that they were misleading. (Science, June 4/93)
NASA announced that it had set July 17 as the launch date for the Space Shuttle Discovery's 17th flight.  The nine-day mission of STS-51 was to include deployment of an Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) and deployment and retrieval of the German-built ORFEUS-SPAS astrophysics free-
Senator James M. Jeffords and a group of House members last month introduced an amendment to the Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 to prohibit the Department of Transportation from licensing a payload that would result in advertising from space.  The amendment was in response to a proposal by Space Marketing Inc. of Roswell, Georgia, to launch a mile-long inflatable billboard into space.  The company planned to stuff the billboard in a satellite; after the satellite reached orbit, it would open and the billboard would jump out like "a giant life raft."
Intelsat and Martin Marietta reached a tentative settlement of lawsuits connected with a communications satellite that Space Shuttle astronauts rescued after it was stranded in low orbit. The lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 1990 launch of a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went into a low, useless orbit after a Martin Marietta rocket launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts attached a new rocket booster package to the satellite in May 1992, and the satellite then fired itself into its proper orbit. (W Times, June 12/93; W Post, June 12/93)
At a public hearing on July 20, the National Transportation Safety Board described a scene of confusion in the mission control room during the launch of a Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia. Control room operators at a NASA command center in Wallops Island, Virginia, ordered the launch of the Pegasus from a B-52 bomber, then ordered the launch aborted, only to rescind that order seconds later. Federal safety officials want stricter controls over commercial satellite launches. (AP, Jul 21/93)
The Mars Observer failed to call Earth on August 25, when a five-day timer should have had it send an emergency signal, lessening hopes that the mission could be salvaged. Observer was the latest reminder of the growing problems of the U.S. space program.  The Observer failure added to a string of expensive space failures: the loss earlier in August of a $500-million spy satellite, then of a $67-million weather satellite, and a series of mishaps with NASA's orbiting observatories and other planetary probes.
NASA announced that it had successfully boosted its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory into a higher orbit around Earth, a move that would keep the 17-ton satellite from reentering the atmosphere. The reboost extended the mission life of the observatory by five years and prevented a reentry in which large parts from the spacecraft could have struck Earth, said officials at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, which managed the spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-224)
In an interview in the Scientist, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the current NASA reorganization would make science more of a priority in NASA and involve the science community in correcting problems at NASA. He stated, "NASA is science and exploration, not infrastructure and bureaucracy." In response to a question about jobs, he noted that NASA was not a jobs program, but rather existed for "inspiration and hope, and a basic understanding of science." He said that he hoped to launch a small discovery satellite every year, while cutting back Space Shuttle flights from 12 or 13 to six a year. (The Scientist, Jan 11/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18)
Space School, a method of teaching math and science that uses spaceage technology to beam educational "adventures" into classrooms across America, was scheduled to open August 30. Space School lessons, which were to be carried on a delivery system called "distance learning," would be broadcast from a studio in Spokane, Washington, beamed up to a satellite, down to a receiver, and transmitted to a television in the classroom. Space school was to be operated and partially financed by the Young Astronaut Council, a nonprofit organization started by the White House in 1894. (Parade, June 27/93)
According to a report in Reuters, the Arianespace consortium continued to be the world leader in number of commercial satellite launches. Ariane filled the void when NASA stopped launching commercial payloads after the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded in January 1986. U.S. launchers, especially the General Dynamics Atlas series, which has the capacity to launch large payloads, were fighting for each launch contract. (RTw, Mar 14/93)
WorldView Imaging of Livermore, California, received a government license to launch small, inexpensive spy satellites. Worldview claimed that it could take super-sharp photos from 250 feet up and sell the photos for about half the $4,000 charged by the government's Landsat and France's SPOT Image. Possible uses included traffic monitoring, urban planning, and corporate spying. (USA Today, Feb 12/93; NY Times, Feb 12/93)
Motorola Inc. announced yesterday that it had contracted with a Russian firm, Khrunichev Enterprises, to launch 21 of the satellites needed for Motorola's proposed $3.37 billion Iridlum communications network. The Iridium project, scheduled to begin operating in 1998, required various government approvals and a definitive financing agreement before it could go forward. (B Sun, Feb 4/93;  WSJ, Feb 4/93; W Times, Feb 4/93; C Trib, Feb 4/93; UPI, Feb 21/93)
A 240-pound Array of Low-Energy X-ray Imaging sensors (ALEXIS) satellite was launched into orbit April 25 aboard an Air Force Pegasus rocket for the Los Alamos National Laboratory in Mew Mexico. Officials at the New Mexico laboratory had hoped to demonstrate that they could handle space missions faster, better, and cheaper than NASA. However, one of the satellite's four solar panels was damaged during the launch, and the satellite was deemed a loss.
The 1993-94 season of NASA's Update for Teachers telecasts was scheduled to feature presentations on astronomy, life sciences, research, high-speed aeronautical research, and the environment and global change. The telecasts, a series of four, one-hour, live and interactive education television programs, were broadcast via satellite to schools in all 650 states, Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico between 3-4 p.m. Eastern time.  (NASA Release 93-150)
The LA Times announced that Russian space officials had signed a contract in late April for the first commercial launch of a Western-built satellite by a Russian rocket. The agreement was signed with Inmarsat, a 67-country consortium that puts up satellites for mobile communications. (LA Times, May 11/93)
Martin Marietta Corporation, which in one three-week period in August, saw one of its rockets explode soon after launch and two of its satellites lose contact with Earth, announced on September 3 that it was undertaking an internal investigation of all phases of its space division. (W Post, Sep 4/93)
NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93)
NASA announced that April marked the 10th anniversary of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a space-based network developed to meet telecommunications needs of Space Shuttle, Space Station, and other low Earth-orbiting spacecraft missions. The TDRSS is equipped to support up to 24 user spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle, simultaneously. (NASA Release 93-60)
French scientists, led by Dr. Jacques Laskar of the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris, writing in the journal Nature, and Dr. Jack Wisdom, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, writing in the journal Science, described the implications of chaos in the solar system. New computer simulations have revealed that over great spans of time, small gravitational disturbances from neighboring planets, combined with their own wobbly rotations, can cause significant fluctuations in the orbits and orientations of the planets, leading to, for example, great temperature fluctuations. Mars, for example, is still undergoing great variations. According to scientists, Earth may be spared such variations because of the stabilizing influence of the moon, the only large satellite in the inner solar system. (NY Times, Mar 2/93; Time, Mar 8/93)
A European Space Agency official said that a re-usable science satellite scheduled to be rescued during Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission next week would be mothballed after astronauts returned it to earth and experiments were removed from it. The satellite was scheduled to be flown four more times, but there was no budget for additional flights. (RTw, June 16/93)
NASA was scheduled to launch an unmanned Delta rocket with a military navigation satellite and NASA's tagalong tether experiment. The 12 1/2-mile tether, which is just three-hundredth of an inch thick--is wound around a spool. One end of the cord is tied to a 57-pound aluminum box. Everything is mounted on the rocket's second stage. NASA planned to pop the box off the spent booster an hour after the launch. As it shoots away, the box should cause the tether to unwind. Instruments on board would record the speed and tension of the tether and send the data to earth. (AP, Mar 18/93)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
Callers jammed switchboards at Cape Canaveral, Florida, reporting that a fiery object had lit up the night sky over the Southeast. People in Georgia, Alabama, North Carolina, and Tennessee reported seeing an object streak across the sky about 10 p.m. Tuesday. Some observers said the object hit the ground and exploded. NASA confirmed that it had launched a navigation satellite at that time, but the boosters fell into the Atlantic Ocean as planned, said Gary Peltier, a spokesman at Cape Canaveral. (AP, Feb 3/93; B Sun, Feb 4/93)
Antarctic ozone levels have reached record lows, according to data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Climate Monitoring and Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record low levels were recorded at the South Pole Station, Antarctica, at the end of September and early October 1993 and confirmed by satellite measurements. (NASA Release 93-190; B Sun, Oct 16/93; AP, Oct 18/93; NY Times, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chantilly, Virginia, unveiled the Orbcomm communications satellite, which was  designed to provide global personal communications service.  The company said it planned to initiate Orbcomm service in the United States by mid-1994 and planned worldwide service by 1995.  The Orbcomm system planned to provide low-cost, two-way data communications to users worldwide through a constellation of 26 small satellites. (W Times, Aug 26/93)
NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory was to receive a scheduled boost to a higher orbit beginning on October 4, to prevent the spacecraft from reentering the Earth's atmosphere. The reboost was necessary to compensate for orbit decay, which is the result of solar activity slowly pushing the satellite toward Earth over a period of time, said NASA officials. (NASA Release 93-179)
A Delta 2 rocket successfully ejected a television-size satellite on 12 and 1/2 miles of cord. The experiment demonstrated that tethers could be used to deploy small payloads in space, NASA said. The tether, which was thin as a kite string, dangled the 57-pound box for 90 minutes at an altitude of 450 feet. (W Post, Mar 31/93; NY Times, Mar 31/93; P Inq, Mar 31/93)
The Federal Aviation Administration authorized civilian pilots to use a satellite-based navigation system that would enable them to choose direct routes without relying on navigational aids on the ground. The system, the Global Positioning System, uses a network of 24 satellites orbiting 11,000 miles above the Earth. Each satellite sends out a continuous signal that can be computed by receivers to determine an exact position. (NY Times, June 10/93)
Scientists of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which managed the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanography satellite, had been studying data it developed. The findings from two years of monitoring the oceans, which were to be announced at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, indicated that the average sea level had risen about 0.12 inches a year from December 1992 to September 1994. Such a rise was an indicator of global change and supported theories than an increase in "greenhouse" gases was causing long-term global warming. (Pasadena Star News, Dec 7/94)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) authorized airlines to begin using military satellite signals for navigation. The military's Global Positioning System, consisting of 24 orbiting satellites, according to the airlines would save them millions of dollars by flying more efficient routes. It was unclear what the FAA would do with existing microwave landing systems. (WSJ, Feb 18/94; W Post, Feb 18/94; NY Times, Feb 18/94)
NASA announced that transmission of data from Galileo spacecraft indicated its observation of what was probably a satellite of the asteroid Ida, which would be the first moon of an asteroid ever sighted. The flyby of Ida occurred August 28, 1993. (NASA Release 94-34; AP, Mar 4/94)
NASA announced that a new satellite, the NOAA-J, a joint project of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to be launched on December 4 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The new satellite would circle the Earth every 102 minutes, passing over the North and South Poles on each orbit. The satellite would collect meteorological data and transmit them directly to users around the world to enhance local weather analysis and forecasting. (NASA Release 94-189)
NASA announced the members of the mid-1995 Space Shuttle mission that was scheduled to carry a NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. The satellite was intended to provide for telecommunications needs essential to the success of Space Shuttle and low-Earth orbit spacecraft missions. The Space Shuttle was to be commanded by Terence T. Henricks. (NASA Release 94-141)
The U.S. company Space Express Corporation planned to build a rocket launch site in northern Germany to send satellites into space, according to Stern magazine. Richard Coleman, head of the Washington, D.C.-based company, discussed the project with NASA. (UP, Apr 27/94)
On February 5 and 6, NASA astronauts tried unsuccessfully to put the Wake Shield Facility satellite in orbit. They encountered problems first with radio interference from the Shuttle and then with failures in the satellite's guidance and navigation system. (UPI, Feb 6/94; Reuters, Feb 6/94; NY Times, Feb 6/94; W Post, Feb 6/94; NY Times, Feb 7/94; W Post, Feb 7/94; USA Today, Feb 7/94; P Inq, Feb 7/94; B Sun, Feb 7/94; AP, Feb 7/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth after making an additional orbit because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. In spite of its inability to release the Wake Shield Facility, that satellite was the site for growing high-grade semiconductor films while attached to Discovery. Discovery also conducted 12 experiments in Spacehab, a commercial laboratory, in the cargo bay. (NY Times, Feb 12/94; B Sun, Feb 12/94; W Post, Feb 12/94; AP, Feb 12/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
NASA scientist Michael Van Woert discussed plans for a satellite in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, which was to be a follow-on to the U.S./French topex/Poseidon then in orbit. The successor, to be launched in 1998, would be smaller and cost $200 million. However, NASA cannot find the $120 million for its share, which was to include building the spacecraft bus and integrating the instruments. The French space agency, CNES, offered to build the bus if NASA would help with integration and launch it, which should save the United States some $50 million. (AvWk, May 30/94)
NASA announced the naming of Italian scientist Umberto Guidoni to the Columbia Space Shuttle mission in early 1996. He would be involved with experiments dealing with the Tethered Satellite System, with which he had previous experience. (NASA Release 94-169)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)
A lengthy article on the Clinton Administration's science and technology policy dealt with these two fields and the President's goals in their regard. The government spent more than half of its research and development money on developing usable technologies. The remainder was divided almost evenly between applied research and basic research. However, the availability of funding was a serious problem. Funding increased significantly during the Cold War but scientific disasters such as the failure of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island electric power plant and the explosion of the Challenger Space Shuttle eroded public support and federal funding. The accomplishments of the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in consolidating the two weather satellite systems of the Defense Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration as well as the NSTC's initiative in coordinating space launch policy among NASA and the Defense, Commerce, and Transportation departments were commended. (Government Executive, Nov 94)
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)
The Paris-based Euroconsult organization assessed world space markets through the year 2004. The European think tank studied U.S., Asian, and European space and communications companies, agencies, and analysts. It concluded that new communication programs would result in a $95 billion to $115 billion global market for satellites, ground stations, and launch services during the period and that U.S. industry was increasing its share of that market. (AvWk, Aug 29/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
A study released by the Virginia-based Teal space consulting group said that since the space age began, 271 missions have failed or malfunctioned. Of the 271 missions, 108 were considered failures and of these, two-thirds or an estimated 71 were Soviet. The remaining 34 failures were American. The most failure-prone spacecraft over the period appeared to be the Soviet-made Cosmos satellite. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)
In a patent case, Hughes Aircraft Company won $114 million from the U.S. Government (represented by the Defense Department and NASA) as opposed to the $4.8 billion it sought. At issue were royalties due under a patent developed by former Hughes engineer Donald D. Williams in 1959 for a single rocket nozzle for satellites. (NY Times, Jun 18/94; P Inq, Jun 19/94; W Times, Jun 19/94; WSJ, Jun 20/94)
Ecologists Christopher Potter and Steven Klooster of NASA's Ames Research Center processed ten years of data to construct a map charting one month's exchange of the heat-trapping gas carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and the Earth's land plants and soils. This is a key process in determining the extent to which the release of this gas through burning fossil fuels and land-use changes might cause global climate warming, and this is the first time satellite data have been combined with computer simulation of soil processes. A 1990 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change gave estimates in billions of tons of carbon per year to try to answer the question of where missing amounts of extra human-released carbon dioxide go. Princeton University geochemist Jorge L. Sarmiento hypothesized a terrestrial sink, while Harvard University geochemist Steven Wofsy agreed with Potter that simulation also needed detailed studies of plant-soil processes. (CSM, Jan 19/94)
An Air Force Titan 4, the most powerful U.S. unmanned rocket, boosted a $1 billion military communications satellite (Milstar) into space. The satellite formed the initial link in a controversial $17.3 billion data relay network designed to provide secure communications during a nuclear conflict. (W Post, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94)
The Wide Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) spacecraft was designed to use recent advances in large format infrared technology to answer some key questions concerning the formation of stars. The project--the fifth in a series of NASA Small Explorer program missions--was being designed to observe starburst galaxies about 500 times fainter than those recorded at 25 microns by the Infrared Astronomical Satellite in 1983. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory worked with the Space Dynamics Laboratory at Utah State University to build the cryogenically cooled infrared telescope. The three-axis spacecraft, which would be provided by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center--would be the same design Goddard developed for the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite, a Small Explorer mission planned for 1995. The WIRE spacecraft was to be launched on an Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL, which was scheduled to be air-dropped from an L-1011 carrier aircraft. (AvWk, Nov 7/94)
John Gibbons, White House science adviser, said that as a result of tight budgets the Government would combine the operations of civilian and military weather satellite systems: two belonging to the Defense Department and two belonging to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The combining should save as much as $300 million by the end of 1999. Under an interagency agreement, the Defense Department was to procure future weather satellites, the Commerce Department's Atmospheric Agency was to operate the system, and NASA was to conduct research on advanced technology to be incorporated into the new spacecraft. The program became a joint Defense Department-NASA project in 1993. NASA was to build and launch a Landsat 7 spacecraft to replace the aging Landsat 4 and 5 spacecraft. NASA also was to design a new generation of spacecraft to compete with foreign satellites that provide similar data. On May 11 John Morgan, Director of the European weather satellite operations (Eumetsat) said he would discuss with nations that participate in European satellite and space programs NOAA's invitation to join the combined weather satellite system. These agencies already cooperate with NOAA on developing a Joint Polar System. (AP, May 10/94; NY Times, May 11/94; W Post, May 11/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 12/94)
Former NASA astronaut and Space Shuttle commander Ronald J. Grabe assumed his new post as vice president of business development for the launch systems group of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC) in Sterling, Virginia. He explained that OSC's specialty was providing access to space for small satellites at reasonable cost. One of his priorities was to find new markets for OSC's Taurus and Pegasus rockets. OSC also was about to enter the communications field through its ORBCOMM satellite system. (W Post, May 23/94)
NASA announced that the 12-member panel investigating the failure of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)-13 meteorological satellite in August 1993 had concluded that the probable cause was a short circuit that prevented the solar array current from powering the spacecraft and recharging the batteries. The short circuit probably resulted from a 1.25 inch screw that extended too far below an aluminum plate and penetrated the insulation. The board made recommendations for future NOAA spacecraft; NASA supervised the design and construction of the weather satellites. (NASA Release 94-157; P Inq, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
The matter of space science research--its cost and its usefulness--was discussed in a feature article. Such research developed more or less as an afterthought, but it had already proved valuable in such ways as making precise measurements of the thickness of clouds and dust to enable automated weather satellites. Assessing the legitimacy of the high costs involved was more difficult, but valuable scientific findings had resulted, such as changing ideas about how different levels of compression at the top and bottom of the lung affected the way the lung functioned and contradicting expectations about how the circulation of blood in the body worked. (Boston Globe, Sep 19/94)
Worldwide pollution was revealed among other things by the Measurement of Air Pollution by Satellite (MAPS) instrument, flown on Space Shuttle Endeavour, which showed atmospheric carbon monoxide levels. Not only can this pollution contribute to global warming but it also can make it more difficult for the atmosphere to cleanse itself. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
NASA officials indicated that details of scientific evidence supporting the theory that man-made chlorine was causing the ozone hole above Antarctica would be released on December 19. The evidence was based on three years of data from NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). UARS instruments had found chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in electronics and refrigeration systems in the stratosphere. The stratospheric ozone layer was responsible for protecting people, animals, and plants from too much ultraviolet sunlight. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; NASA Release 94-215; UP, Dec 19/94; Reuters, Dec 19/94; LA Times, Dec 20/94; NY Times, Dec 20/94; W Post, Dec 20/94; W Times, Dec 20/94; USA Today, Dec 20/94; WSJ, Dec 20/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94; H Chron, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 20/94; C Trib, Dec 20/94; AP, Dec 20/94)
Air Force Colonel Sanford Mangold told members of the House of Representatives Government Operations Committee of his dismissal for recommending the cancellation of the $27 billion military satellite program Milstar. He considered Milstar, intended to provide worldwide military communications during a nuclear war, to have "fundamental, insurmountable problems," including "unacceptable" costs of $1.4 billion for each satellite. (NY Times, Feb 3/94)
NASA announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had yielded data indicating that gamma-ray bursts show relative "time-dilation"--"a result of the General Theory of Relativity"--suggesting they occur not only near the Milky Way Galaxy but also far away, and thus indicating expansion of the universe. (NASA Release 94-10)
NASA announced that it had selected eight projects that could lead to new private sector applications of space-based and airborne sensing technologies. Named Earth Observations Commercial Applications (EOCAP) '94, the projects represented the fourth cycle in a continuing program designed to increase use of NASA-developed technology for gathering and analyzing valuable data about Earth and ocean resources through remote satellite or aircraft observations. (NASA Release 94-203)
A German company set up a joint venture with China, called EurasSpace, to develop  state-of-the-art satellites. It expected to launch its first high-capacity data  transmission satellite, the Sinosat-1, in 1997 for the People's Bank of China. The satellite would be assembled and tested in China and boosted into orbit by a Chinese Long March rocket. (UP, Sep 21/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin Chang-Diaz would be payload commander for the Space Shuttle mission scheduled for early 1996 in which the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) would be flown for the second time. Because of the preparation time required for this mission designed to orbit the TSS at the end of a 13-mile-long tether to test techniques for managing aircraft at great distances and to study the electrodynamic effects of moving a conductive tether through the Earth's magnetic field, the selection was made early. (NASA Release 94-142)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
The government announced that it would allow companies to market sophisticated spy satellite technology worldwide. U.S. firms could build and operate for-profit satellite systems powerful enough to take photographs from 22,300 miles above the Earth and show objects on the ground as small as one square yard. (NY Times, Mar 11/94; USA Today, Mar 11/94; W Post, Mar 11/94; WSJ, Mar 11/94)
NASA announced the members of the crew of the Space Shuttle mission for the fall of 1995 under the command of Brian Duffy. A Japanese National Space Development Agency specialist was included and one of the mission objectives was to retrieve a science satellite scheduled to be launched by a Japanese H-2 rocket in early 1995. The Shuttle would also retrieve another science satellite, the Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy (SPARTAN). In addition, two spacewalks would be conducted. (NASA Release 94-208)
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)
The Italian Foreign Ministry announced that Italy and the United States would launch a spacecraft in October 1997 on a seven-year voyage to Saturn. The Cassini would leave a special probe, called Huygens, on the surface of Saturn's largest moon, Titan, to gather data on the atmosphere, magnetosphere, and chemical make-up of the rings of Saturn and the movements of its satellites. An agreement to conduct the mission, which was being developed by NASA and the Italian Space Agency, was signed by Italian Foreign Minister Antonio Martini and U.S. Ambassador to Italy, Reginald Bartholomew. (Reuters, Jul 21/94)
NASA announced that the International Astronomical Union had approved the name Dactyl for the tiny moon discovered on August 28, 1993 in orbit around the asteroid Ida by NASA's Galileo mission. Dactyl was the first natural satellite of an asteroid ever discovered and photographed. The name derived from the Dactyli, a group of mythological beings who lived on Mount Ida, where the infant Zeus was hidden. (NASA Release, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; H Post, Sep 21/94)
An article analyzed the role played by lasers in advancing atmospheric science. Reference was made to the end of the last Space Shuttle flight when NASA was gathering data simultaneously from different altitudes over the same spot on Earth with three laser systems--one on Discovery and two on research aircraft. A fourth, ground-based Lidar (light detection and ranging) at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, also gathered data concurrently. This combination should significantly advance technology toward the goal of a permanent, automated Lidar satellite. The article provided scientific details of the flights undertaken and Discovery's operation of Lite, the Lidar In-space Technology Experiment. (AvWk, Oct 3/94)
Turkey scheduled the launch of its first satellite aboard an Ariane-4 rocket from French Guyana. (B Sun, Jan 19/94)
Japan's new H-II rocket was aborted six seconds before liftoff when its main liquid fuel engine was ignited but the solid fuel booster rockets failed to ignite. Japan's National Space Development Agency said the problem appeared to be in a ground-control computer known as the countdown sequencer rather than in the rocket. On August 28 the H-II rocket was launched again. However, Japan's space agency said on August 31 that it was abandoning efforts to put into orbit an experimental satellite launched by the H-II rocket. (NY Times, Aug 19/94; O Sen Star, Aug 19/94; Reuters, Aug 28/94; NY Times, Aug 29/94; CSM, Sep 1/94)
Officials at NASA, Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said mission designers were being discouraged from including Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) in future satellites. RTGs were plutonium-powered and were used most frequently on spacecraft traveling beyond Earth's orbit because solar panels became increasingly less efficient the farther they were from the sun. Scientists and engineers planning NASA's proposed Pluto Fast Flyby mission wanted to use an RTG, but thus far approval had been refused. The scientists were concerned that NASA was becoming anti-nuclear, but NASA officials and the White House denied there was a policy decision to end the use of RTGs. In late June, a Technology Challenge team headed by Dwight Duston, director of science and technology for the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, "unanimously recommended the use of an RTG without reservation" for the Pluto Fast Flyby. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94)
France's national space agency CNES launched a public relations campaign featuring its astronauts in order to improve strained relations between CNES and the inhabitants of French Guiana on South America's northeast coast, where the Ariane rocket series was launched. The Guiana space center gave France independent launch capacity for civilian and military satellites. (Reuters, Nov 19/94)
Orbital Sciences Corporation launched the Taurus rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, placing two military satellites into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 14/94; W Post, Mar 15/94)
Jean-Marc Artaud, program director for the Ariane-5 rocket for the French National Space Agency (CNES) in Guiana, discussed the launch that took place of a solid propellant booster that was part of the new generation rocket. The rocket was launched from a European Space Agency (ESA) center in the jungle of French Guiana on the northeast coast of South America in a test aimed at keeping the ESA in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the next century. (Reuters, Sep 30/94)
NASA announced the opening of a new, remote ground station in Tidbinbilla, Australia, called the Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO) Remote Terminal System. The station was to receive scientific data from the Compton GRO via a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite that was moved into position over the Indian Ocean. (NASA Release 94-42)
On the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the first moonlanding mission, the Italian newspaper La Repubblica published an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. In it he complimented Italy for its good space knowhow, saying Italians were magicians in the area of space communication. He also mentioned ways in which Italy was cooperating with NASA such as the Italian astronaut who was to help complete the testing of the tethered satellite system and the Italian Space Agency's work with NASA on the Cassini Space Mission. He pointed out that above all NASA counted on Italy for the construction of logistic pressurization modules and that this construction would give Italian firms a technological capacity that would have an impact on all Italian industries. (La Repubblica, Oct 11/94)
NASA announced that recent results from the Haystack Orbital Debris Radar measurements of orbital debris were good news for the International Space Station. The radar, which was operated for NASA by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, showed that the measured debris at low altitudes (250-400 miles) was below predicted levels. The improvement resulted in part from NASA's Orbital Debris Mitigation Program under which NASA informed other nations of the hazards resulting from third stage rocket explosions, which led Japan, China, and Russia to join NASA in modifying their launch vehicles and satellites. Other reasons were the decreased military space activities of Russia and the U.S. and the decrease in worldwide space launches. (NASA Release 94-136)
NASA announced the award of a supplemental agreement to Martin Marietta Astro Space of the Martin Marietta Corporation East Windsor, New Jersey. The agreement provided for two additional advanced meteorological satellite spacecraft through the Televisision Infrared Observation Satellite project contract at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-mm)
The French national space agency CNES proposed for government approval developing a series of small spacecraft to broaden science mission opportunities at lower cost. If approved in 1995, France would invite other European countries or the United States to participate. According to Pierre Contreras, head of the System Engineering Division at the CNES Toulouse Space Center, satellites weighing about 500 kilograms were contemplated. The first flight would be a radar altimeter spacecraft designed as a follow-on to the NASA/CNES TOPEX/Poseidon sea surface topography mission currently underway. The chairman of the European Space Agency's (ESA) Space Science Advisory Committee, Lodewijk Woltjer, said that all ESA members "like the idea of small missions because of their low costs, but for most of ESA's objectives small satellites are too small." (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
Western Europe's 70th Ariane rocket sent a U.S. PanAmSat communications satellite worth more than $150 million plunging into the Atlantic Ocean off French Guiana after its third stage malfunctioned. This was the second Ariane rocket failure in 1994 and the seventh since Western Europe began launching the Ariane series in 1979. (Reuters, Dec 1/94)
The Russian President made an edict in mid-November establishing the state's first experimental space center at Plesetsk. The edict divided the Plesetsk facility, with one part being retained by the strategic missile forces and the other transferred to Russia's military space forces without, however, increasing logistical support, staffing, or pay. In contrast to Baikonur, for which Russia annually paid Kazakhstan $116 million, the Plesetsk Space Center would give Russia its own launching site. From the Soviet era Plesetsk had nine launchpads and was the top secret site for launching more than half of all satellites. However, a critical state of electricity supply to industrial enterprises in Arkhangelsk Oblast had occurred, resulting from the payments crisis, which threatened a cut-off of electricity to Plesetsk and to Severodvinsk, where atomic submarines were built. (Izvestiya, Nov 17/94)
A Russian Military Space Forces official told Reuters that Russia planned a series of unmanned space launches to its orbiting Space Station Mir in May before a manned launch in June with a cosmonaut from Kazakhstan. The unmanned launches were to consist of a cargo spacecraft, a communications satellite in a joint program with the U.S. company Rimsat, and two military satellites. (Reuters, May 5/94)
Dr. Robert Wingate of NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, as chairman of an investigation board appointed by Jeremiah Pearson, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, released a study of the cause of an anomaly on Shuttle Discovery--STS-51. During deployment of the ACTS communication satellite, commands for firing a single explosive cord caused the firing of both primary and backup cords, which ruptured a containment tube and released debris into the cargo bay. The study described the primary and contributing causes--a ten-year-old design flaw--and made recommendations for corrections. (NASA Note to Editors 94-8, USA Today, Jan 28/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
The crew of NASA's November Atlantis Shuttle mission were scheduled to test the feasibility of an unusual rendezvous procedure for the second docking with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. They would fly Atlantis on a "plus R bar" (the radius vector from the target's center of mass to the Earth's center) to rendezvous with and retrieve the Crista-Spas atmospheric research satellite on the ninth day of the planned 11-day mission. The new approach would save fuel and not require any braking. Crista-Spas was to be deployed from Atlantis's robot arm within about 20 hours of Atlantis's launch. (AvWk, Oct 17/94; SP News, Oct 24-30)
NASA agreed to launch in January 1996 South Africa's first satellite, Sunsat, which was developed at Stellenbosch University near Cape Town. A four-member NASA team evaluated the Stellenbosch project and offered the university a free launch in return for minor additions of U.S. equipment. Stellenbosch project leader Garth Milne said the satellite would deliver high-resolution multispectral stereo images of the Earth and would carry amateur radio equipment that would allow children to talk to the satellite. NASA structural engineer Marisa Achee said NASA was keen to launch Sunsat because it could carry a U.S. Global Positioning System receiver and a laser reflector needed to monitor variations in the Earth's gravitational field. The university was scheduled to control the satellite during its four-year life. (Reuters, Jul 29/94)
GOES-8, a sophisticated weather satellite, was the first of five advanced GOES-NEXT satellites scheduled to be deployed by 2003. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the GOES program but engineers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center oversaw development of the spacecraft. These engineers redesigned weather instruments used by polar-orbiting weather satellites that flew 500 miles high to operate instead at 22,300 miles high. The system had vast potential benefit for firefighters, farmers, marine and aviation navigators, and others through improving the accuracy of weather forecasting. (W Post, Mar 28/94)
Dr. Edward Tagliaferri, a physicist and consultant for the Aerospace Corporation, an engineering firm in El Segundo, California, that helps the Air Force run its many satellite programs, was lead author of a report discussing declassified Air Force studies of meteors and their possible threat. The report is a chapter in a book edited by Dr. Tom Gehrels, a planetary astronomer at the University of Arizona, and published by the university. The potential threat is viewed in the light of occurrences such as the strike in Tunguska, Siberia, and the probable strike in Yucatan, Mexico. (NY Times, Jan 25/94)
An Air Force Titan 4 rocket was launched successfully from Cape Canaveral Air Station and deployed "in the desired orbit." The classified satellite was thought to have an electronic eavesdropping platform capable of tapping into military and civilian communications. (Reuters, Aug 27/94; W Post, Aug 28/94)
With aid from NASA, the University of Florida Medical School created a microcomputer, more than 14 years in the making, which enabled physicians to communicate via satellite or telephone. The computer held the latest information from 12 medical reference books and more than 1,000 medical journals and was updated quarterly. Both an electronic library and a record-keeping system were provided to doctors. System 2000 was originally designed to help ailing crew members on distant space stations diagnose their own illnesses. NASA's director of aerospace medicine and occupational health, Dr. Earl Ferguson, expected the use of telecommunications in health care delivery to "totally revolutionize the way we practice medicine." (Fla Today, Sep 11/94)
The crew for the STS-66 mission aboard Atlantis in the Fall of 1994 was selected. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Donald R. McMonagle was to command the mission, called ATLAS-03. This third Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) would continue Spacelab studies of solar energy effects on the Earth's climate and environment. USAF Major Curtis L. Brown, Jr, was named pilot; Scott E. Parazynski, M.D., Joseph R. Tanner, and ESA astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy, mission specialists; and Ellen Ochoa, PhD., Payload Commander. Tasks included the CRISTA-SPAS Cryogenic Infrared Spectrometer Telescope for Atmosphere on the Shuttle Pallet Satellite, jointly with Germany. (NASA Release 94-4; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that Russia had launched the Kosmos-2290 military satellite from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. (W Times, Aug 30/94)
Shuttle Discovery launched three pairs of stainless steel spheres as part of a study of space debris in which ground stations were to track junk that could pose a collision hazard for spacecraft. On February 8 it left a small German satellite, Bremsat, in orbit to conduct six science experiments. (Reuters, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 10/94; AP, Feb 10/94)
NASA and Carnegie Mellon University scientists gave a preliminary test to an eight-legged robot name Dante II. They sent it down a gravel quarry to test the $1.8 million robot's satellite and fiber-optics links and software. On July 22 or soon thereafter they planned to send it down Mount Spurr, an active volcano, 80 miles west of Anchorage. Such robots would be useful in extreme terrains and climates. On July 28 a NASA scientist, Butler Hine, said that a communications problem resulting from a poor satellite link with the robot was delaying the robot's mission into the volcano. The robot took its first steps on July 29 and was scheduled to walk 12 hours a day. By late on July 31, the robot was about 150 feet from its goal, a field of volcanic vents on the bottom of the crater. As of August 2, the robot was sending back valuable scientific data from inside the crater, despite being hit by a falling rock. On August 3, Dante II began its steep walk out of the crater. The climb halted on August 4 because of a faulty power unit on the crater rim. Scientists fixed the electrical problem but on August 6 the robot fell on its side. Possible methods for retrieving the robot were under consideration. An attempt to airlift the robot by helicopter on August 9 failed when the cable snapped, dropping Dante II further down the crater. On August 13 two experienced climbers climbed into the crater and manually wrapped a sling around the robot and attached it to a line from the helicopter, which then pulled Dante II up. (AP, Jul 21/94; AP, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 27/94; Reuters, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Jul 30/94; AP, Jul 30/94; W Times, Jul 31/94; C Trib, Jul 31/94; NY Times, Aug 2/94; Reuters, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 4/94; USA Today, Aug 5/94; Reuters, Aug 6/94; USA Today, Aug 8/94; NY Times, Aug 9/94; USA Today, Aug 9/94; AP, Aug 9/94; Reuters, Aug 9/94; B Sun, Aug 10/94; W Post, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 10/94; Chronicle of Higher Education, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 13/94; Reuters, Aug 14/94; W Post, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 15/94; USA Today, Aug 15/94; CSM, Aug 15/94; Time, Aug 15/94; AvWk, Aug 15/94; Chemical and Engineering News, Aug 15/94; AP, Aug 22/94; LA Times, Aug 28/94)
An article on electronic navigation and the Global Positioning System (GPS) using 24 satellites described the advantages of GPS and its uses. The article reported that using GPS and a sophisticated flight computer aboard a 737 aircraft owned by NASA, more than 36 "hands-off" precision landings were completed at Wallops Island airfield in Virginia. (C Trib, Aug 7/94)
NASA announced that it would continue to study how the Earth's environment was changing and how human beings affected that change during the upcoming flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis. This, the third flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Also during the mission astronauts would deploy and retrieve a free-flying satellite designed to study the middle and lower thermospheres and would perform various experiments covering life sciences research and microgravity processing. The flight, commanded by Donald R. McMonagle, was scheduled for launch on November 3. (NASA Release 94-175)
President Clinton, who was in Houston, spoke to the Discovery astronauts. Mission Control earlier had instructed them to abandon efforts to launch the Wake Shield Facility satellite. (UP, Feb 7/94; W Times, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 8/94; LA Times, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the New York Medical College (NYMC) in Valhalla, New York, were using satellite remote sensing and computer technology to predict the risk of Lyme disease transmission. The NASA team, working with Dr. Durland Fish of NYMC and Westchester County Health Department investigators, found that the higher the proportion of vegetated residential area next to woods within a municipality, the higher the transmission risk. (NASA Release 94-123)
A dispute of possible long-term import with hundreds of millions of dollars at stake appeared to be brewing between NASA and the television industry over local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), pitting the satellite industry against proponents of this low-cost alternative to cable television. Further, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was approaching an auction of some airwaves for a new generation of wireless communications services. Charles Force, NASA Associate Administrator for space communications, stated that "It appears that there is a significant possibility for interference with LMDS from satellite uplinks; this was no secret to the FCC." He suggested a four-year delay in LMDS service to deal with interference in the disputed 27.5-to-30-gigahertz spectrum band. The FCC believed that LMDS can coexist with satellite use and was preparing to authorize nationwide deployment of LMDS. (LA Times, Jan 12/94)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Endeavour was to be launched in April to study Earth's global environment. The Space Radar Laboratory was to consist of the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Measurement of Air Pollution from Satellite. Of these instruments, the German Space Agency (DARA) and the Italian Space Agency (ASI) were to provide the X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar. An international team of 49 science investigators from 13 nations were to conduct the experiments. In addition, the mission was to include NASA's Get Away Special experiments that allow average persons a chance to perform experiments in space; it was also to be the first cooperative initiative with the National Institutes of Health using a special cell culture system. (NASA Release 94-38)
The Hughes Network Systems telecommunication firm contracted with the Hawaiian corporation ITTI to install a high-speed satellite link dubbed "Teleport Asia" between the Eastern and Western hemispheres on the island of Oahu, with twin Earth stations facing toward Asia and North America. (W Times, Jan 19/94)
The Clinton Administration authorized NASA to be an advocate for satellites in the evolving National Information Infrastructure/Global Information Infrastructure (NII/GII), the so-called information superhighway. The Administration wanted to ensure that industry--satellite builders and operators and telecommunications users--was intimately involved in formulating satellites' role in the NII/GII. Industry in turn wanted NASA to provide research and development on "pre-competitive technologies." (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced contract awards for two new "Smallsat" satellites to observe the Earth with unprecedented sensor technology. The awards went to two teams led by CTA of Rockville, Maryland, and TRW, Inc., of Redondo Beach, California. The teams were to build, launch, and operate the satellites--each no bigger than a console television set--for less than $60 million each. The satellites were to be developed, launched, and delivered on orbit in 24 months or less on a Pegasus launch vehicle. (NASA Release 94-94; AP, Jun 8/94; Reuters, Jun 8/94; NY Times, Jun 9/94; W Post, Jun 9/94; USA Today, Jun 9/94; WSJ, Jun 9/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; H Post, Jun 9/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94; W Post, Jun 14/94)
NASA was commended for raising the problem of debris mitigation in space to a high policy goal and for being in the process of drawing up a detailed rule book for its spacecraft designers, launchers, and operators to avoid creating debris. The commercial sector was the unknown in this regard, particularly with reference to communications satellites. The matter was a vital one because over the years several satellites were lost for unknown causes and may have been victims of "space junk." (NY Times, May 17/94)
Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)
After 12 years of work, Orion Network Systems, a Rockville, Maryland, firm, launched its first satellite. Orion was the first company to apply in 1982 to the Federal Communications Commission to provide international satellite communications. Orion won FCC approval in 1987 and Intelsat approval in 1989 on condition that it not harm any existing Intelsat business. Orion formed a consortium, Orion Atlantic, which included British Aerospace, which built the satellite, and Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, which provided the Atlas rocket. (W Post, Nov 30/94)
The projected testing of the SAFER (Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue) device during an Extravehicular Activity (EVA) by the astronauts in the September Discovery flight was discussed at some length. SAFER was developed by engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was designed to stabilize an astronaut, allowing the astronaut to fly back to safety should the astronaut drift too far from a structure during an untethered EVA. The 83-pound SAFER was intended to be attached to the bottom of an astronaut's spacesuit. Other objectives of the Discovery flight were to orbit the Langley Research Center's LITE (Lidar In-space Technology Experiment) payload, a laser-observation of the Earth, and to release and retrieve the Goddard Space Flight Center's Spartan 201 solar-wind research satellite. (AvWk, Sep 5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) since 1987 had cooperated to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning System (FEWS). NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, were the principal data providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms. Using daily data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites, scientists measured the density of green vegetation every 10 days. When drought conditions were detected, an AID-FEWS team could begin to coordinate relief efforts, if needed. The same data also were used for locust control purposes. (Black Media News, Apr 94)
British astronomers reported in the journal Nature on finding new physical evidence of "ripples" in space, hot and cold spots confirming 1992 findings by NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) Satellite, that shed light on the origin of the universe. Rod Davies of the University of Manchester discussed studies done by radio telescope in the Canary Islands that revealed microwaves from when the universe was only 300,000 years old. Astrophysicist Joseph Silk of the University of California at Berkeley commented that the findings could offer the most intriguing possibility that the universe is open, i.e., would expand indefinitely. (W Post, Jan 27/94; USA Today, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
Charles Bigot, chairman of Arianespace, told a news conference that the company hoped to resume launches of Ariane missiles in two months' time. Following the failure of the December 1 launch, which sent an American PanAmsat-3 communications satellite to the bottom of the Atlantic, 21 corrective measures had been taken. French-based Arianespace had captured more that 60 percent of the world's satellite launch market and had orders to launch 37 satellites. (Reuters, Dec 22/94)
NASA announced that the second mission of its Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS-2) was scheduled for launching from a U.S. Air Force Delta II rocket no sooner than March 9 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The project was designed to demonstrate an economical way of delivering smaller payloads, such as micro-satellites, to higher orbits. (NASA Release 94-35)
Retired Air Force Colonel Ken Munechika, former chief of Onizuka Air Force Base's Satellite Test Center, was designated the new chief of NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC). (Sunnyvale Sun, Jan 12/94)
NASA's last SCOUT (Solid Controlled Orbital Utility Test) launch vehicle was scheduled to blast off May 6 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Lompoc, California, the final of 118 space missions that began July 1, 1960. Called the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration spacecraft, the satellite is one in a series of military spacecraft being launched to develop sensors for ballistic missile devices. Since the mid-1960s, NASA gradually has gotten out of the unmanned rocket business, which was transferred to commercial manufacturers. (Fla Today, May 2/94; NASA Release 94-72; Fla Today, May 9/94; Reuters, May 9/94)
Observations from Space Shuttles and other vehicles revealed a clearly visible line stretching for hundreds of miles across the Pacific Ocean. The dark green line, from one to several miles wide, was attributed by scientists to an abundance of microscopic plants that thrived where cold, nutrient-rich water from polar seas met warm equatorial currents. New observations of the interaction between these two currents were made from the NOAA-11 weather satellite and NASA's P-3 research aircraft flying 500 feet above the water. (NY Times, Oct 25/94; AP, Oct 31/94)
From Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Russia launched one of its Gorizont communications satellites for the U.S. firm Rimsat, putting it into orbit at about 22,300 miles above Earth. This was the second launch of a Russian spacecraft for Rimsat. The Gorizont went into orbit over Malaysia, with AllAsia Sat of Manila as its first customer. (UP, May 20/1994)
NASA unveiled its new Mission Control center in Houston with a flight simulation that pretended to rendezvous a Space Shuttle with a satellite. The demonstration went well and provided an opportunity to identify additional equipment needed, such as more display facility. The new center should be directing the Shuttle in orbit by the summer of 1995. (Federal Computer Week, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 21/94)
A solid-fuel booster for Ariane-5, the new rocket designed to keep Western Europe in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the 21st century, was tested successfully in the jungles of French Guiana, according to Jean-March Artaud, Ariane-5 program director for the CNES French national space agency in Guiana. (Reuters, Dec 16/94)
The official newspaper, China Daily, quoted a spokesman for the China Aerospace Corporation as expressing confidence it would fulfill all launch services for overseas clients in 1994. China launched the Apstar-1 satellite made by U.S. Hughes Aircraft, from the Xichang Space Center in southwest China on July 21. An Australian satellite was scheduled to be launched in August. China sought a larger share of the commercial space market dominated by NASA, Europe's Arianespace, and Russian launchers. (UPI, Jul 30/94)
An Air Force Delta 2 rocket blasted into orbit carrying the final advanced satellite in the U.S. military's Global Positioning System, Navstar. Delta 2 also carried NASA's experiment to test a space tether 12.5 miles long to determine how long it survived in orbit among space junk. The tether could ultimately be used for various purposes such as generating electricity or changing spacecraft altitudes. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94; AP, Mar 10/94; NY Times, Mar 11/94; NY Times, Mar 15/94)
One of the results of the data produced by the U.S.-French TOPEX-Poseidon satellite, part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, was the mapping of ocean circulation, one of the least understood areas of climate research. Data had shown that the El Nino remnant wave was pushing the current northward off the coast of Japan, raising the temperature of the northwest Pacific. (W Post, Oct 3/94)
The digital data representing the first direct image of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 slamming into Jupiter reached Earth from Galileo. The impact of the explosions was presumed to have created waves in the atmosphere, and these were being sought by the Infrared Telescope Facility that NASA operated atop Mauna Kea mountain in Hawaii. The explosions sent substantial amounts of helium hundreds of miles above the top of Jupiter, which was a surprise and which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Satellite detected. (NY Times, Aug 16/94)
NASA announced that its Office of Space Communications, Headquarters, Washington, D.C., was initiating an opportunity for private industry to conduct experiments of future telecommunications technologies via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS). Called the Mobile Satcom TDRSS (MOST) Experiment Program, it was designed to enhance U.S. competitiveness in the global satellite telecommunications area. (NASA Release 94-43)
NASA announced that the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-8 had successfully completed basic engineering testing and was beginning to provide more precise data for improved weather forecasting. The older GOES-7 was to be shifted further west to cover storms approaching from the Pacific. (NASA Release N94-77; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 9/94)
Gregory Reck, Acting Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology (OACT), said that NASA had tasked an industry team with reviewing the direction of its research and development (R&D) efforts in space communications technologies. The group, which was to be composed of satellite manufacturers such as Hughes and Space Systems/Loral, ground station builders like Harris Corporation, and small aerospace firms like Orbital Sciences Corporation, was to identify future space-based systems, both in low-Earth and geosynchronous orbits, and how they might tie into the National Information Infrastructure. NASA's role in the activity was to be directed by Samuel Venneri, head of spacecraft and remote sensing in OACT. The consensus findings of the team were to be used in relation to NASA fiscal year budgets. According to the NASA officials, the key motivation behind the initiative was to minimize inroads by European and Japanese competitors into the 60 percent market share held by U.S. firms in satellite communications. (Defense Daily, Apr 7/94)
An article highlighted the benefits satellite reporting could provide for various earthly activities. An example given was the way in which Frank Lamb, president of Eastern Oregon Farming Company and Cropix, Inc., who had a grant from NASA's Earth Observation Commercialization Applications Program, used satellite observations to check on the health of plants in his Oregon farm by determining the rate of photosynthesis. The images enabled a farmer to detect problems such as irrigation-equipment failure, drainage problems, and pest infestation. Satellite images were also used by the South Florida Water Management District to update its maps and identify illegal tampering of wetlands, as well as to create maps of Midwest flood areas for damage and rebuilding plans. (USA Today, Aug 9/94)
China's space agency said that the April 2 blast that killed one person and injured 20 would not delay the launching of three foreign communications satellites from the Xichang Satellite Launching Center in southwestern China. The three satellites were manufactured by Hughes Space and Communications Company for Hong Kong and Australian customers. (NY Times, Apr 27/94)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
China successfully launched a new telecommunications satellite, the Dongfanghong III, using a Long March 3A rocket from the Xichang base in Sichuan province, southwestern China. (AFP, Nov 30/94; Xinhua news agency, Nov 30/94)
Systems Integration Group, TRW's Fairfax, Virginia-based subsidiary, was awarded a NASA contract for $173 million to manage a network of computerized ground stations receiving data from government satellites that observe the earth's environment and climate changes. (W Post, Jan 6/94)
A NASA B-52 successfully launched a standard Pegasus booster carrying an Advanced Photovoltaic and Electronic Experiments (APEX) spacecraft, which Orbital Sciences Corporation had developed for the U.S. Air Force. APEX was the first satellite developed using Orbital's standard satellite platform and represented the first Pegasus mission that maximized the payload and weight capability of the standard booster. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
The retrieval of the German Crista-Spas satellite by Atlantis during its recent mission proved the validity of the rendezvous approach that NASA now planned to use for all dockings with Russia's Mir Space Station. Technical details were given of the "plus R bar" approach. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
China recently suffered a fire at its Xichang Long March launch facility, damaging a Fengyun II weather satellite and adjacent work areas. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham at Kennedy Space Center said the tether launched by the Space Shuttle was working well. It could be used to move satellites around in different orbits in space. Originally about 12 miles long, atomic oxygen and tiny meteorites ate it so that it was now only about five miles long. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/94)
NASA announced that more than a decade after affecting climate on a global scale, residual signs of a powerful El Nino were still visible from space. Oceanographers using data from the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite were tracking the remnant wave of the 1982-83 El Nino as it moved across the Northwest Pacific Ocean, where some scientists theorized it might still be affecting weather in the region. TOPEX/Poseidon, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, used a radar altimeter to precisely measure sea-surface height. The study was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Launched August 10, 1992, the satellite had completed two years of its three-year prime mission. (NASA Release 94-162; W Post, Oct 3/94)
Intelsat, the US satellite operator, signed a record $2 billion insurance contract for 10 satellite launches with the insurance firm International Space Brokers, Inc. The contract covered launches on the Ariane 4 rocket of the European Arianespace Consortium and on China's Long March rocket. (Reuters, Jan 11/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) shows that radio galaxies(which existed when the universe was half its present age(are surprisingly varied and intricate structures that are even more complex than previously thought. A team of astronomers at Cambridge University, England, is analyzing 28 radio galaxies that have been imaged by HST in visible light, by the Very Large Array Radio Interferometer, and by the UK Infrared Telescope. They propose that the remarkable structures seen in the Hubble images are different manifestations of activity associated with radio galaxies. The new details may be a combination of light from massive star forming regions, small satellite dwarf galaxies, and bow shocks caused by jets of hot gas blasted out of the galaxys core by a suspected black hole. The period of strong radio emissions is quite short relative to the total lifetime of a galaxy. (NASA Release 95-133)
A Japanese-German attempt to put a space capsule into orbit for five days of experiments failed, sending it tumbling through the atmosphere where it broke up and burned over the Pacific after two or three orbits. The $60 million "Express" satellite was supposed to land in Australia's outback Saturday for retrieval. (H Chron, Jan 17/95; Reuters, Jan 16/95)
Conestoga rockets are expected to be launched from Wallops Island, Virginia. These 52 foot rockets could bring life back to one of the earliest launch sites in the country. The rockets are produced by EER to launch satellites for global communication and high-technology navigation. Todays launch was postponed due to hydraulic failure in two engines. (W Post, Aug 14/95 & Oct 11/95; W Times, July 20/95 & Aug 14/95; Space News, Jul 24/95 & Aug 28/95; LA Times, Oct 8/95; AvWk, Aug 28/95)
Industry analysis by the Virginia firm Teal Group showed that almost 1,000 satellites, mostly for communications, will be launched during the next ten years. Most of these satellites will belong to mobile communications multi-satellite systems such as Motorola's Iridium and Space Systems/Loral's Globalstar. The most common destination for these satellites will be Earth low orbit. (Defense Daily, Jan 10/95)
NASA reported that three years of data collection from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) confirmed that Clorofluorocarbons (CFCs) cause ozone loss.  The satellite detected CFCs and hydrogen fluoride, a product of the chemical breakdown of CFCs, in the stratosphere. (AvWk, Jan 2/95; The Grand Rapids Press, Jan 2/95)A General Accounting Office report called NASA's plans to expand and fund the scientific research needed to support a manned space facility unrealistic. The report indicated that NASA's projected $18 billion cost for Space Station Freedom was far too low. The chief congressional critic of the space station, Sen. William Cohen, estimated a $71 billion price tag. (AvWk, Jan 2/95; The Grand Rapids Press, Jan 2/95)
Atmospheric scientists presented some 40 papers or abstracts at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Tucson, Arizona, on the topic of newly-discovered discharges of lightning in Earth's upper atmosphere. The upper-atmospheric lightning materializes above thunderheads and shoots upward, not downward, in bolts and flickers that soar as high as 60 miles above the surface of the Earth. Satellites have detected gamma ray bursts emanating from thunderheads, whereas red flashes have been linked to powerful burst of radio waves. NASA planned to fly a jet loaded with cameras and instruments across the thunderstorm belt of South America in February to begin serious study of upper atmospheric lightning. (NY Times, Jan 17/95; H Chron, Jan 23/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope serves as an interplanetary weather satellite for Mars and Venus. It shows that the Martian climate has changed since Viking visited Mars in the mid-1970s. The planet is now cooler, clearer, and drier. Venus continues to recover from an intense shower of sulfuric acid rain triggered by a suspected volcanic eruption in the late 1970s. Such knowledge of weather is critical to the planning of future missions to these planets. They also make natural laboratories for testing computer models that will lead to a general theory of the behavior of planetary atmospheres. The Hubble Space Telescope is a project of international cooperation between NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA). (NASA Release 95-31; Fla Today, May 14/95; AvWk, Mar 27/95; Science, Mar 31/95)
Radioactive debris leaking from a large group of orbiting Russian nuclear reactors make up the puzzling clouds of junk orbiting Earth. This is the conclusion of a team of scientific sleuths who have been sifting clues for five years. The clouds, which seem destined to grow, are threatening to wreak havoc in the most crowded orbit in the heavens, roughly 600 miles up. In all, 33 nuclear-powered radar satellites that spied on the movements of Western warships were launched into orbits about 150 miles above the Earth. Afterward, as a safety precaution, Moscow boosted the old reactors into parking orbits roughly 600 miles up. Published designs of the Russian space reactors show they were filled with sodium-potassium coolant. Liquid droplets moving at kilometers a second are just as dangerous to a spacecraft as a solid object. While the drops pose no radioactive health danger to humans, they will force engineers to add more shielding to help protect new spacecraft. (NY Times, Feb 26/95)
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that the El Nino phenomenon had returned and was getting stronger. The TOPEX/Poseidon satellite, a program of NASA and the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etude Spatiales, provided radar data confirming the buildup of a large warm water mass called a Kelvin wave in the tropical Pacific Ocean. This high sea-surface temperature heats the atmosphere and alters atmospheric jet streams, which affect worldwide weather patterns. (NASA Release 95-7; W Post, Jan 25/95; LA Times, Jan 25/95; AP, Jan 24/95; H Post, Jan 25/95; Reuters Press Agency, Jan 24/95; Bakersfield Californian, Jan 25/95)
El Nio is stronger this year compared to the winter of 1992-93, according to NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The TOPEX/Poseidon ocean observing satellite, launched on August 10, 1992, is part of a joint program of NASA and the French space agency. The satellite uses a radar altimeter to measure sea-surface height with an accuracy of better than 2 inches. Sea-surface elevation is related to the heat in the upper ocean, which is important for long-range weather forecasting. (NASA Releases 95-7, 146 & 159; NY Times, Jan 14/95 & Apr 25/95; W Post, Jan 25/95 & Feb 11/95; AP, Jan 24/95; Reuters, Jan 24/95; Science, Feb 3/95)
A satellite payload designed and built by college students was launched onboard a NASA launch vehicle. Shortly after launch the SURFSat-1 was separated from the primary payload and moved into a polar orbit. When the project began in 1987, six Caltech students were chosen to begin the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURFSat). Each summer a new group of undergraduates took over. Through 1994, 61 students have participated. The satellite has two experiments: one tests how Earths atmosphere affects the new Ka-band being implemented on NASAs Deep Space Network, and the other tests ground stations supporting NASAs new Space Very Long Baseline Interferometry project. The latter will be used to communicate with a Japanese spacecraft that will make radio astronomy studies of quasars and other objects at the edge of the universe. (NASA Release 95-204; Space News, Sep 4/95 & Nov 13/95)
A Russian booster rocket placed a US commercial communications satellite into orbit for the first time. The FAISAT satellite was owned by Final Analysis, Inc., of Greenbelt, Maryland. (H Chron, Jan 25/95; ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
The Galileo spacecraft has produced hard evidence in the form of an image that asteroids can have satellites. The satellite in orbit around asteroid 243 Ida has a 1.6 km (one mile) diameter. (Reuters, Apr 26/95)
U.S. polar orbiting weather satellite programs are being combined to save money. Costs for the combined program will be split between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Defense Department. NASA will be in charge of developing the technology for the new systems. (AP, Aug 23/95)
Woodpeckers riddled the insulating foam of the external fuel tank on top of the Space Shuttle Discovery, causing the shuttle to be moved to a hangar for repairs. Its mission to launch a communications satellite is delayed until July. (NY Times, Jun 3/95 & Jul 13/95; W Post, Jun 1/95 & Jun 3/95; USA Today, Jun 2/95; Fla Today, Jun 3/95 & Jun 5/95; Space News, Jun 5/95; AP, Jun 2/95 & Jun 8/95; Reuters, Jun 1/95; UPI, Jun 1/95; AvWk, Jun 5/95 & Jun 12/95)
NASA began a 110-hour countdown to the first of an unprecedented series of US missions to the Russian Space Station Mir. Launch of Discovery and its crew of six--including the first woman shuttle pilot and a famed cosmonaut--was set for February 2. The eight-day flight was to include a spacewalk by two astronauts, deployment and retrieval of an astronomy satellite, and science experiments in a commercial space laboratory. The primary goal of the mission was to be the rendezvous with Mir. (Reuters, Jan 29/95; APn, Jan 29/95; H Chron, Jan 31/95; H Post, Jan 31/95; H Chron, Jan 29/95)
A Russian booster rocket placed a US commercial communications satellite into orbit for the first time. The FAISAT satellite was owned by Final Analysis, Inc., of Greenbelt, Maryland. (H Chron, Jan 25/95; ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
The Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) mission will be launched in October 1998. This mission was selected earlier in the year as part of an overall restructuring of the Explorer program. Beginning in 1958, the Explorer program provides Earth-orbiting satellites to conduct research in space physics and astrophysics. (NASA Release 95-206; Space News, Nov 27/95)
NASAs unmanned spacecraft Wind, patrolling interplanetary space 662,000 miles from Earth, detected a giant magnetic cloud on October 18. An updated space weather alert was issued to commercial satellite operators, electrical utilities and other organizations worldwide. The disturbance was speeding to Earth at over 2.1 million miles per hour. It produced a magnetic storm and auroral displays that persisted for two days. Future disturbances are anticipated as the 11-year sunspot cycle is expected to peak shortly after the year 2000. The Wind spacecraft was launched November 1, 1994. (NASA Release 95-202; Space News, Oct 30/95)
NASA scientists expressed concern about space trash from spent satellites and burned out rocket boosters that pose a hazard to functioning satellites and space shuttles. Instead of attempting to collect such debris, NASA has been concentrating on preventing its further buildup by programming satellites and boosters to spiral into the atmosphere and burn up harmlessly. In the future, however, NASA may take a closer look at the possibility of retrieving space debris. At that point, the research of Kumar Ramohalli, formerly of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who was attempting to develop a debris retrieving satellite, should be useful. (CSM, Jan 9/95)
After the successful launch of a satellite called "Wind," NASA gave the manufacturer, Martin Marietta Astro Space, the go-ahead to build a second satellite called" Polar."  The purpose of both satellites is to measure the forces of solar wind. (Star-Ledger, Jan 6/95)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite was launched to probe the Suns hidden interior, its boiling atmosphere, and the physics behind the supersonic solar wind. SOHO is a joint project of the European Space Agency and NASA. It will be positioned at the point where the gravitational pull of the Sun and Earth cancel out. (NY Times, Dec 3/95 & Dec 5/95; W Post, Dec 3/95 & Dec 4/95; USA Today, Dec 4/95; Fla Today, Nov 22/95, Nov 24/95, Nov 28/95 & Dec 1/95; CSM, Nov 28/95; Space News, Nov 6/95; AvWk, Nov 13/95)
A Chinese Long March 2E rocket carrying a telecommunications satellite exploded and crashed to earth moments after launch, a setback to space ambitions of China and major global broadcasters. The Apstar 2 satellite, built by Hughes Aircraft, would have provided television, telephone, and digital communications to a vast swath of Asia, Eastern Europe, North Africa, and Australia. (W Post, Jan 26/95; USA Today, Jan 26/95; Xinhua News Agency, Jan 26/95; Reuters, Jan 26/95; AP, Jan 25/95; UPI, Jan 25/95; WSJ, Jan 27/95; LA Times, Jan 27/95; CSM, Jan 27/95)
Data from NASAs Upper Atmospheric Research Satellite indicate that chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are responsible for the destruction of Earths protective stratospheric ozone layer. By mid-1995, the amount of methyl chloroform in the atmosphere was found to have begun to decrease, although the Antarctic hole in the ozone grew significantly. (NASA Release 95-115; NY Times, Jul 16/95, Aug 3/95, Oct 12/95 & Nov 29/95; W Post, Jul 14/95, Sep 13/95; W Times, Oct 12/95; UPI, Sep 20/95; AvWk, Jan 2/95; Science, Oct 20/95)
An international team of scientists have examined data from the Japanese/U.S. X-ray astronomical satellite ASCA which may confirm how cosmic rays achieve speeds near the speed of light. Enrico Fermi suggested a theory in 1949 in which charged particles are bounced between turbulent regions inside the shock front of a supernova explosion. Bouncing much like a ping pong ball between a table and a paddle as the paddle is brought closer to the table, a charged particle gains energies up to 100 trillion electron volts. The tell-tale clue to the discovery was the detection of two oppositely-located regions in the rapidly expanding remnant of the Supernova of 1006 AD. The ASCA satellite contains telescopes for simultaneously taking images and spectra of X-rays, allowing astronomers to distinguish between different types of X-ray emission from nearby regions of the same celestial object. ASCA was launched February 20, 1993. (NASA Release 95-208)
The HST has discovered ozone on Jupiters satellite Ganymede, making it one of the solar systems rare moons that have atmospheres. Ganymedes ozone is produced when it passes through charged particles trapped in Jupiters powerful magnetic field. (AvWk, Oct 16/95)
NASA announced the crew members for the Shuttle Columbia STS-75 mission in early 1996. This flight was to be the second of the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) and also marked the third devoted to orbital investigations using the US Microgravity Payload.
NASA spacecraft managers reported the failure of two scientific satellites. NASA had designed the Scientific Applications Satellite-B (SAC-B), launched three days earlier from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility, to survey solar flares and gamma-ray bursts. The project was a cooperative effort between NASA and Argentina. NASA scientists had intended the second satellite, HETE (High Energy Transient Experiment), to remain dormant until it detected sunlight, at which time it would deploy, transmitting signals. Scientists doubted this would ever occur, because the satellite had fallen into a tumbling pattern. Officials hypothesized that the satellites had not deployed properly and, therefore, had orbited uselessly, lacking electrical power. NASA valued both satellites at more than US$20 million. The launch failure was the third miscue in two years for the Pegasus rocket program. The Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, developed and ran the program.(John Mintz, Orbital Sciences Fails in Another Launch, Washington Post, 5 November 1996; Associated Press, NASA Reports Failure of Scientific Satellites, 7 November 1996; NASA, SAC-B/HETE Spacecraft No Longer Operational, news release 96-231, 7 November 1996.)
NASA and the Italian Space Agency released the investigative report on the failed tethered satellite system (TSS) experiment conducted during Shuttle Columbias Mission STS-75 in February 1996. The 358-page report, produced by a board established to investigate the incident, concluded that a breach in the layer of insulation surrounding the tether conductor, possibly the result of contact with debris, led to the failure. According to the report, the breach in insulation allowed an electrical current to jump from a copper wire in the tether to an electrical ground, causing the breakage: the tether failed as a result of arcing and burning of the tether, leading to a tensile failure after a significant portion of the tether had burned away. The board noted that NASA scientists had already announced findings regarding tether current and voltage measurements, concluding that the unexpected breakage of Columbias tethered satellite did not indicate any fundamental problem with the concept of the TSS. Furthermore, the board recommended that during future experiments, scientists should take greater precautions to ensure that neither debris nor high-voltage arcing compromised the tethers strength.(NASA, Tethered Satellite Investigation Report Released, news release 96-112, 4 June 1996; Reuters, Damaged Insulation Ruined Test in Space, 5 June 1996; Associated Press, Study Finds Metal Debris Punctured Tether Pulled by Satellite, 5 June 1996.)
NASA announced that engineers from NASA and Lockheed Martin had completed successful tests on a prototype, lightweight, external fuel tank for the Shuttle. The tests measured the tanks strength and reliability under conditions exceeding recommended flight certification. NASAs External Tank Project Manager Parker V. Counts reported that the tests had demonstrated that the unique composition of the very lightweight tanks did not reduce their strength. NASA had awarded Lockheed Martin the contract to produce the lighter tanks, to enable the Shuttle to carry cargo to the high inclination orbit where the International Space Station (ISS) would reside. To build the tanks, NASA had used aluminum lithium, a material both lighter and stronger than the metal alloy used in previous tank construction. NASA had designed the tanks to weigh 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) less than the models used on earlier Shuttles.(NASA, Shuttle Super Lightweight Fuel Tank Completes Tests, news release 96-186, 11 September 1996. 129 NASA, First Global Image of Total Atmospheric Ozone Obtained from NASA Instrument Aboard Japanese Satellite, news release 96-188, 16 September 1996.)
missions priorities was to place in flight the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS), which
NASA formed an independent panel to review the failure of the tethered satellite experiment and the loss of the satellite. NASA selected Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of Dryden Flight Research Center, to chair the panel. The formation of such an investigative body in the wake of a costly loss conformed to standard practice under NASAs Space Flight Operations Contingency Plan. In a NASA press release announcing the panels formation, Szalai stated, given the public investment in the tethered satellite, it is important that we find out what went wrong.(NASA, NASA To Form Independent Review Panel, news release 96-39, 26 February 1996.)
Endeavours crew successfully tested a giant inflatable antenna, deploying the structure and gathering data during its orbit. Project Manager Steven Bard, a NASA scientist at JPL, called the successful test a giant step toward developing lightweight, cost-effective equipment for space research. The silver, inflatable antenna, about the size of a tennis court, cost US$14 million to develop. The Shuttle astronauts used the Shuttles robotic arm to launch the small satellite carrying the antenna. The crew situated Endeavour about 400 feet (122 meters) immediately above the antenna, to observe its behavior after deployment, but when the antenna made some unexpected tumbling rotations, the astronauts moved the Shuttle to a safer distance. After completing the test, the astronauts set off a series of small explosions to cut loose the antenna. Before the mission began, NASA officials had determined that deflating and recapturing the antenna would be too risky and costly to attempt.(William Harwood, Inflatable Antenna Passes Test, Washington Post, 21 May 1996; Associated Press, Space Shuttle Deploys Giant Antenna, Washington Times, 21 May 1996.)
NASA revealed that the joint U.S.-Italian team investigating the failure of the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS) had determined that the tether experiment conducted aboard Mission STS- 75 had revealed numerous fundamental flaws in space physics and plasma theories. The TSS experiment had ended with the tether breaking before reaching its full 13-mile (21-kilometer) length. The scientists concluded that a number of theoretical models, widely accepted for as long as 30 years, were incorrect and in need of revision. According to Noble Stone, a NASA scientist at MSFC, the teams most significant finding was that tether current flows between the satellite and the orbiter were three times greater than theoretical models had predicted. Because the amount of power generated was directly proportionate to the current, the harnessed energy had the potential to furnish thrust for rebooting a space station, satellite, or shuttle in a decaying orbit. Stone suggested that tether systems might some day supplement solar arrays as sources of power for long-term space platforms.(NASA, Early Findings from Tethered Satellite Mission Point to Revamping of Space Physics Theories, news release 96-106, 23 May 1996; NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Fall Science Meeting Highlights Tether Satellite Results, http://spacescience.spaceref.com/newhome/headlines/ast15oct96_1.htm (accessed 27 October 2008).)
other spacecraft. NASA planned to fly the satellite for 22 hours. To retrieve the satellite, the
Arianespace, the commercial arm of the European Space Agency, suffered a major setback in its bid to maintain control of the satellite-launching market in the face of competition from U.S. companies. Only seconds after the launch of Ariane 5, a huge rocket intended to launch satellites, Arianespace had to blow up the rocket when it veered severely off course. Arianespace had spent 10 years and more than US$7 billion to develop the 674-foot (205-meter), 821-ton (750,000- kilogram or 750-tonne) vehicle. Also lost in the explosion were satellites valued at more than US$500 million. Arianespace had projected a launch reliability of 98.5 percent for the rocket, considering failure so unlikely that the company had guaranteed a free launch to customers if the launch failed. A spokesperson for Arianespace acknowledged the disappointment of the failed test, but promised that the company would continue as the worlds leader in launching satellites. Aerospace industry analysts predicted that U.S. companies such as Lockheed Martin would likely gain an increased foothold in the market because of the European companys misfortune.(Kathleen Day, Losing a Rocket and a Satellite Edge? Washington Post, 5 June 1996; Craig Whitney, Costly Failure: Space Launch Is Aborted, New York Times, 5 June 1996.)
Space Shuttle Endeavours crew used the spacecrafts 50-foot (15-meter) robotic arm to snare NASAs Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology Flyer (OAST-Flyer) satellite. The OAST- Flyer, valued at US$10 million, weighed 2,600 pounds (1,200 kilograms).(Associated Press, Shuttles Astronauts Grab a 4-Ton Japanese Science Satellite from Its Orbit, 17 January 1996; Mark Carreau, Shuttle Dodges Military Satellite on Way To Retrieve Japanese Craft, Houston Chronicle, 13 January 1996; Michael Cabbage, Satellite Stowed, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1996.)
The Communist Party of China acknowledged for the first time that a failed satellite launch occurring on 15 February 1996 had killed six people and injured 57 others. The Long March 3B rocket had exploded, destroying the 15 Intelsat satellite and damaging 80 homes. The secretive government of the Peoples Republic of China had denied the major accident, announcing simply that a setback had occurred. However, foreign news sources had captured video footage of the launch rocket as it careened out of control and exploded in a highly populated area. The Chinese government ended the news blackout, which had prevented its own citizens from learning of the disaster, stating Chinas intention to delay future launch plans.(Reuters, China: Fiery Launch Killed 6, Injured 57, 4 March 1996.)
More than 200 experts met in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to plan the design and implementation of a new fleet of radar satellites. The group emphasized the recent geological discoveries made with data from radar satellites, especially from those satellites tracking the movements and shifts in Earths plates that have been impossible to track until recently. The U.S. Geological Survey and NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory sponsored the event. Geophysicist Howard A. Zebker described the satellites as a great leap forward. Its like suddenly having [x]-rays to see inside a body.(William J. Broad, Satellite Radar Unveils Subtle, Slow Wrinkling of the Planets Surface, New York Times, 3 September 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission, 10 March 1996.)
crew intended to retract the tether until the satellite was about 2 miles (3 kilometers) from the
With the push of a button at GSFC, NASA discontinued use of the International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite, which had been in orbit since 1978. When NASA sent a signal to the satellite to empty its fuel, the satellite effectively went to sleep, spinning off into space. Although NASA had originally designed the satellite to spend only three years in space, scientists continued to use it to gather data far beyond the spacecrafts anticipated lifespan. NASA ended control of the satellite to save between US$1 and US$2 million annually in operating costs. GSFC had operated the satellite as part of a three-way agreement with the European Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom. More than 2,000 researchers from around the world had made observations from the satellite, research that had directly led to the publication of more than 3,200 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals.
NASA successfully launched its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, via an Orbital Sciences Pegasus XL launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A jet flying roughly 7 miles above the California coast released the rocket that was carrying the satellite, placing the TOMS-EP in a successful orbit. The McMurdo Sound Tracking Station in Antarctica acquired the satellite almost immediately and determined that the spacecraft was functioning properly. After it reached a circular orbit, the TOMS-EP was ready to conduct its scientific mission.(NASA, Pegasus/TOMS Launch Successful from Vandenberg AFB, news release, 2 July 1996; Associated Press, BRFSatellite Launch, 2 July 1996.)
Scientists at the University of Texas at Dallas revealed their discovery of an ancient river channel buried beneath the Sahara Desert in Africa, publishing their findings in Science magazine. The discovery offered an answer to a question that had long perplexed the scientific community, why does the Nile River, as it flows through the worlds largest desert (in Sudan) make a huge, looping bend in its course? The Nile generally flows toward the north, except at the Great Bends turning, where the river flows toward the southwest for more than 200 miles (320 kilometers). After this detour, the Nile resumes its course toward the Mediterranean Sea. The researchers had used the images taken by the Spaceborne Imaging Radar C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR), which had flown with Shuttle Endeavours Mission STS-59 in 1994, to study the ancient structures in the Precambrian rock, guiding the rivers course. The SIR-C/X-SAR radar waves had penetrated the sand to reveal unseen structures, not visible without the satellite images. Diane L. Evans, SIR-C Project Manager at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), called the discovery one of the most exciting discoveries from the SIRC/XSAR mission to date. JPL was managing the program as a part of NASAs Mission to Planet Earth initiative.(Robert J. Stern and Mohamed Gamal, The Origin of the Great Bend of the Nile from SIR-C/X-SAR Imagery, Science 274, no. 5293 (6 December 1996): 16961698; NASA, Space Radar Unearths Secrets of the Ancient Nile, news release 96-251, 6 December 1996.)
The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 2A rocket, a satellite aimed at serving the burgeoning European television market. The satellite Hot Bird 2 cost US$100 million to develop and was powerful enough to beam television images throughout Europe and the Middle East. Eutelsat led a consortium of co-owner companies from the 45 different countries that co-own the satellite. Eutelsat assumed responsibility for operating Hot Bird 2, calling it the most powerful commercial satellite launched to date.(Todd Halverson, Atlas Sends $100 Million Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 1996.)
NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planets surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars, New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely after a successful nine-day mission. The Shuttle crew accomplished its primary task of capturing a Japanese satellite. The early-morning landing, in which the Shuttle returned to Earth under a shroud of darkness, was a rare occurrence.(Associated Press, Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks, 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal, news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
Russia launched a satellite carrying two monkeys and a collection of insects, snails, and plants. The satellite Bion-11 launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome, 600 kilometers (373 miles) north of Moscow. The Russian Space Agency planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the animal crew.(Reuters, Russia Launches Satellite with Monkeys, Insects, 24 December 1996.)
to jam. The U.S.- Italian satellite had cost US$443 million to produce. The satellite, extended on
Shuttle Endeavour made a smooth sunrise landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bringing to its close a fruitful 10-day research mission. The Shuttle crew celebrated their record achievement of 21 hours flying in close proximity to the satellites they had released. NASA planned to move Endeavour to Palmdale, California, for refurbishing.(Stefanie Asin, Welcome Back, Endeavour, Shuttle Lands at Kennedy Space Center After 10-Day Mission, Houston Chronicle, 30 May 1996.)
NASA announced the recipients of the 1996 Software of the Year Award, honoring those individuals who had created software enhancing NASAs mission and the U.S. aerospace industry. Linked Windows Interactive Data System, developed by NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the Tetrahedral Unstructured Software System, developed by LARC, won the 1996 awards. The former system allowed scientists to examine geophysical and climatological data gathered from satellites, and the latter aided researchers in studying problems with spacecraft, rotorcraft, automotive, turbomachinery, and medical analysis and design.(NASA, NASA Announces 1996 Software of the Year Award Recipients, news release, 9 July 1996.)
NASA announced that the tethered satellite experiment had failed. The 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, attaching the 0.5-ton (450-kilogram or 0.45-tonne) satellite to Shuttle Columbia, broke unexpectedly just as the tether had nearly reached its full extension. Before the tether broke, the experiment to use an orbiting satellite to produce electricity had been proceeding smoothly. The astronauts had been in the process of extending the satellite from the Space Shuttle for more than 5 hours, when they noted a decrease in tension and realized that the tether and satellite had broken away. NASA Commander Andrew M. Allen responded to the break immediately, directing the Shuttle away from the satellite to prevent a collision. However, the satellite never came close to the Shuttle; it was more than 18 miles (29 kilometers) away only a few minutes after breaking free. NASA officials could not immediately identify the cause of the break. The astronauts aboard the Shuttle managed to record images of the satellite trailing away from the Shuttle. This footage, a black and white rendering of the tether disappearing into space, reached Flight Command Center in Houston, Texas, shortly after the event. Those are some tether dynamics we did not want to see, stated one Mission Control operative. NASA dismissed the idea of attempting to retrieve the satellite, explaining that, although it was technically possible, such a mission would be too dangerous and too costly in consumption of fuel.(NASA, STS-75 Mission Control Status Report No. 10, 26 February 1996; Steve Marshall, Satellite Tether Snaps; Shuttle Safe, USA Today, 26 February 1996; William Harwood, Science Satellite Is Lost as Shuttle Tether Breaks, Washington Post, 26 February 1996.)
Scientists at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) received the first images from the United States Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), as the instrument orbited aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS). GSFC scientists noted the superior quality of the initial images. ADEOS continued a long line of satellites launched to aid scientists in observing total levels of ozone and volcanic sulfur dioxide. Because of data obtained from the TOMS instruments deployed by NASA, millions of Americans became aware of the ozone hole and began to use ozone as a household word. The latest TOMS instrument joined a series of instruments aboard ADEOS, including the Improved Limb Atmospheric Sounder, the Interferometric Monitor for Greenhouse Gases, and the Retroreflector in Space.
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASAs Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight, New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77, news release 96-83, May 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavours launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavours flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay, Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs, 16 January 1996.)
EarthWatch Inc. of Longmont, Colorado, launched into orbit Early Bird 1, the first private spy satellite. The launch, which took place in Russia, ended government domination of space spying. According to EarthWatch, Early Bird 1 had the capability to track objects on Earth as small as 10-feet (3-meters) long. The company also reported that customers were lining up to buy images. Customers for Early Bird 1 services included public interest groups, planning to track military movement and arms control measures, and foreign governments, without the resources to launch their own satellites. Because Early Bird 1 was an American-produced satellite, the U.S. federal government retained the right to switch it off during wartime, as well as the right to filter images sold to foreign customers. Experts predicted that the security and privacy questions surrounding the first private spy satellite would take years to sort out. However, they also surmised that Early Bird 1 was only the first in the wave of satellites that private industry would launch during the coming decade.(William J. Broad, First Civilian Spy Satellite Soars into Space, Launched in Russia by a U.S. Company, New York Times, 25 December 1997; Reuters, 1st Civilian Spy Satellite Launched in Russia, 26 December 1997.)
The unpiloted cargo spacecraft Progress M-33 failed in its planned docking with the Mir space station, forcing Russian space officials to decide whether to allow the cargo craft to burn up in the atmosphere or to try again to connect with Mir. The docking of Progress M-33, which only had some surplus fuel aboard, was not of critical importance to Mir, but Russian Space Agency scientists had planned to use the crafts docked mass to adjust the trajectory of Mir. News of the failure of the Progresss docking tempered Russias celebration of its first satellite launch from a new cosmodrome in Svobody, occurring on the same day. On 6 March, the saga ended, when Russian officials decided to let the Progress M-33 drift off to burn up in the atmosphere.(Reuters, Russia May Try New Space Docking or Let Craft Burn, 5 March 1997; Reuters, Russian Space Launch Marred by Failed Docking, 4 March 1996; Reuters, Russia To Scrap Spacecraft after Docking Snag 6 March 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earths ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASAs trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, one word for our mission would be diversity. With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch, news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study, USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair, Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
Following on the heels of Mars Pathfinders successful mission to map the surface of Mars, two researchers used sonar information and satellite images to create a highly detailed map of the global ocean floor, another largely unexplored area. David T. Sandwell of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Walter H. F. Smith of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration improved by 30 times the precision of the worlds most exact ocean maps. Their new map, revealing ridges and canyons never before delineated, helped explain ocean currents and tides across the world. The new mapping technology interested oil companies, looking for clues to the location of fossil fuel deposits, and fishermen seeking likely habitats of fish.(Robert Lee Hotz, Map Dramatically Deepens Learning About Sea Floor, Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997.)
Lockheed Martin Corporation announced a joint satellite venture with the Moscow-based Intersputnik consortium. Financial analysts estimated the pact could produce more than US$1.5 billion in annual revenue, capitalizing on the increasing demand for satellite transmission services for telecommunication signaling. The agreement, which cemented ties between the U.S. corporation and Russian space interests, combined Lockheeds capital resources with Intersputniks rights to prime satellite positions. Lockheed assumed responsibility for constructing and launching the satellites, whereas Intersputnik took the lead in marketing and sales. The Intersputnik group represented Russia and 21 other nations. The newly formed Lockheed Martin Intersputnik Ltd. Company planned to focus on providing services to South Asia and Eastern Europeburgeoning markets with great potential for technological and economic growth.(Jeff Cole, Lockheed To Unveil Intersputnik Satellite Venture, Wall Street Journal, 2 June 1997; Associated Press, Lockheed Planning Russia Venture, 2 June 1997; Greg Schneider, Lockheed To Link Ex-Soviet Markets, Baltimore Sun (MD), 3 June 1997.)
NASA announced the selection of four industry partners to study and develop a new Earth- imaging radar system. The proposed LightSAR system would use advanced technologies to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of radar-based satellites, which gather scientific data and provide commercial remote sensing. Project Manager Steven Bard of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pointed out the unique team approach planned for the project. NASA intended to work with industry partners from the start, to assess the potential commercial market for LightSAR products and services and to share the cost of developing the expensive new technology with private companies. The four primary contractors selected were DBA Systems Inc., Lockheed Martin Astronautics, Research and Development Laboratories, and Vexcel Corporation.(NASA, Teams Selected for Studies of Potential Partnership with NASA To Develop New Earth Imaging Radar System, news release 97-35, 6 March 1997.)
For the first time, NASA turned over control of a satellite project to a group of non-NASA scientists, placing the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) under the control of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at Harvard University. Harvard scientists had designed and built the satellite, but in previous NASA-university collaborations, NASA had always maintained control over implementation projects that it had funded. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA hoped the move would embolden non-NASA scientists: What we wanted to do is get the scientists closer to their spacecraft and close to their sources of data. NASA intended the AXAF, which had cost US$1.4 billion to develop, to study black holes and collisions between stars and galaxies.(Jules Crittenden, X-ray Tour of the Universe To Begin in Cambridge Lab, Boston Herald, 13 September 1997; Peter J. Howe, Putting the Universe into Focus, Boston Globe, 13 September 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Earth on Mission STS-87 with great fanfare, executing an unusual 180 roll 6 minutes into the 812-minute flight, a maneuver planned to put the Shuttle in radio contact with communication satellites. The launch itself took place at the exact moment on the exact day as planned for the sixth consecutive mission. The six-person crew included Takao Doi, a Japanese astronaut who planned to make his countrys first spacewalk; Kalpana Chawla, the first Indian-born woman to travel into space; Leonid K. Kadenyuk, the first Ukrainian to fly on a U.S. Shuttle; and U.S. astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Steven W. Lindsey, and Winston E. Scott. The crew planned to conduct a spacewalk to test instruments and procedures for the ISS. The Shuttle also carried the U.S. Microgravity Payload-4, which the astronauts planned to use to test the responses to conditions in space of a variety of materials and liquids.(NASA, Solar and Microgravity Research Highlight Final Shuttle Mission of 1997, news release J97037, November 1997; William Harwood, Columbia Corkscrews into Orbit, Washington Post, 20 November 1997; Reuters, U.S. Shuttle Blasts Off with Multinational Crew, 19 November 1997; Associated Press, Shuttle Executes Flip on Its Way into Orbit, 16 November 1997.)
Data gathered by the U.S.-French satellite TOPEX/Poseidon confirmed theories that a full- blown El Nino condition existed in the Pacific. Scientists believe that an El Nino forms when steady, westward-blowing trade winds weaken or reverse direction, altering typical, atmospheric jet-stream patterns around the world. TOPEX/Poseidon measured sea-surface heights and atmospheric water vapor to confirm the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrations earlier prediction. Based on previous El Nino events, scientists predicted heavy rainfall for the western United States, mild winters in the east, and extreme droughts in Australia, Africa, and Indonesia.(NASA, Independent NASA Satellite Measurements Confirm El Nino Is Back and Strong, news release 97-200, 15 September 1997.)
NASA announced its plan to compensate for the failure of Japans Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS) with NASAs weather instruments aboard, admitting that the loss of the spacecraft was a real blow to NASAs science program. Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) had declared the ADEOS lost on 30 June 1997. NASA scientists had been using the satellite to gather data about weather patterns and climate change. NASA resolutely pledged to continue working with NASDA despite the setback, highlighting plans to send up a second scatterometer aboard ADEOS II in 1999. Michael B. Mann, Deputy Associate Administrator of the Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise, qualified the failure saying, The collaboration between NASDA and NASA on this mission has been outstanding . . . space operations is a risky business; those of us involved in the business strive to limit the risk but sometimes mishaps do occur.(NASA, NASAs Earth Science Program Adjusts to Loss of Data from Japanese ADEOS Satellite, news release 97-149, 2 July 1997.)
In the first study to observe directly a change in the growth cycles of a large swath of the Northern Hemisphere, scientists reported that spring was arriving a full week earlier in the Earths coldest regions than only a decade earlier. The report contributed to growing concern over the prospect of global warming. Using images obtained from NOAA satellites, a team of five scientists from Boston University demonstrated that plants budding in early spring had used 10 percent more carbon than previously, indicating the springs earlier onset. The scientific community reacted to the report with interest, although most scientists cautioned that understanding climate change would be a long and difficult process.(Joby Warrick, Spring Sprouting Earlier than a Decade Ago, Washington Post, 17 April 1997.)
Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) unveiled its key contribution to the ISS, two satellites named after starsOrihime and Hikoboshi, which Japan planned to launch aboard an H-2 rocket. The satellites would make it easier to perform unpiloted docking experiments on the ISS. Japans interest in robotic space research fueled the proposal, which complemented NASDAs plan to build an unpiloted space shuttle to ferry Japans experiments to the ISS.
NASA announced that Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space Company had won the contract to develop and deliver solar-imaging instruments for U.S. weather satellites. The US$54 million contract provided funding for the creation of a model instrument and two flight instruments. Scientists believed that the solar x-ray images captured by the instrument would improve the ability of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Air Force to forecast special weather events. The proposed imager also had applications for civilian companies dependent upon predicting weather patterns.(NASA, Lockheed Martin Selected To Build Solar X-ray Imaging, news release C97-g, 18 June 1997; Grant Jerding, NASA Brings Its X-ray Vision to the Universe, USA Today, 17 June 1997.)
The international scientific community observed the 40th anniversary of Sputniks successful launch. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union had sent into orbit Sputnik I, a small sphere-shaped satellite, setting off a space race that continued throughout the Cold War. Although the United States had initially responded to the Soviet Unions achievement with fear and apprehension, NASA commemorated the event 40 years later with a celebratory symposium. The United States had launched NASA itself less than one year after the USSRs Sputnik success, partly because of the American publics distress over the Soviets beating the United States into space. The son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, Sergei N. Khrushchev, a prominent professor of International Studies at Brown University in Rhode Island, spoke at NASAs Sputnik symposium. With the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had unveiled to the worlds scientists many of the developmental plans of the Sputnik program. However, the end of communism had also precipitated enormous budget shortfalls for the Russian Space Agency. Kazakhstans President Nursultan Nazarbayev took the opportunity of Sputniks widely celebrated anniversary to complain publicly that Russia owed more than US$400 million in rent for Baikonur Cosmodromethe site of Sputniks launch and of ongoing Russian space activity. When the Soviet confederation broke up, Russia had agreed to pay US$100 million annually for the right to continue using the launch facilities in Kazakhstan.(NASA, Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite, news release N97-64, 5 September 1997; Associated Press, Plea for Rent Marks Sputnik Anniversary, 5 October 1997.)
The Pentagon announced that it had successfully tested its Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser (MIRACL), at White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The laser, constructed under President Ronald Reagans Strategic Defense Initiative, generated a beam that traveled more than 260 miles (418 kilometers) from Earth, hitting an orbiting satellite. According to Pentagon representative U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Robert Potter, if turned to its highest setting, MIRACL would have destroyed the satellite target. The test, which took place two years after the expiration of a 1985 congressional ban on tests of this type, was the first time the United States had tested a laser aimed at an orbiting satellite. Representatives of defense-related industries and scientists around the world debated the acceptability of such a test and the ethics of deploying the instrument. However, whether or not the test was justifiable, the successful hit had demonstrated the vulnerability of satellites to Earth-based weapons.(Associated Press, Laser Test-Fired into Space Strikes Orbiting U.S. Satellite, 21 October 1997.)
A Russian Zenit-2 rocket carrying a military satellite exploded moments after taking off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to Russian space officials, the failure occurred 38 seconds after liftoff, when an engine inexplicably shut off. The Russian Space Agency suspended all further launches until an investigation could determine what had caused the explosion. NASA believed that the destroyed satellite was a spy satellite intended to replace in orbit one of Russias many outdated satellites. Russia had not insured the satellite, valued at US$17 million.(Richard C. Paddock, Russian Rocket Bearing Military Satellite Fails, Los Angeles Times, 21 May; Associated Press, Russian Booster Fails, Explodes During Satellite Launch, 20 May 1997.)
U.S. Senator D. Robert Bob Graham (D-FL) announced a plan to lease room aboard NASA Space Shuttles and the ISS to private entities, to offset the costs of space exploration. Graham announced his plan during a news conference at a new Cape Canaveral, Florida, air station dedicated to commercial launches. Congress had banned the use of the Shuttle for commercial purposes after the Challenger accident. Some space experts believed that Grahams plan would take advantage of a strong commercial market for the retrieval of satellites from space. Grahams plan joined a list of other initiatives of the mid-1990s, designed to merge government and private space interests to ease costs for the federal government.(Seth Borenstein, Graham: Lets Make Money in Space, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 December 1997.)
At a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, scientists unveiled evidence of another cause, besides the Sun, of killer electrons, which travel at high velocity. When electrons travel from Jupiters massive magnetic field, their speed approaches the speed of light. Showers of high- velocity electrons cause many problems, including blackouts on Earth and damage to orbiting satellites and global positioning systems. Scientists had previously been unable to determine the source of the electrons causing the damage. Presenting the new information on the phenomenon of high-velocity electrons, the researchers declared that the ability to forecast space weather, including the patterns of high-velocity electrons, would become increasingly important during the coming age of the ISS.(Tim Friend, Mystery Solved: Jupiter Is Source of Killer Electrons, USA Today, 9 December 1997.)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force Space Command announced an agreement to collaborate on several projects of mutual interest. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained that the agreement was part of NASAs ongoing mission to become a more efficient and cost-effective agency, and that sharing information would lead to greater efficiencies in our respective missions. Goldin and U.S. Air Force Space Commander General Howell M. Estes III signed the pact, establishing seven teams to explore areas of potential cooperation. The areas of research included the feasibility of launching defense satellites from the Shuttle; the use of the Shuttle for U.S. Air Force technology payloads; and development of a plan to meet the dual space needs of NASA and the U.S. Air Force. The two agencies also planned to examine ways they might share their common infrastructure and facilities.(NASA, NASA and Air Force Space Command Announce Cooperative Efforts, news release 97-68, 16 April 1997.)
NASA announced that it would join an international consortium of space agencies to support the launch of a Japanese satellite designed to create the largest astronomical instrument ever. The launch of the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) Space Observatory would create a radio telescope more than twice the diameter of the Earth, giving astronomers their sharpest view yet of the universe. Astronomers praised the Japanese-led launch as a significant advance for space research. VLBI satellites would allow radio astronomers to link together widely separated radio telescopes, so that they would function as a single instrument with extraordinarily sharp resolving power. The farther apart the telescopes, the greater would be the images resolution. NASA equated the power of the new tool with the ability to see a grain of rice in Tokyo from Los Angeles. Scientists hoped that the new tool would allow for further exploration of active galaxies with massive black holes. Researchers also hoped that the instrument would foster understanding of the mysterious quasars, which pour out tremendous amounts of energy and host or create black holes. Creating the enormous VLBI network involved 40 radio telescopes from 15 nations. Japans Institute of Space and Astronautical Science led the international consortium of science agencies, including NASAs JPL, the U.S. National Science Foundations National Radio Astronomy Observatory, the Canadian Space Agency, the Australia Telescope National Facility, the European VLBI Network, and Europes Joint Institute for VLBI.(NASA, Launch Will Create a Radio Telescope Larger than Earth, news release 97-24, 7 February 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 25.)
NASA launched an unpiloted Delta rocket carrying the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE), a US$100 million solar-observatory satellite bound on a 1 million-mile (1.6 million-kilometer) journey. The launch took place one day later than expected because, on the original launch date, a commercial fishing boat had come within range of the launch danger zone. Scientists launched ACE toward an imaginary point 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth and 92 million miles (148 million kilometers) from the Sun, a point at which scientists believe that the gravity of the Earth and Sun balance each other. NASA planned for ACE to orbit for as long as five years, analyzing particles streaming from the Sun. In keeping with NASAs focus on improved efficiency, NASA engineers collaborated with the Boeing Company to build ACE and launch the mission, at a cost of US$200 millionmore than US$30 million under budget.(Associated Press, After 1-Day Delay, NASA Launches Bargain-Priced Solar Observatory, 25 August 1997; Associated Press, Launch Delayed by Errant Shrimpers, 25 August 1997.)
Two members of Columbias crew, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott and Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, conducted a spacewalk, successfully recapturing the unresponsive Spartan satellite released on 21 November. After the 3,000-pound (1,400-kilogram) satellite had failed to turn toward the Sun, Columbias robotic arm had bumped it away from the Shuttle. NASA officials had cancelled the missions originally planned spacewalk to rescue the US$10 million spacecraft. Astronauts Scott and Doi later received a telephone call from President William J. Clinton congratulating them on grabbing the satellite.(William Harwood, Satellite Designed To Study Sun Fails, Washington Post, 22 November 1997; Associated Press, Columbia Crew Prepares Plan To Recover Spinning Satellite, 24 November 1997; William Harwood, Space Walkers Grab Satellite, Wrestle It Back onto Shuttle, 25 November 1997; Reuters, Spacewalking Astronauts Grab Errant Satellite, 25 November 1997; Associated Press, Clinton Calls Shuttle Crew with Thanks, 28 November 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mirs crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mirs crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mirs path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call, New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare, USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
NASA announced the establishment of a National Microgravity Center, formed in conjunction with Case Western Reserve University and the Universities Space Research Association. NASA selected Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, to lead its research efforts in the project. Plans for the nations first center dedicated exclusively to microgravity research focused on five areas: 1) research and technology development; 2) science program outreach and development; 3) scientific support; 4) technology transfer to industry; and 5) public education initiatives. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the endeavor, stating, The National Center for Microgravity Research on Fluids and Combustion represents a commitment to our goal to strengthen the partnership between NASA and our nations research community in universities and industry so that together we can increase the scientific and economic payoffs from NASAs Microgravity Science Program. NASA selected Simon Ostrach, a distinguished professor of engineering at Case Western University, as Director of the National Microgravity Center. As Director, Ostrach would be responsible for managing the Centers staff of more than 30 people and for shaping an agenda of research that would take advantage of opportunities aboard the ISS.(NASA, NASA Establishes New National Microgravity Center, news release 97-40, 13 March 1997. 225 Reuters, Japan Unveils Experimental Docking Satellites, 20 March 1997.)
Satellites survived the annual Leonid meteor storm with no major damage. Astronomers had predicted the storm would be the most intense in three decades, because Comet Tempel-Tuttle had swung closer to the Sun in February, as it does every 33 years, creating a greater-than- average amount of comet dust. Scientists had feared that particles traveling at 43 miles (69 kilometers) per second could shred satellites solar arrays, damage sensitive instruments, or cause circuits to short.
Steve Fossetts Solo Spirit balloon, carrying NASAs prototype Aerobot Science Payload, landed prematurely when it experienced equipment problems. NASA had been testing the Aerobot Science Payload prototype for use on balloons in outer space, to collect information from other planets atmospheres. On this trip, Aerobot returned accurate data on position, balloon velocity, vertical wind velocity, temperature, and humidity, but experienced problems with a pressure sensor and a satellite communications link.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Balloon Trip Helps Martian Studies, 11 January 1998.)
Russias first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russias largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a revolution, because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, Delta Lifts Russian Satellite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia, 23 November 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States. With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone. The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket, 9 May 1998.)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, BRFSatellite Launch, 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, Orbitals Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecrafts First Signals Indicate Early Success, 2 April 1998.)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite, out of contact with ground controllers since 25 June, responded to signals sent by NASAs Deep Space Tracking Network antennas in Canberra, Australia. Although the signals contained no data, SOHO transmitted a series of short radio bursts, indicating to space scientists that the craft was still able to receive ground commands and, therefore, that they might still have a chance of salvaging it.(NASA, SOHO Spacecraft Contacted, news release 98-145, 4 August 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, Contact Re-established with Wayward Satellite, 4 August 1998.)
After two delays, one because of mechanical problems, the other because of strong winds, a Japanese H-2 rocket blasted off from Tanegashima Space Center, carrying a US$370 million communications satellite intended to conduct a three-year series of communications and broadcast tests. However, an engine breakdown prevented the satellite from entering a geostationary orbit; instead, the launch left the satellite floating in space, useless for its intended mission. Engineers were looking for ways to rescue the mission.(Mari Yamaguchi for Associated Press, Japan-Satellite, 21 February 1998.)
On NASAs 40th anniversary, President of the Space Frontier Foundation Richard N. Tumlinson and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about space exploration and the possibility of privatizing space ventures. Tumlinsons organization advocated limiting NASAs role to supporting technology and research programs. He proposed commercializing the Shuttle fleet and privatizing NASA field centers, to reduce the costs of space exploration and eventual colonization. Goldin advocated reducing costs as well, but did not respond to Tumlinsons proposals. He also outlined new technologies that NASA was developing, to cut the cost of rockets and satellites. Goldin remarked that NASA would form partnerships with industry for cutting-edge research development, also emphasizing NASAs support of government loans to fuel the growth of the space industry in the United States.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, UPI Science News, 2 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, NASA Urged To Sell Shuttles, 1 October 1998.)
NASA announced that astronomers had located the wayward SOHO satellite after losing radio contact on 24 June, when a programming error on the ground caused its solar panels to switch positions. Two U.S. radio telescopes had located the satellite rotating slowly near its original position, approximately 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth. Engineers had calculated its exact location after NASAs Deep Space Network in Goldstone, California, intercepted the echo of a radio signal transmitted by the giant radio telescope of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center in Arecibo, Puerto Rico. The spacecrafts slow rotation on its axis indicated that it had incurred only minor damage and that its solar panels would soon face the Sun again.(Agence France-Presse, U.S.-European Satellite Located by Engineers, 28 July 1998.)
NASA announced that Colorado State University would lead a US$145 million study of clouds, to better understand global warming and to dramatically improve weather forecasts. The five- year project would use a satellite named CloudSat to capture three-dimensional global images of clouds.
NASA partially cancelled the Clark satellite program, keeping only the US$13 million launch vehicle service portion of the contract with Lockheed Martin. As reasons for the cancellation, NASA cited cost overruns, an uncertain launch schedule, and questions concerning the effectiveness of Clarks instruments in orbit, because its primary instrument had been sitting on the ground two years longer than planned. The intended mission of the program was to take black-and-white stereo images, showing detail as small as 10 feet (3 meters) across, for NASAs Office of Earth Science Enterprise (formerly the Office of Mission to Planet Earth), as well as for commercial customers. NASA had paired the Clark satellite with the Lewis satellite. However, after its August 1997 launch, the Lewis satellite had gone into a spin, which controllers were unable to repair. Consequently, the Lewis satellite plunged into the atmosphere where it burned up.(NASA, NASA Terminates Clark Earth Science Mission, news release, 25 February 1998; Justin Ray, NASA Cans Clark, an Imaging Satellite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 February 1998.)
A West European Ariane 4LP rocket blasted off from French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites, Brasilsat-3 and Inmarsat-3. Twenty-one minutes after takeoff, the first satellite, belonging to Brazil, separated from the rocket. Five minutes later, the second satellite, a 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne) worldwide mobile communications satellite, separated from the rocket. The launch successfully placed both satellites in orbit.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), European Ariane Rocket Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit, 5 February 1998.)
Boeing successfully launched, from a California launch site, five satellites for the Iridium World Communications network, aboard a Delta II rocket. The Delta II launched two weeks after the disastrous maiden flight of the new Delta III rocket, which had exploded during liftoff. Officials announced on 5 September that a problem with the rockets control system had caused the explosion, but that they had not yet determined the exact chain of events. The five satellites launched aboard the Delta II rocket replaced satellites that had malfunctioned and could not be included in the Iridium telecommunications constellation.(Justin Ray, Delta 2 Lifts Five Satellites into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 1998.)
This date marked Mirs 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, BRFMir, 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion, 20 February 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer. As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program, 26 March 1998.)
NASA announced that experts from the ESA and Matra Marconi Space, the prime contractor for the SOHO spacecraft, had met at GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to assess the situation of the noncommunicating spacecraft and to analyze the satellites status in the event that ground controllers reestablished contact with it. Participants at the meeting named as cochairs of a joint inquiry board to investigate the incident, Professor Massimo Trella, the ESAs Inspector General, and Michael A. Greenfield, Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters.(NASA, Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Inquiry Board Co-Chairs Named, news release 98- 118, 30 June 1998.)
Pentagon officials announced that, on 12 August, a split-second power outage had caused a Titan IV rocket to explode while launching a secret spy satellite into space. A battery powering the guidance system had failed, interrupting the flow of electricity for a fraction of a second. After the restoration of battery power, the guidance control system had sent a command causing the rocket to pitch down and to the right, while traveling at 675 miles (1,100 kilometers) per hour at 17,000 feet (5,200 meters). The rocket had begun to break up, and the malfunction had triggered the automatic destruct system. In addition, when it had begun to explode, range safety officers had sent the rocket destruct commands, to ensure it would not threaten the coastal population.(Todd Halversen, Titan 4 Blast Blamed on Brief Battery Power Outage, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 September 1998.)
NASA announced the discovery of a fast-spinning pulsar, providing evidence of an evolutionary link between strong-field, slower-spinning, energetic pulsars and weak-field, millisecond pulsars. Frank Marshall, William W. Zhang, and Eric V. Gotthelf of GSFC found the pulsar by examining x-ray emissions that NASAs Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer spacecraft had recorded in 1996. Observations of the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics spacecraft, a satellite jointly owned by Japan and the United States, confirmed the discovery. The scientists reported that the pulsar was spinning at a rate of 60 times per second, and that it could have been spinning as fast as 150 times per second when it formed 4,000 years ago. An astrophysicist at the U.S. Department of Energys Los Alamos National Laboratory remarked, this is the fastest high-energy pulsar of its type we know about. The research team reported that the pulsar is likely associated with the remnant of a supernova (N157B) that exploded in the Large Magellanic Cloud about 4,000 years ago. Comparing the pulsar found in N157B to the high- energy pulsar in the Crab Nebula, the scientists reported that the central source of x-ray light from N157B is this fast-spinning pulsar associated with a supernova remnant, proving the hypothesis that the weaker the magnetic field, the faster the pulsar spins at birth.(NASA, Fast-Spinning Pulsar Discovery Provides Evolutionary Link, news release 98-14, 26 January 1998.)
An international team of researchers announced that observations of U.S. satellites orbiting Earth had proven one of physicist Albert Einsteins theories correct. In his general theory of relativity, Einstein had predicted that a spinning body could curve space, because the spin of a body must change the geometry of the universe by generating space-time curvature. Einstein had called the phenomenon frame dragging, but scientists came to refer to it as the Lense-Thirring effect, naming it for two Austrian physicists who wrote that rotating celestial bodies, such as the Sun, create a force that pulls space toward them. Ignazio Ciufolini, a physicist at Sapienza University of Rome, and his colleagues used lasers to measure changes in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellite I, or LAGEOS, a NASA spacecraft, and LAGEOS II, a satellite belonging to NASA and the Italian Space Agency. The research team observed changes that they could not account for by the laws of gravity or tidal forces, concluding that the Lense-Thirring effect exists. The satellites, launched in 1976 and 1992, were passive satellites dedicated exclusively to laser ranging. In this process, scientists had send laser pulses to the satellite from ranging stations on Earth, measuring the round-trip travel time of the pulses. The research team had analyzed data collected over a four-year period beginning in 1993.(NASA, Earth Dragging Space and Time as It Rotates, news release 98-51, 27 March 1998; Reuters, Einstein Proved Right Yet Again, 26 March 1998.)
The joint committee of NASA and the European Space Agency investigating the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) incident issued a preliminary report. The committee found that several errors had led to the loss of the satellites signal. First, Mission Control had unknowingly activated two preprogrammed sequences, which lacked commands to reorient the spacecraft properly. The resulting anomalies had caused SOHO to enter into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR). A rapid decision to turn off one of the crafts gyroscopes had ultimately triggered two more ESRs, sending the spacecraft flailing out of control. Controllers also discovered that undetected failures, which had occurred sometime earlier in the year, had taken out three of the four batteries.(NASA, Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Investigation Board Focuses on Most Likely Causes, news release 98-125, 16 July 1998; James Glanz, Chain of Errors Hurled Probe into Spin, Science 281, no. 5376 (24 July 1998): 499; United Press International, UPI Science News, 28 July 1998.)
NASAs Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft captured a video of a short-lived but extremely bright explosion in the atmosphere of the sun. The explosion was 55,000 miles (89,000 kilometers) long, 200 miles (322 kilometers) wide, and traveled at a rate of 2 million miles (3.2 million kilometers) per hour. The explosions overlapped each other and snapped, releasing vast amounts of energy as solar flares. Solar flares cause magnetic disturbances that disrupt satellites and power supplies if directed at Earth. In April, NASA had launched the TRACE spacecraft, with a telescope 10 times more powerful than any other telescope focused on the Sun. The telescope studied the transitional region of the Suns atmosphere, between the relatively cool surface of the lower atmosphere, with temperatures of 6,000C (11,000F), and the corona or upper atmosphere, where temperatures reach 1.7 millionC (35 millionF). The telescope was able to photograph ultraviolet light and to show temperature variations using false colors.(Mark Prigg, Photos Reveal Suns Power, Sunday Times (London), 7 June 1998; Leonard Novarro for Reuters, Solar Flare May Disrupt Worldwide Communication, 8 June 1998.)
The PanAmSat-owned Galaxy IV, a five-year old communications satellite, lost its bearings so that its antennas were not directed toward Earth, causing the worst outage in 37 years since communications satellites first entered service. Most of the 45 million pagers in the United States were unable to function during the outage, which severed electronic links vital to thousands of retailers, news organizations, and broadcasters. PanAmSat officials said that an attitude-control mechanism failed for an unknown reason and a backup processor failed to turn on, causing the satellite to rotate. At that point, hundreds of thousands of satellite dishes in the United States lost contact with Galaxy IV.(Mike Mills, Satellite Glitch Cuts Off Data Flow, Washington Post, 21 May 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
A US$35,000 study commissioned by the Florida Space Business Roundtable revealed that commercial satellite companies did not favor Cape Canaveral as a launch site. The Florida Space Business Roundtable presented its findings at the Florida Space Launch Symposium in Melbourne, Florida. In the survey, executives from satellite manufacturing companies rated spaceports, evaluating them in 11 categories, such as their launch base facilities, flight scheduling, governmental red tape, and on-site technical services. The executives favorite launch site was Vandenberg Air Force Base in central California, and they selected Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China as the worst place to launch. Floridas spaceports did well in two categories, but business executives considered red tape at those facilities a problem.(Todd Halvorson, Survey: Brevard Launch Sites Fail To Measure UpSpace Coast Falls Short for Commercial Liftoffs, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 February 1998.)
The Chinese Long March 2C rocket launched two U.S. satellites into orbit, from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in Shanxi province in northern China. The satellites were part of a mobile telecommunications system that Motorola Corporation had developed for the Iridium World Communications network scheduled to begin commercial service on 23 September 1998. The Iridium contract had boosted Chinas launching industry, which had been struggling to recover from a string of launch disasters in 1995 and 1996.(Associated Press, China Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit, 3 May 1998.)
PanAmSat Corporation announced the impairment of a critical subsystem of its Galaxy VII spacecraft. A spokesperson for the company said that engineers had not yet determined whether the problem was the same as that which caused the failure of the Galaxy IV spacecraft on 19 May. Both the primary and backup systems keeping the Galaxy IV correctly pointed toward Earth-bound controllers had failed, but although the Galaxy VII had lost its primary system, its backup system had continued to function properly. Hughes Electronics Corporations Space and Communications Company, the manufacturer of the two satellites, was investigating the failures. Both satellites were HS601 models, the worlds best-selling large communications satellite, with customers including the U.S. Navy, NASA, the government of Mexico, and communications companies throughout the world.(Robert Covington for Reuters, Second PanAmSat Satellite Encounters Problems, 2 July 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life, 31 January 1998.)
After a one-day delay to correct a software problem, Mars Climate Orbiter launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Delta II rocket. NASA had scheduled the 1,400-pound (635-kilogram) robotic craft, paired with Mars Polar Lander, to launch on 3 January 1999. Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, the second pair headed to study Mars following Mars Pathfinder and Mars Global Surveyor, were part of NASAs long-term strategy for Mars exploration, calling for small robotic craft to leave Earth two at a time, about every two years. According to NASAs plan, Climate Orbiters first task would be to provide a two-way communications relay between ground controllers and Polar Lander after Landers arrival and during its planned 6090 day mission. Thereafter, Orbiter would generate weather maps and profile the Martian atmosphere for a full Martian year, or 687 days.(Kathy Sawyer, Mars Probe To Examine Climate; NASA Launch Is First of Two Designed To Shed Light on Potential for Life, Washington Post, 12 December 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martinbuilt Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASAs Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Rocket Explosion, 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite, Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
Controllers at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun. Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHOs mission was to track major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space. The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Suns atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted, news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears Its Lost, USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
At a NASA news conference, astronomers discussed the discovery of the largest explosion ever sighted in space. The journal Nature published three papers about the event, detected on 14 December 1997. The explosion, a gamma-ray burst (GRB) designated GRB971214, had occurred 12 billion years ago and had apparently outshone all the rest of the universe for about 40 seconds. The Italian-Dutch orbiting gamma-ray observatory BeppoSAX had measured the sharp pulse of gamma rays and pinpointed the position of the rays source. The United States Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had also detected the gamma-ray pulse, and scientific institutions around the world had monitored the after-effects of the explosion. Twelve hours afterward, John R. Thorstensen of Dartmouth College had used a 94-inch-diameter (49- centimeter-diameter) telescope at Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona to detect a visible afterglow, which lasted for about two weeks. After the glow had faded, the scientists had discovered a faint galaxy in the same location. A team of American, Italian, and Indian astronomers, led by two California Institute of Technology scientists, used the Keck II Telescope in Hawaii to measure the distance from Earth to the source of the burst. No theorists were able to explain the explosion, and no existing models explaining GRBs could explain the amount of energy emitted from GRB971214. The scientists suggested the possibility that a superdense neutron star had ripped apart as it disappeared into a neighboring black hole, or that a violent merger of two black holes had caused the burst.(Malcolm W. Browne, Astronomers Detect Immense Explosion 2d Only to Big Bang, New York Times, 7 May 1998; NASA, Most Powerful Explosion since the Big Bang Challenges Gamma Ray Burst Theories, news release 98-75, 6 May 1998.)
Ghassem R. Asrar, NASA Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about budget concerns and delays associated with the Earth Observing System program. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) had called the hearing to discuss numerous delays in NASAs Earth Science Enterprise missions. Asrar explained the reasons for the delays, indicating that NASA would work with Raytheon Systems to deliver a scaled-back data system within budget, in time to support two delayed missions. Subcommittee member, Representative David Weldon Jr. (R- FL), questioned the legitimacy of NASAs ownership of the Earth Science program, suggesting that a different agency, such as the National Academy of Sciences or the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), should manage the program. Weldon also questioned whether scientists would be able to make use of the vast amount of data they expected the program to generate. Robert S. Winokur, NOAAs Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, assured subcommittee members that scientists would be able to use the information. Winokur was responsible for coordinating NOAAs joint efforts with NASA to archive and retrieve environmental data.(Brian Berger, Earth Science Faces Hurdles: NASA To Forfeit Data Capabilities To Put Key Program on Track, Space News, 1420 September 1998.)
Hughes Global Services Inc. announced the success of its salvage mission to a stranded Asia Satellite Telecommunications Company Ltd. communications satellite. The 3.8-ton (3,500- kilogram or 3.5-tonne) AsiaSat 3 had remained stranded in a useless orbit since its December 1997 launch. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had received US$200 million from insurers. The insurers had told Hughes Global Services to find a new customer, if the salvage mission was successful. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had originally intended AsiaSat 3 to provide television and telephone service in Asia, but the Russian-built launcher had malfunctioned, and the satellites orbit had gone awry, rendering it useless. Hughes Global Services had taken possession of the satellite, implementing a seemingly improbable mission to salvage the spacecraft. Hughes had sent the satellite around the Moon twice, using the Moons gravity to help correct the satellites orbit around the Earth, and declared the salvage mission a success, even though the satellite was not stationary, which would limit the number of customers who might lease or buy it.(Andrew Pollack for Associated Press, Rescue Effort Puts a Satellite in Viable Orbit, New York Times, 19 June 1998; Associated Press, US Satellites, 19 June 1998.)
Officials from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported that they had placed GOES-8, the weather satellite responsible for monitoring the East Coast, in a safe hold shutdown, after it had developed problems with its attitude sensors. GOES-10 was then required to watch the entire country, although it could provide images only every 30 minutes, instead of every 15 minutes, as it did when each of the two satellites was able to monitor half of the United States. NASA officials were especially concerned about monitoring East Coast weather, because of worry that winds from Hurricane Mitch, located over the coast of Central America, could interfere with the upcoming launch of the Space Shuttle carrying veteran astronaut, U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr.(Randolph E. Schmid for Associated Press, East Weather Satellite Shuts Down, 28 October 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science, news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive Drizzle, USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
A month after its launch, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) began activating the weather satellite, Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-10 (GOES- 10), a backup to the failing GOES-9 satellite. The momentum wheels on GOES-9, similar to a gyroscope, which maintain the satellites stability, were showing signs of impending failure. GOES-9 was responsible for monitoring weather on the west coast of the United States. GOES- 10, placed in storage mode above the center of the country, would need about 30 days, moving approximately 1o of longitude each day, to move to the west coast location. GOES-10s well- timed placement in storage mode would ensure data continuity, saving NOAA a 12- to 15-month wait for a time slot for launch, following the imminent failure of GOES-9.(Associated Press, Failing Weather Satellite Replaced, 10 July 1998.)
The investigation board of engineers and officials from NASA and the European Space Agency released their final report, determining how controllers had lost communication with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite on 24 June. The boards findings, presented at a joint news conference held in Washington, DC, and Paris, concluded that no anomalies existed on the spacecraft; the loss of SOHO was a direct result of operational errors, a failure to monitor the status of the spacecraft adequately, and the use of insufficiently tested rescue procedures. However, the board emphasized that no single cause or particular person was responsible for the incident.(Warren E. Leary, Satellite To Study Sun Is Reviving from Dead, New York Times, 4 September 1998.)
The newly developed Delta III rocket exploded during liftoff, destroying the Galaxy X communications satellite it was carrying into orbit. The launch was the maiden flight of Boeings newest version of the Delta rocket, designed to carry 8,400 pounds (3,800 kilograms), twice the payload of the previous version.(Seth Schiesel, New Type of Rocket To Carry Satellites Explodes in Liftoff, New York Times, 27 August 1998. 574 NASA, International Candidates Join 1998 Astronaut Class, news release 98-155, 27 August 1998.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula, the site of a gas cloud generating enough water to fill the Earths oceans 60 times a day. The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula. The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time the vital role that water plays in star formation, may provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem. Michael Werner of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, that water is prevalent in space and plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth, 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns, Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
The Iridium World Communications system global, digital wireless communications network completed a series of deployment missions, with the launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California of five Iridium satellites aboard a Boeing Delta II launch vehicle. The successful launch had completed the entire Iridium constellation in just twelve months. The worlds first global, wireless telephone company scheduled its commercial service to begin four months following this last launch, once it had completed integrating and testing the Iridium system.(PR Newswire, Boeing Delta II Rocket Places Iridium Satellites into Orbit, 17 May 1998.)
A modified L-1011 jetliner flying at 40,000 feet (12,000 meters) dropped a Pegasus XL rocket carrying the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS), designed to study the formation of stars and planets. The launch marked the beginning of a two-year, US$64 million mission to learn more about the composition of interstellar clouds and monitor how they cool as they collapse to form stars and planets. The 397-pound (179-kilogram) SWAS would study water, molecular oxygen, atomic carbon, and isotopic carbon monoxide, by means of submillimeter wave radiation, which scientists cannot observe from the ground. NASAs GSFC managed the mission.(Associated Press, NASA Launches Probe To Study Stars, 5 December 1998; CNN.com, NASA Launches Satellite To Study Star Formation, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9812/05/swas.launch/ (accessed 27 October 2008).)
NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration awarded a US$423 million contract to Hughes Space and Communications of El Segundo, California, to manufacture and launch up to four weather-monitoring Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). The basic contract covered the manufacture and launch of two spacecraft. Separate fixed-price options for two additional spacecraft would cost US$190 million and US$185 million. The spacecraft would carry instruments to provide regular measurements of the Earths atmosphere, cloud cover, and land surfaces. Two spacecraft would also carry the Solar X-ray Imager and Space Environment Monitor instruments. These four spacecraft, known as GOES-N, -O, -P, and -Q were to continue, enhancing the services of the current GOES-I through -M series, a mainstay of modern weather forecasting. The GOES series provided meteorologists and hydrologists with visible and infrared images of weather systems, and precise atmospheric soundings. The positions of the spacecraft in orbit would allow scientists to monitor storms when they were first forming in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.(NASA, Hughes Selected To Build Weather Satellites, contract announcement release C98-B, 28 January 1998. 404 Robyn Suriano, Atlas Launches on Fourth Try: Classified Craft Likely To Serve as Orbital Switchboard, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 January 1998.)
An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagons National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 112 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellitesOrihime and Hikoboshiin outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment an impressive feat. NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japans Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi, associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly, New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) launched into orbit, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, a new weather satellite, the NOAA-K, aboard a 34- year old converted Titan II nuclear missile. The satellite was an Advanced Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS-N) weather satellite, able to see inside clouds, a feature that scientists expected would greatly increase our knowledge of how hurricanes develop and move. The TIROS-N was the latest model of TIROS satellite in four generations. Lockheed Martin had last built a TIROS satellite for NASA and NOAA in 1960. After the launch of the TIROS-N, the satellite would undergo a series of tests by NASA, followed by a round of tests by NOAA, before becoming fully available in time for next years hurricane season.(Justin Ray, New NOAA Weather Satellite Will Keep a Better Eye on Hurricanes, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 1998; Business Wire, Nations Newest Advanced Weather Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully, 14 May 1998.)
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches, while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur. Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project, Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as chief of American rocketry efforts, died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimers disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germanys defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects. In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agencys Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89, New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Ghassem R. Asrar as the new Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise. Before this appointment, Asrar had served as Chief Scientist for the Earth Observing System in the Office of Earth Science Enterprise at NASA Headquarters. He led an international team in developing scientific priorities and measurements to be obtained from a series of advanced Earth-orbiting satellites that promise fundamental new insights into the connections between Earths land, oceans, atmosphere, ice, and life.(NASA, Asrar Named Associate Administrator for Earth Science, news release 98-19, 2 February 1998.)
After experiencing two disastrous launch failures in 1996 and 1997, the European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched its French-made Ariane 5 rocket and recoverable space capsule from Korou, French Guiana. The 1.6 million-pound (800-ton, 726,000-kilogram, or 726-tonne) rocket carried a 2.6-tonne (2.9-ton, 5,700-pound, or 2,600-kilogram) mock-up of a telecommunications satellite and a 2.8-tonne (3.1-ton, 6,200-pound, or 2,800-kilogram) recoverable capsule. With the successful recovery of the capsule from the Pacific Ocean, France became the fourth country to develop such technology, following the United States, Russia, and China. French scientists had designed the Ariane 5 rocket to carry payloads of 5.96.8 tonnes (6.57.5 tons, 13,00015,000 pounds, or 5,9006,800 kilograms) into geostationary orbit, using twice the power of the Ariane 4; to provide launches for low-altitude orbits and interplanetary space probes; and to lift the cargo vehicle that would be the ESAs contribution to the ISS.(John-Thor Dahlburg, Third Trys the Charm for European Rocket, Los Angeles Times, 22 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, Ariane Capsule Test Called a Success, 21 October 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, NASA [is] trying to concentrate attention entirely on Russias difficulties even though [NASA is] three months behind in constructing a laboratory module. Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agencys financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russias launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would keep its promise to stop assisting Irans weapons program.(Houston Chronicle, Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station, 18 March 1998.)
Hughes Electronics Corporation concluded its investigation into the 19 May failure of PanAmSats Galaxy IV satellite and the similar problems that later had affected two other satellites. Metallic crystals growing in space, less than the width of a human hair, had caused tin-plated electrical switches to short, disabling navigational devices that kept the satellites oriented toward Earth-based controllers. However, the investigation had failed to uncover the source of the failure of Galaxy IVs backup system, which led to the widespread blackout on 19 May.(Aaron Pressman for Reuters, Tiny Crystals Waylaid Satellites, Hughes Says, 11 August 1998.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery successfully retrieved the Spartan spacecraft, thus completing a priority project of the nine-day mission. The crew had deployed the satellite on 1 November, to record observations of the Suns outer atmosphere and the solar wind. Spartan had lagged 40 miles (64 kilometers) behind the Shuttle, in free flight, as it recorded the data. The flight was the last in a series of four flights begun in 1993 to gather observations at different points in the [S]uns 11-year cycle of magnetic activity. NASA had originally scheduled the mission for November 1997, but astronauts had failed to send a crucial command before releasing the satellite, so Spartan had gathered no data. The crew had also tested an experimental laser range-finding device mounted in the Shuttle, aiming at targets on Spartan.(Washington Times, Glenn Reports No Space Sickness as Discovery Releases Sun Gazer, 2 November 1998; Washington Times, Astronauts Snag Sun Observer To Complete a Primary Mission: Glenn, 77, Undergoes More Tests of His Response to Space, 4 November 1998; New York Times, Shuttle Easily Regains Satellite, and Photos, 4 November 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronauts error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawlas efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttles robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawlas crewmates could have helped her verify the command but did not do so because such vigilance was not part of the plan. The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the boards findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) aboard the three-stage Pegasus-XL rocket. Orbital Sciences Corporations L-1011 jet carried the rocket to an altitude of 40,000 feet (12,200 meters) before releasing it. Shortly after WIREs release into orbit, it encountered difficulties maintaining its stability, and NASA immediately began to investigate the malfunction. The satellites scientific instrument was a cryogenically cooled telescope designed to shed light on the history of star formation in the universe, as part of NASAs Origins program. The 12.5-inch-aperture (31.8-centimeter-aperture) telescope aboard WIRE had no moving parts and was enclosed in a cooling system to keep its mirrors below -436F (-260C), to prevent its own heat emission from overwhelming the light it would detect from space.(Associated Press, NASAs Star-Gazing Wire Satellite Successfully Launched, 4 March 1999; Associated Press, Satellite Launch, 5 March 1999.)
U.S. Air Force officials announced that, despite initial media reports of a successful launch, the previous days launch of the USA 142 aboard a Titan IVB rocket had failed. The USA 142, also called the DSP 19, an American geosynchronous military satellite, had launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The failed launch had placed the Defense Support Program satellite in a useless orbit after an attached rocket engine failed. This was the first launch attempt since the explosion of a Titan IVA in August 1998. Engineers had designed the Titan IVB, an improved version of the Titan IV, to survive the electrical malfunction that had led to its predecessors demise. Because of a policy of secrecy concerning military spy satellites, the U.S. Air Force had delayed informing its public affairs office about the launch failure. Although senior Air Force officials knew of the loss of the satellite, they were unable to make the event public until they were certain that the failure had not entailed the release of classified information. The Air Force had designed the satellite, a highly sensitive, 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne), infrared telescope, to detect missile launches and nuclear detonations.(Robyn Suriano, Air Force Says Security Questions Delayed Announcement, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 April 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles OBrien, Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station, CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches, 28 October 1999.)
Two satellites, the China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS-1), sometimes called ZY-1 in Chinese reports, and the Brazilian Saci-1 satellite, launched atop a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Taiyuan Launch Center in central China. Brazil and China had jointly financed the 1,500-kilogram (3,307-pound) CBERS-1, which carried three high-resolution cameras for monitoring environmental and vegetation conditions in Brazil and China, as well as in other, unspecified locations. Brazil had designed the 60-kilogram (132-pound) Saci-1 microsatellite to monitor cosmic rays, the magnetic field, and plasma. Shortly after launch, communications with the craft failed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 552, 1 November 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx552.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency signed a cooperative agreement with Russian arms exporter Rosvooruzheniye, intended to raise Russias earnings on the world market and help it develop space hardware. Russia had earned only US$800 million, compared to the United States US$50 billion, in commercial satellite launches during 1998. Rosvooruzheniye hoped the deal would help Russia break into the international space markets.(CNN.com, Russias Space Agency, Arms Exporter Sign Cooperation Deal, 25 February 1999.)
V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASAs first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agricultures Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASAs new space-grant program, Rasmussens primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension workusing the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information systemas precision agriculture, because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work, Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the companys spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade. Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the crafts enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earths surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earths surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit, San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmospheres density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, covered with 878 small, circular mirrors that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had popped from its canister in the Shuttles cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discoverys crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash, 14 July 1999.)
President of the Aerospace Industries Association John W. Douglass testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space that the nation needed an enlightened national space program, combining public and private investment in synergistic ways. Douglass stated that the government needed to remove barriers to the growth of commercial space. He said that the most critical action needed for the industrys growth was renewal of the indemnification provisions of the Commercial Space Launch Act, because without such provisions, U.S. companies are unable to compete with the government-backed programs of foreign competitors. Douglass also testified that U.S. launch ranges lacked modern facilities, causing launch delays. Such delays wreak havoc in the commercial world, because launch sites require more time to reconfigure a launch than convenient for commercial enterprises. He cited the export licensing process as a serious problem, because it was causing the U.S. commercial space industry to lose market share in both satellite and launch services. Additionally, Douglass called the dramatic drop in funding for aerospace research and development over the last two decades a serious structural problem, which the United States should correct, to remain competitive in the world market.(AIA Urges Congress To Remove Barriers to Commercial Space Industry, Aerospace News, 20 May 1999.)
A team of astrophysicists at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center announced that they had found the first direct evidence of a black hole pulling in matter. Using the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics, an x-ray satellite belonging to Japan and the United States and launched in 1993, the team observed superheated gas in the accretion disc of the black hole. Previously, scientists had only seen the phenomenon by observing these accretion discs, or the swirling matter circling around as it is being pulled into the black hole. However, this time, the Goddard team had observed a strange feature buried in the x-rays that the gas emitted. Energy had been redshifted, an occurrence described as an astronomical Doppler effect, because, just as the compression of sound waves, for example, causes the sound of a siren to rise and fall as it passes an observer, light stretches as it speeds away from Earth. The team observed light that was being stretchedredshiftedmoving at about 6.5 million miles (10.5 million kilometers) per hour, toward a black hole in galaxy NGC 3516.(Reuters, Evidence of Super Gravity Reported: Backs Black Hole Astronomy Theory, Washington Times, 17 August 1999.)
NASA announced that the WIRE Mishap Investigation Board had concluded that NASAs Wide- Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) satellite had failed after its 4 March 1999 launch, because of an incorrectly designed electronics box. The premature firing of explosive devicesthe pyrotechnicshad caused the instruments telescope cover to eject too early in the mission, thus exposing the instruments frozen hydrogen to the Sun. The frozen hydrogen was necessary to cool the telescopes infrared detectors. The satellite had lost the frozen hydrogen within 48 hours of its launch, rendering the instrument incapable of carrying out its scientific mission. Darrell R. Branscome, Deputy Associate Administrator (Enterprise Development) for NASAs Office of Space Flight and chairperson of the eight-member investigation team, emphasized that there had been no component failure, but simply a case of a design error that allowed power to get to the explosive charges before it should have. The boards report also concluded that engineers had failed to identify the design errors in the circuitry controlling the pyrotechnical functions. Unlike the other systems in the satellite, the electronics box design had received no peer review.(NASA, Investigation Finds Design Errors Caused WIRE Spacecraft Failure, news release 99-74, 25 June 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-074.txt (accessed 11 February 2008).)
Pending the outcome of an investigation into the crash of a Russian Proton rocket the previous day, the Kazakhstan government banned Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, causing a potentially significant disruption to Russias commercial satellite launch program. Kazakhstans foreign ministry informed the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that launches from the facility would cease until investigators had identified the causes of the crash and evaluated the damage sustained. The ministry did not indicate how long the ban would remain in effect. Kazakhstan investigators collected soil and water samples to test for possible hazardous material dispersed in the crash.
A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstars launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
Indias government-run space agency began commercial operations with the launch, from an island in the Bay of Bengal, of its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C-2 (PSLV), carrying Indian, German, and South Korean satellites. PSLV carried into orbit Oceansat-1, Indias remote- sensing satellite, intended to carry out oceanographic research; KITSAT-3 of South Koreas Satellite Technology Research Center; and the German Aerospace Centers Tubsat. Chairperson of Indian Space Research Organization Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan stated that India could offer to launch satellites at a much cheaper rate than other countries with launch facilities. Without naming how much India was charging for its newly inaugurated launch services, Kasturirangan said that in the international market it would cost US$1 million to piggyback a satellite.(Dow Jones Newswire, Indian Rocket with Korean and German Satellites Takes Off, 26 May 1999.)
A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, Delta Rocket Soars into Space, Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
Mario Dario Grossi, radio physicist and engineer, died at the age of 74 in Boston, Massachusetts. Grossi developed the concept of tethered satellites and the hardware to make them possible. Together with a colleague, Grossi had conducted most of his work at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Grossi had first approached NASA with his concept in 1972, and in 1982 NASA had issued a contract to build a system. In July 1992, NASA had tested the tether in space when astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-46 reeled out a half-ton [450- kilogram or 0.45-tonne] satellite of the Italian Space Agency dangling on a spaghetti-thin cord 12 miles [19 kilometers] long. The successful test had provided data that would assist engineers in applying the tether satellite technology to build space stations or in operating instrument- laden satellites far from the [S]huttle.(Wolfgang Saxon, M. Grossi, 74; Created Tether for Satellites, New York Times, 18 January 1999.)
Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martinbuilt Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russias new Dnepr rocket, Europes Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporations Pegasus.(United Press International, Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year, 23 November 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force officially declared dead its US$800 million Milstar communications satellite. Launched atop a Titan IV rocket on 30 April and placed in the wrong orbit, the Milstar would never reach its intended 22,300-mile-high [35,900-kilometer-high] orbit. U.S. Air Force representative Aaron Renenger stated that the useless satellite could remain in orbit for hundreds of years, but posed no threat to other spacecraft.(Associated Press, Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead, 12 May 1999.)
Officials at NASAs Langley Research Center (LARC) officially opened the Centers new Experimental Test Range (ETR), described as an electromagnetic wind tunnel. LARC engineers had designed the ETR to determine how low-frequency electromagnetic radiation affects aircraft, to help the military improve stealth technology. The ETR also would assist in testing technologies to enable airline passengers to watch television signals from satellites or to help Internet users make wireless connections. The first military customer that had signed up to use the ETR, the U.S. Armys National Ground Intelligence Center, planned to use models of enemy targets in the test chamber, to see how they appeared on radar screens.(Jeff Long for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, Hampton, Va., NASA Research Center Tests Plane Design with Wind Tunnel, 17 November 1999.)
Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in Chinas Shanxi Province launched two Iridium World Communications satellites into orbit aboard a Chinese Long March 2C rocket, replenishing the 66-satellite Iridium constellation, which provides telephone, paging, and fax communication services worldwide. The satellite was the 57th launched from Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center and the 15th consecutive successful launch since October 1996 for the Long March rocket series.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Iridium Launches Two More Satellites, 11 June 1999.)
NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robots components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASAs ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiments success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine housekeeping chores, such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions, news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
Brazilian space officials, having lost contact with their countrys Saci-1 satellite days after its launch, asked NASA to help them rescue the US$4.6 million satellite. Saci-1 had launched on 14 October from China along with another satellite, the CBERS-1, which the two countries had built jointly. Brazil asked NASA to photograph the satellite, check its condition, and devise a plan for its recovery. President of the Brazilian Space Agency Luis Meira Filho remarked that Brazil had not given the satellite up for lost, because space officials knew its location. The CBERS-1 satellite was functioning normally and had returned images of Brazil.(Reuters, Brazil Asks NASA Help To Rescue Lost Satellite, 21 October 1999.)
The main engine of Japans H-2 rocket malfunctioned 4 minutes after launching from Tanegashima Space Center, failing to put the Mtsat satellite into orbit. Fearing they could lose control of its trajectory, officials ordered the rockets destruction 8 minutes into its flight, marking the first time the National Space Development Agency of Japan had destroyed a rocket in flight. It was the second launch failure for the H-2 rocket during 1999; another H-2 had failed to place its payload in orbit in February. However, before the February malfunction, Japan had launched five H-2 rockets successfully. The Mtsat satellite, intended to replace the Himawari 5 satellite, would have observed weather patterns and monitored aircraft.(Associated Press, Japan Destroys Rocket in Midair as It Lifted $95 Million Satellite, New York Times, 16 November 1999; Dow Jones Newswire, Japan Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, Rocket Destroyed, 15 November 1999.)
NASAs Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected Ball Aerospace of Boulder, Colorado, and Aerojet General Corporation of Azusa, California, to study the next-generation, spaceborne, microwave, atmospheric instrument for weather-forecasting and climate-change research, awarding each company a one-year, US$4 million, fixed-price contract through Goddard Space Flight Center. The new instrument, the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), was one-third the size and weight of existing microwave-sounding instruments on board the Polar- Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and the Earth Observing System-PM spacecraft. The application of new technologies, particularly in microwave electronics, had made the significantly smaller size of the ATMS possible. NASA intended to fly the first ATMS unit on the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environment Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) mission, a joint effort between NASA and the NPOESS Program Office. NPOESS, a tri-agency program consisting of parts of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, merged civilian and military polar-orbiting weather satellite systems into a single system.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Ball and AerojetGeneral Picked To Study New Weather Sensor, news release 99-117, 12 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-117.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)
A European Ariane 4 rocket launched, carrying two communication satellites from French Guiana. The rocket placed into orbit an Arabsat 3A satellite, providing television broadcasting and telephone communications to the Middle East, North Africa, and Southern Europe, as well as the Skynet 4E satellite, a British armed forces strategic and tactical communications satellite. Both craft would move into geostationary orbits.(BBC News, Ariane Blasts Off Successfully, 27 February 1999.)
Astronomers captured for the first time optical images of a gamma-ray burst (GRB) as it was occurring. Detectors of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on NASAs orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory detected the GRB as it began and radioed its position to the Gamma Ray Burst Coordinates Network (GCN) at NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). GSFC immediately forwarded the position to astronomers around the world. In response to this signal, the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) team in Los Alamos, New Mexico, photographed the patch of sky where the GRB was occurring. Using precise information from instruments aboard the Italian-Dutch BeppoSAX satellite, the ROTSE team was able to locate the GRB within the images they had captured. Astronomer Scott D. Barthelmy of GSFC remarked that capturing a burst as it unfolded was the holy grail of GCN, and that, previously, optical telescopes had only seen the afterglow of a burst, never the burst itself.(NASA, Gamma Ray Burst Imaged for the First Time, news release 99-8, 27 January 1999.)
After a one-day delay, a Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the US$128 million Stardust spacecraft. Stardust launched on a mission described as NASAs first attempt to return to Earth solid extraterrestrial material from beyond our [M]oons orbit. Astronomers expected that, after traveling for about five years, the craft would rendezvous with a medium-sized comet. A device aboard the Stardust would collect tiny particles from the comet before returning to Earth on 15 January 2006.(Michael Cabbage, Stardust Is Launched To Sweep Comet Debris, New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 February 1999.)
NASA announced that NASA scientists and other weather researchers had gained intriguing new information about upper-level winds that drive hurricanes and about the storms devastating impact as they collide with mountains. The research findings were the result of a seven-week study conducted by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and several universities during the previous summer, as part of the Third Convection and Moisture Experiment (CAMEX-3). The studys purpose was to gauge the strength of Atlantic hurricane winds and rainfall. CAMEX-3 researchers had used data collected with special laser instruments aboard NASAs DC-8 aircraft, which flew through hurricanes Bonnie, Danielle, Earl, and Georges; data collected from NASAs ER-2 high-altitude aircraft, which flew above the hurricanes to collect first-of its-kind data; and data from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission satellite. Edward J. Zipser of Texas A&M University remarked, the multi-aircraft datasets obtained by NASA aircraft in these hurricanes are unprecedented in their comprehensiveness.(NASA, NASA Hurricane Study Reveals Intriguing Results, news release 99-4, 15 January 1999.)
A Boeing Delta III rocket, carrying an Orion satellite for Loral Space and Communications, malfunctioned shortly after launch, leaving the satellite in the wrong orbit. In the inaugural launch in August 1998 of a Boeing Delta III, a rocket designed to carry twice the payload of the Delta II, the rocket had exploded in midair. In this second attempt at flight, the rocket had survived the initial launch, but malfunctioned when the second stage failed to ignite properly, leaving Orion in an orbit lower than planned. Engineers were uncertain whether it would be possible to boost the satellite using on-board fuel and thrusters.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, New Boeing Rocket Malfunctions, Satellite Enters Wrong Orbit, 5 May 1999.)
NASA announced that its new orbiting SeaWinds radar instrument, flying aboard the QuikSCAT satellite, was successfully tracking Iceberg B10A, which had broken off the Thwaites glacier of Antarctica in 1992, drifting into a shipping lane. Earlier in 1999, Iceberg B10A had disappeared when conventional methods of tracking sea-surface iceships radar, shipping reports, optical images from satellites, and microwave sensor datawere unable to track it. David G. Long of the SeaWinds science team at Utahs Brigham Young University remarked that, although a ship was dispatched to the icebergs last known position, we were unable to find it until we started receiving data from the SeaWinds instrument in July. During its first pass over Antarctica, SeaWinds had spotted the iceberg, and the National Ice Center in Suitland, Maryland, had confirmed that the iceberg was B10A. Scientists had continued to track it as it moved through the Drake Passage and headed northeast between Tierra del Fuego, at the southern tip of South America, and the Antarctic Peninsula. At that time, the National Ice Center had issued an iceberg navigation warning to Argentina.(NASA, New NASA Ocean Radar Watches for Breakup of Giant Iceberg, news release 99-102, 3 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-102.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
The NASA WIRE team declared a spacecraft emergency, as ground controllers worked to recover the spacecraft. The satellite continued to spin, instead of maintaining a stable position in orbit, and had a higher temperature than expected. NASA formed a spacecraft-recovery team headed by David F. Everett of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), as well as an anomaly-investigation board.(NASA, NASA Working To Correct Spin Rate of Wire Spacecraft, news release 99-34, 5 March 1999. 188)
Lockheed Martin Corporation named former Martin Marietta President and Chief Operating Officer A. Thomas Young to lead an independent review of the management, engineering, manufacturing, and quality control processes of its space and missile business, specifically Astronautics, Missiles and Space, and Michoud Space Systems. The company had experienced a series of expensive and well-publicized failures of its rockets and satellites, including two in the previous week, when a Titan IV placed one military satellite in the wrong orbit and when another satellite, the remote-sensing Ikonos, lost contact with the ground. The company instructed the panel to submit a report to senior Lockheed management by 1 September.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Announces Comprehensive Space Sector Review, Former Martin Marietta President Will Chair Independent Panel, news release, 4 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesComprehensiv.html (accessed 7 February 2008); Tim Smart, Panel To Review Lockheed Failures: Former Company President To Head Probe of Aerospace Foul-Ups, Washington Post, 5 May 1999.)
Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch, 29 April 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the missions duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite, news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
A Lockheed Martin Titan II rocket launched successfully, carrying JPLs QuikSCAT satellite. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation had built QuikSCAT in 11 months, setting an industry record. JPL stated that the satellite had opened its solar arrays as planned an hour after launch, and a tracking station in Norway acquired the first signal from the spacecraft 18 minutes later. NASA had originally scheduled the satellites launch for November 1998, but delayed it when a Titan IVA exploded after launch, carrying a payload for the National Reconnaissance Office. NASA had postponed the QuikSCAT launch until engineers could determine whether Titan II used any of the hardware that had caused the explosion on the Titan IVA. Following the launch of a Titan IVB rocket that placed a Milstar satellite in a faulty orbit, NASA had again delayed the QuikSCATs launch, pending investigation of the failure. The successfully launched QuikSCAT satellite was on a two-year mission with the option of a third year, to gather about 400,000 detailed measurements of the speed and direction of winds over the oceans surface. NASA intended the US$98 million mission to improve weather forecasting and detect the onset of conditions like El Nino. Engineers had designed the QuikSCAT to radiate microwave pulses over wide areas and to listen for the pulses echo. Those return signals would allow scientists to determine wind speeds and directions at the surface of the oceans. Understanding the interaction [of wind and ocean circulation] is important for weather prediction. Under the terms of NASAs first contract using the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, Ball Aerospace had provided the QuikSCAT spacecraft bus, launch interface, system integration, test, launch support, and two years of mission operations.(Dow Jones Newswire, Lockheed Martins Titan Launches with QuikScat Satellite, 20 June 1999; Satellite Launched on Weather Mission, New York Times, 20 June 1999; Aerospace Daily, QuikSCAT Makes It to Space After Six-Month Delay, 22 June 1999; Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corp., BATC Launches Its First Commercial Spacecraft, news release, 19 June 1999, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=30 (accessed 25 February 2008).)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) detached the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-L (GOES-L) from an Atlas IIA rocket, returning the satellite to the integration facility Astrotech, where engineers planned to recondition its batteries and purge it of gaseous nitrogen, to prevent degradation. NOAA had planned to store the satellite in orbit, ready to replace one of the weather satellites, GOES-8 or GOES-10, but GOES-L had been on the launchpad since 6 May. On 15 May, NASA and NOAA had decided to delay the launch of GOES-L until they had received the results of the investigations into the recent Titan and Delta launch failures.(NOAA, Weather Satellite De-mated from Launch Vehicle, NOAA and NASA Announce, news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases99/june99/noaa99GOESDemate.html (accessed 12 February 2008).)
The U.S. Air Force officially declared the US$1.2 billion launch of a communications satellite on 30 April a mission failure. A malfunction in the upper stage booster of the Titan IVB rocket had stranded the Milstar satellite in the wrong orbit. The Air Force established an investigation into the failure, which was its third costly space failure in nine months.(Reuters, U.S. Air Force Investigates Costly Satellite Loss, 4 May 1999.)
Europes new 746-ton (677,000-kilogram or 677-tonne) Ariane 5 rocket launched smoothly on its first mission, carrying the European Space Agencys 3.7-ton (3,400-kilogram or 3.4-tonne) X- ray Multi-Mirror (XMM) scientific satellite into orbit. In what France called an industry milestone and hailed as proof of Europes superiority in the commercial launch market, the powerful rocket lifted off at the opening of its launch window from Europes facility in Kourou, French Guiana, depositing the satellite in orbit exactly on schedule, 29 minutes later. Jean-Marie Luton, chairperson of Arianespace, the France-based commercial space company that dominated the worlds commercial satellite-launching market, remarked that, although the United States remained its most serious competitor and China was catching up quickly, Europeans were still one step ahead. Arianespace intended the Ariane 5, twice as heavy and twice as powerful as the Ariane 4, to carry 10- to 12-ton (9,100- to 10,900-kilogram or 9.1- to 10.9-tonne) payloads by 2005, transporting space-exploration modules and serving the ISS. The XMM satellite was the largest scientific satellite ever built in Europe, equipped with three powerful telescopes, with 58 mirrors each, and capable of observing everything from supernovas to the remains of exploded stars.(Jean-Marie Godard for Associated Press, Mission Accomplished for Powerful New European Launcher, 10 December 1998.)
A dummy satellite reached its orbit, 23,000 miles (37,000 kilometers) above Earth, signaling an important success for the Sea Launch Company. The international consortium, which had invested US$500 million to develop the first commercial, marine-based launch system, launched the dummy satellite from the Odyssey, a converted oil rig located 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) south of Hawaii. A Zenit-3SL rocket, built jointly by Ukraine and Russia, carried the satellite aloft. One hour after launch, the satellite separated from the third stage of the rocket at an altitude of 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers), to continue to its ultimate position.(Associated Press, Satellite Reaches Orbit After First Commercial Launch from Ocean, 30 March 1999. 689 European Space Agency, Mission to Mars Set To Revolutionize ESAs Working Methods, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 1999.)
A Russian rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, carrying a scientific satellite into orbit. It was the second launch from the facility since Kazakhstan partially lifted the launch ban imposed following the crash of a Proton-K rocket on 5 July.(Washington Times, Russian Satellite Launched in Kazakhstan, 18 July 1999. 210)
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. Pete Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligences Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failuresan explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers at least [US]$3 billion. Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake got through, despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his companys workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
An international team of scientists published findings based on research using data from NASAs Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. The team had sought to locate the origin of solar wind, which interacts with Earths magnetic field, creating auroral displays like the Northern Lights, as well as disrupting satellites and communications equipment. The SOHO team believed that the solar wind originated from honeycomb-shaped areas called convection cells, located beneath the coronal holes. Using data from the spectrometer, the scientists had measured for the first time the structure and motion of gases inside the coronal holes. The team reported that, in some places above coronal holes, magnetic field lines do not loop back to the Suns surface, but rather, the magnetic lines shoot upward without returning to the Sun, thereby originating the solar wind.(Donald Hassler et al., Solar Wind Outflow and the Chromospheric Magnetic Network, Science 283, no. 5403 (5 February 1999): 810; United Press International, Source of Solar Wind Believed Found, 4 February.)
NASA announced its selection of three very small satellites, each about 16 inches (41 centimeters) across and 8 inches (20 centimeters) high, to conduct the Nanosat Constellation Trailblazer mission, the fifth mission in NASAs New Millennium program. NASA had developed the New Millennium program to test technology for future missions, with the goal of dramatically reducing the weight, size, and costs of missions, while simultaneously increasing science capabilities. NASA scheduled the US$28 million Nanosat Constellation mission to launch in 2003 as a secondary payload on an expendable launch vehicle.(NASA, NASA Selects Miniature Spacecraft To Test Space Technology, news release 99-95, 19 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-095.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earths landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earths Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earths radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission, 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Floridas Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agencys Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstans Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and Chinas Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the groups findings: companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer. Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Floridas expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights, 7 January 1999.)
NASA launched Mars Polar Lander from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Boeing Delta II rocket, three weeks after the launch of its companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter. The crafts main purpose was to search Mars for signs of water. Lander carried machinery and two microprobes, as well as a microphone to record the sounds of Martian wind. Mars Polar Lander and Mars Climate Orbiter formed a pair, the second launched in a 12-year series of dual missions to explore Mars, with the ultimate goal of collecting a sample of Martian soil to bring to Earth by 2008.(Reuters, U.S. Mars Probe Launched from Florida, 3 January 1999; Beth Dickey, Craft Joins Mars Quest for Water, New York Times, 4 January 1999.)
A Taurus rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying satellites for NASA and the Korean Aerospace Institute, as well as 36 capsules holding 7 ounces of cremated remains for Celestis Inc., a Houston-based company that arranged to send human remains to space. NASAs 253-pound (114.8-kilogram) Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (EOS ACRIM III), expected to return data for a minimum of five years, was deployed to measure sunlight reaching Earths atmosphere, oceans, and land, data needed for scientists to study whether slight changes in solar output affected global warming and cooling. ACRIM III was the third in a series of long- term, solar-monitoring tolls that NASAs JPL had built. ACRIM IIIs data would expand the database begun with the ACRIM I mission in 1980, aboard the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft, and continued with the ACRIM II mission in 1991, aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. ACRIM I was the first instrument to demonstrate clearly that the total radiant energy from the Sun is not a constant. The Korean satellite, built by TRW Inc. for a three-year mission, carried three instruments for creating digital elevation maps of Korea, studying the biology of the ocean, and performing physics experiments on the effects of radiation on electronics. The Celestis mission carried 36 capsules of human remains, which would orbit for 45 years before burning up in Earths atmosphere.(NASA, Item 1ACRIMSAT LaunchHQ, NASA Daily News Summary, 21 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/media/1999/m99-262.txt (accessed 13 March 2008); Associated Press, NASA Satellite, Korea Probe Rocket into Space, 21 December 1999.)
Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from Californias Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Forces Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, collecting data on the Earths global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs, as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmarks Orsted and South Africas SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earths magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit, 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russias first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion, 22 November 1999.)
Kazakhstan lifted its ban on launches of Russian Proton rockets after Moscow paid US$270,000 in compensation for the 5 July crash of one of the booster rockets and completed an agreed-upon joint investigation. The lifting of the ban cleared the way for two Russian Yamal-100 communications satellites to launch aboard a Proton rocket on 6 September. Although initially the country had banned all launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, which Russia had rented since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan had modified the ban to bar only Proton rocket launches, pending a joint investigation of the accident.(Russia Today, Kazakhstan Ends Russia Proton Rocket Ban, 1 September 1999.)
NASAs Inspector General Roberta L. Gross published findings and recommendations on behalf of NASAs Office of Inspector General, regarding Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr.s proposed Triana satellite project, named for Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Christopher Columbuss 1492 voyage who had first spotted North America. The Triana project would call on NASA to provide continuous, satellite-generated images of the Earth for posting on the Internet. Gross suggested that it was ill-advised for the financially strapped [A]gency to fund a new system to collect pictures of Earth when many images were already widely available. Gross said the Triana project would cost four times as much as the Vice Presidents US$50 million estimate, noting that NASA had already spent US$41 million on the project, even though Congress had not yet endorsed it. She criticized NASA for pressing forward with the project without fully assessing the scientific value of photographing the Earth. NASA had scheduled the satellite for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in December 2000.(NASA Office of Inspector General, Assessment of the Triana Mission (final report no. G-99-013, Washington, DC, 10 September 1999), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-99-013.pdf (accessed 3 March 2008); Steve Lash, Gores Pet Project Not Worth Its Cost, NASA Auditor Says, Houston Chronicle, 17 September 1999. 784 Greg Schneider, AlliedSignal Technical Gets a New President; Adamson Is Former Astronaut, Shuttle Executive, Engineer, Baltimore Sun (MD), 21 September 1999; NASA Johnson Space Center, Biographical Data: James C. Adamson, http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/adamson-jc.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
NASA released its newest and most accurate map of the continent of Antarctica, created from data that the Canadian Space Agencys (CSAs) RADARSAT-1 satellite had collected over an 18-day period during the spring of 1997. Vexel Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had developed software to generate a mosaic of the continent from many small images made from different angles and orientations of the satellite. Project officials and scientists remarked that the most important discoveries resulting from the radar images concerned the network of ice streams; the new satellite data revealed that the streams traveled enormous distances at speeds up to 3,000 feet (914 meters) per year100 times faster than the flow of surrounding ice. The CSA had begun planning RADARSAT in 1980, because of Canadas interest in using a high- resolution radar satellite to monitor shipping channels in the Arctic. NASAs negotiations with the CSA had resulted in an agreement: NASA would launch the satellite and provide software and data analysis in exchange for access to some of the data the satellite produced. Additionally, the CSA would make at least two imaging scans of Antarctica. RADARSAT had launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on 4 November 1995, but, until 1997, Canadian controllers had not completed a difficult rotation of the satellite, necessary to place Antarctica in full view. Once correctly oriented, RADARSAT had been able to complete the imaging in 18 days because it could collect data anytime of the day or night and in any weather. The last satellite map of Antarctica had used images from five different satellites, spanning the years 1980 to 1994.(NASA, NASA Unveils New, Most Accurate Map of Antarctic Continent, news release 99-122, 18 October 1999; Malcolm W. Browne, Under Antarctica, Clues to an Icecaps Fate: Radar Uncovers a Network of Ice Streams Larger and Faster than Expected, and More Ominous, New York Times, 26 October 1999.)
NASA successfully launched its Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) telescope aboard a Delta II rocket. FUSEs three-year mission was to measure the abundance of deuterium, or heavy hydrogen, which stars consume every day and convert to helium. Astronomers hoped that the study of deuterium would help them understand better what the universe was like moments after creation. The FUSE scientists sought to determine how much deuterium still exists and how much of it stars consume regularly, thereby calculating the original makeup of the universe. NASA had nearly cancelled the FUSE project in the early 1990s, because of cost overruns and missed deadlines, but in 1994 NASA had asked Johns Hopkins University to manage the project. Project managers at Johns Hopkins had scaled down the scientific instrument and used existing equipment instead of developing new technologies. The Canadian Space Agency had provided the camera, the French Space Agency had provided the spectrograph, and other U.S. universities had provided various parts for the telescope. Orbital Sciences Corporation had built the spacecraft using an existing design to reduce costs further. NASA considered the spacecraft and its launch a success; NASAs Science Director Edward J. Weiler remarked, We have never had a satellite as sensitive as FUSE.(Washington Times, Special Telescope To Look for First Signs of Creation, 25 June 1999; Steven Young for Reuters, NASA Launches Telescope To Seek Universes Origin, 24 June 1999.)
The Russian Defense Ministry launched Raduga-1, an early-warning-system satellite for detecting missile launches, aboard a Proton-K booster rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Ground controllers lost communication with the satellite minutes after its launch, and just as it reached its preliminary orbit, both the satellite and the second stage of the rocket crashed in a remote region of Kazakhstan. Russian space officials initially stated that the satellite had crashed in an uninhabited area, but a Russian television network reported that a large piece of the Proton rocket had fallen onto farmland in the Karaganda region of Kazakhstan, nearly hitting a house. Nobody was injured in the crash.(United Press International, Russian Satellite Crashes into Kazakhstan, 6 July 1999. 737 Sujata Rao for Reuters, Kazakhstan Halts Russian Space Launches, 6 July 1999.)
The Peoples Republic of China announced it had launched into orbit its first piloted spacecraft, a non-reusable capsule named Shenzhou, which carried a mannequin for test purposes but was capable of carrying a crew of four. Xinhua news agency reported that the capsule, launched from Jiuquan satellite launch center aboard the new model Long March 2F, had spent 21 hours in space, orbiting Earth 14 times. China had built a new land- and sea-based, space-monitoring-and- control network for the launch. China heralded the launch as a breakthrough in the Chinese governments effort to join the United States and Russia in the elite club of manned space flight. The Chinese had abandoned the pursuit of human spaceflight in the late 1960s, because Premier Zhou Enlai thought it was too costly, but in 1992, President Jiang Zemin had decided to renew Chinese efforts, with the goal of putting a human in space by the end of the century. The head of Chinas Manned Spaceflight Program told Xinhua news agency that the successful test flight of the Shenzhou capsule demonstrated that the Chinese spacecraft and the new Long March rocket performed superbly. During the mission, the Chinese had conducted experiments in remote sensing, environmental monitoring, space materials, astronomy, and physics. Shenzhou had landed in Inner Mongolia using a parachute.(Michael Laris, Chinese Test Craft for Manned Orbits: Space Launch Boosts National Pride, Washington Post, 22 November 1999; Washington Times, Chinese Successfully Launch First Spacecraft, 22 November 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 553, 1 December 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx553.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
Ukraines Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstans Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rockets lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.)
NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit, news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission, 9 February 1999.)
NASA selected winners of its Government Inventor of the Year and Commercial Invention of the Year awards. Charles E. Clagett, Associate Head of the Component and Hardware Systems Branch at GSFC, won the Government Inventor of the Year Award for his Apparatus for Providing Torque and for Storing Momentum Energy. Clagett had developed the apparatus, known more commonly as the SMEX Reaction/Momentum Wheel, for NASAs Small Explorer program. NASA had used the apparatus successfully in the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer and the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite. Paul M. Hergenrother, Joseph G. Smith Jr., and Brian J. Jensen of Langley Research Center won the Commercial Inventor of the Year Award for their Phenylethynyl Terminated Imide Oligomers, fifth composition, known as PETI-5, which is a type of glue that holds fibers together. The Langley team had developed PETI-5 as an adhesive for use in various aerospace and commercial applications. Used in high- speed, high-temperature aircraft, PETI-5 had netted US$10 million in sales since becoming commercially available.(NASA, NASA Selects Top Inventions of the Year, news release 99-42, 12 March 1999.)
NASA announced the end of the scientific mission of its WIRE satellite, after the craft released into space its entire supply of frozen hydrogen, a critical element of the mission. Preliminary reports indicated that the satellite had released the primary telescope cover three days earlier than planned, exposing the telescopes cryostat to sunlight. The sunlight had warmed the frozen hydrogen in the cryostat, which was supposed to maintain the telescopes temperature, causing the hydrogen to vent into space at a much higher rate than planned. Ground controllers believed the fast venting of the hydrogen had caused the satellite to spin, but they did not yet know what had caused the release of the telescope cover.(NASA, Wire Spacecraft Instrument Runs Out of Hydrogen, news release 99-37, 8 March 1999.)
In its third consecutive failure, the second loss within one month, the U.S. Air Force launch of a Titan IV rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, placed a geosynchronous military communications satellite, the USA 143, also known as Milstar 2, in a useless low-Earth orbit. (Associated Press, Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead, 12 May 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
NASA announced that spacecraft engineers who had worked on NASAs new Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) had won an American Electronics Association Technical Achievement Award for the development of a spacecraft at a record-setting pace of one year. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had built the satellite for NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), assembling the QuikSCAT faster than any construction of a spacecraft since the 1958 Explorer I satellite. To accomplish this fast pace, NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center had developed a new procurement system called the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, to accelerate NASAs purchase procedure. The new acquisition process had enabled NASA to take advantage of low-cost commercial technology from the burgeoning spacecraft industry, to develop satellite systems such as the QuikSCAT. NASA had been able to reduce the time needed to select a contractor and to initiate spacecraft development, from one year to 30 days. Chip Barnes, a QuikSCAT spacecraft system engineer at Ball Aerospace commented that the production had involved a remarkable effort to get the spacecraft built, integrated, and tested in an 11-month time frame.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Quikscat Team Wins American Electronics Achievement Award, news release 99-045, 3 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/aeaaward.html (accessed 12 February 2008). 720 Associated Press, Shuttle Astronauts Release Satellite, Head for Home, Washington Post, 6 June 1999.)
Oleksandr Serdiuk, head of the International Relations Department of Ukraines Space Agency, announced that Ukraine and Brazil had signed an agreement the previous week, allowing Ukraine to use Brazils Alcantara space complex to launch a new generation of Cyclone-4 booster rockets, medium-weight rockets capable of putting 4 tons (3,600 kilograms or 3.6 tonnes) of payload into a geostationary orbit. In 1992, when the USSR dissolved, Ukraine had retained part of the former Soviet Unions space program, using several former Soviet factories to build rockets and selling rocket space to commercial satellite companies. Before the agreement with Brazil, Ukraine had only used launchpads in other former Soviet countries. However, Ukraine wanted to take advantage of the location of the Alcantara space complex near the equator, where spacecraft reach orbit more easily and commercial launches a
The ESA signed a four-year contract with two industry groupsSarcom, led by Spot Image of Toulouse, France, and the Emma consortium, led by Eurimage of Romegranting the two groups priority access to the Envisat radar remote-sensing satellite scheduled for launch in 2001, as well as imagery from the ERS-2 spacecraft, already in orbit. About the new business relationship, a major policy shift for the ESA, Acting Envisat Mission Manager Gunther Kohlhammer remarked that the ESA had realized that it needed to change so that it could develop new markets. The contract gave commercial orders for the satellite images priority over scientific requests, setting new limits on the type and number of users ESA would grant access to data without paying commercial prices.(Peter B. de Selding, ESA Hands Radar Satellite Responsibility to Industry, Space News, 30 October 2000.)
A Sirius-2 communications satellite launched aboard a Russian Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The launch marked the second success for the Sirius Company, which planned to broadcast digital radio to the United States. Sirius had placed its first satellite in orbit on 1 July 2000, scheduling a third launch for November 2000.(Reuters, Kazakhstan: Russia Launches U.S. Satellite from Kazakhstan, 5 September 2000.)
The Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000) officially commenced in South Africas Northern Province, with the gathering of scientists from 14 nations and six South African universities. NASA, alongside the University of Witwatersrand, led SAFARI 2000, their goal to determine how the regions natural ecosystems and human land use affect air quality and atmospheric conditions. The initiative would use specially equipped planes to make four scientific flights each week, over a six-week period, through September 2000. A modern ER-2 version of the U-2 spy plane would fly directly under the Terra satellite as it passed over various regions of southern Africa, to verify the satellites data. Three other aircraft would also fly with the ER-2 like a stack of pancakes, with the ER-2 flying at about 65,000 feet (19,800 meters) to conduct remote sensing, a Convair 580 aircraft collecting air and gas samples just below the ER- 2, and two Aerocommander 690A aircraft conducting similar tests at between 5,000 and 12,000 feet (1,500 and 3,700 meters).(Justin Arenstein for Africa News Service, Africas Biggest Science Experiment Kicks Off, 14 August 2000; Africa News Service, NASA Project Off to a Flying Start, 14 August 2000.)
NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earths atmosphere. Director of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event a bittersweet day for NASA. The spacecraft, NASAs gamma-ray equivalent of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellites control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earths atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASAs efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earths atmosphere.(NASA, Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns, news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth, news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, A Satellites Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project, Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
During routine testing in preparation for a July 2000 launch, excessive vibration damaged NASAs High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Images (HESSI) spacecraft. The vibration test device was accidentally set at a level 10 times higher than appropriate, causing structural damage and cracks in two of the satellites four solar arrays. Officials estimated that the damage would delay the planned launch by at least six months. NASA had designated about US$75 million for the project. The faulty test, occurring at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory, revealed the high degree of precision required of engineers when creating and testing a space-bound craft. Although the satellite had vibrated at the incorrect setting for only about 200 milliseconds, it still sustained damage. However, the project engineers were optimistic that the mission would resume eventually.(Associated Press, NASA Engineers Damage Satellite During Shake Test, 24 March 2000; NASA, HESSI Sustains Damage During Vibration Testing, news release 00-45, 24 March 2000.)
Arianespace, the France-based European satellite launch company, announced that it had won a contract to launch three more satellites for INTELSAT, the international satellite corporation based in Washington, DC. Arianespace already held a contract to launch three other satellites in the INTELSAT IX series. INTELSAT had scheduled six of the series seven spacecraft for launch from mid-2001 through the end of 2002, on Ariane 4 or Ariane 5 launch vehicles, from Europes spaceport in French Guiana. California-based Space Systems/Loral was building the 4.7-tonne (4,700-kilogram or 5.2-ton) satellites. In 1965 INTELSAT had launched the worlds first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird.(Reuters, France: Arianespace in Deal To Launch 3 INTELSAT Satellites, 27 September 2000.)
Lockheed Martin and NASA entered into a consolidated space operations contract (CSOC), allowing NASA to use the services of two commercial, satellite ground-tracking stations. Under CSOC, NASA customers would have access on a per-pass basis to additional stations on Svalbard Island in Norway, owned by Kongsberg Spacetec-Lockheed Martin Space Data Services, and in Poker Flat, Alaska, owned by DataLynx. Both tracking stations had recently completed CSOC operational-readiness reviews in preparation for inclusion in Lockheed Martins catalog of services available to NASA programs.(Lockheed Martin Adds Two Commercial Stations to CSOC Capability, Aerospace Daily, 29 November 2000. 1052 NASA, NASA Technology Allows Engineers to See Airframe Noise, news release 00-189, 30 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-189.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
NASAs Office of Earth Sciences selected Gencorp Aerojet to build the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), a spaceborne instrument for measuring microwave energy emitted and scattered by the atmosphere. NASA intended the ATMS to replace instruments currently used on polar-orbiting weather satellites. NASA planned for the ATMS, working alongside an infrared sounder instrument, to produce daily global atmospheric temperature, humidity, and pressure profiles, essential for accurate weather forecasting and long-term climate research. Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that the advanced technology would improve the accuracy of weather forecasting, from the current three-to-five day forecast span to seven-to-ten day predictions. NASA planned to fly the first unit as part of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project Bridge mission, intended to ensure continuity of research-quality data through the bridging of sounding data between NASAs Earth Observing System research missions and future NPOESS operational missions. Goddard Space Flight Center would provide oversight of the contract, worth US$206.6 million.(NASA, NASA Selects Firm To Build Next Generation Weather Instrument, news release C00-q, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-q.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
The Sea Launch Company suffered a setback in its bid to become a major participant in the satellite launch industry, when one of its Russian-Ukrainian Zenit 3SL rockets carrying a British communications satellite crashed into the Pacific Ocean. The launch was only the third undertaken by the international company, which had planned to use a converted ocean oil rig known as Odyssey as its permanent launchpad. The Sea Launch Company comprised the Boeing Company, together with companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway. The company had designed its innovative Sea Launch System to use Earths rotation and the faster movement of Earths surface at the equator to make it easier to launch rockets with heavy payloads. The failed satellite had cost London-based ICO Global Communications more than US$100 million to develop.(Associated Press, Sea Launch Satellite Falls into Ocean; Boeing-Led Venture Out $100 million, 13 March 2000.)
The United States and Brazil signed a treaty giving U.S. aerospace firms access to Brazils Alcantara launch site, located just 3 south of the equator. The treaty was the first accord signed by the United States that allowed U.S. satellites to launch from foreign soil. The launch sites location near the center of the globe would save money for aerospace companies, because satellites could take a shorter path to equatorial orbit, requiring less fuel. Brazil benefited from the boost to its embryonic space program and the possibility of capturing a portion of the lucrative commercial-satellite business. At the time of the agreement, U.S. firms controlled two- thirds of the annual US$66 billion commercial satellite industry.(Reuters, Brazil: Joins Space Race with U.S. Satellite Treaty, 17 April 2000; Peter Fritsch, Brazil To Sign U.S. Accord To Enter Satellite Business, Wall Street Journal, 18 April 2000.)
Jason Allen Diekman of Mission Viejo, California, pled guilty to federal charges of computer crimes after negotiating a deal with prosecutors. Prosecutors had charged Diekman in September with illegal hacking and with using stolen credit card numbers to purchase US$6,000 worth of computer equipment and other items. He had confessed to investigators that he had hacked into hundreds, maybe thousands of computers over two years, including systems at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, Cornell University, the University of California at San Diego, and California State University at Fullerton. Diekmans most serious confessed invasions had occurred at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where he had gained root-level access to two computer systems, and at Stanford University, where he had gained control over 24 systems, two of them owned by NASA and containing flight-control software for NASAs satellites. The U.S. District Judge set sentencing for 5 February 2001.(David Rosenzweig, Hacker Pleads Guilty to Invading JPL, Stanford Computers Crime: Mission Viego Man, 20, Accepts Federal Plea Bargain. He Had Gained Control of NASA Computers at Both Sites, Los Angeles Times, 7 November 2000.)
New Skies Satellites N.V. selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems (LMCSS) to build a second geosynchronous satellite to provide high-speed Internet access and other multimedia communications to a large coverage area, extending from the eastern Mediterranean and southern Africa to Australia, Japan, and Korea. New Skies selected the LMCSS A
Princeton University graduate student Xiaohui Fan discovered a distant quasar that scientists believed to be the oldest object ever observed by a human being. Fan had worked as part of a team using the 32-foot (10-meter) W. M. Keck Telescope. Estimating that the quasar was (Associated Press, Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks, 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal, news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
EarthWatch Inc., a Colorado-based company developing a network of satellites to capture images of various regions of the Earth for commercial applications, launched its QuickBird 1 craft from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, aboard a Russian Cosmos-3M rocket. However, ground stations did not pick up its signals as planned. U.S. tracking data listed the crafts orbit as decayed, and a Russian Aerospace Agency spokesperson described the craft as effectively lost. EarthWatch had lost its first satellite, Early Bird 1, four days after its 24 December 1997 launch because of a power-system problem.(Stephen Clark, Commercial Eye-in-the-Sky Appears Lost in Launch Failure, Spaceflight Now, 21 November 2000.)
A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americoms fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four othersthe GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site, news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
New NASA research published in the 1 October issue of the American Meteorological Societys Journal of Climate warned that clouds might not help counteract climate-warming trends. Anthony D. Del Genio, of NASAs Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York City, had analyzed observations of low clouds over land, collected between 1994 and 1997 as part of the U.S. Department of Energys Atmospheric Radiation Measurement program. Del Genio had found that clouds are thinner when temperatures were higher, a phenomenon occurring in any weather condition or season and at any time of day. Some climate theories had predicted that high temperatures would cause thicker clouds because of an increase in water vapor, but Del Genio explained that during warmer temperatures, the bottoms of clouds rise and become thinner. This occurs because clouds that form over a warm, dry air mass must rise higher before becoming sufficiently saturated with water to form a cloud base. Thinner clouds are less capable of reflecting sunlight back into space and are, therefore, unable to act as a natural sun shield. Del Genios findings corroborated long-term, worldwide satellite observations, published using the NASA-funded International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) database. The ISCCP, a global composite of cloud observations from international weather satellites, began showing a link between cloud thinning and temperature in 1992.(NASA, RevisedNASA Scientist Predicts Less Climate Cooling from Clouds, news release 00-151, 3 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-151.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
The board appointed to investigate the mishap that had damaged the High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) spacecraft in preflight testing announced its findings. The investigators had discovered that the computer controlling the vibration device had sensed an abnormally high level of static friction and had responded by delivering approximately 10 times the exertion of gravity suitable for the test. A slight misalignment of the shaker mechanism had proved just enough to throw off the preflight testing. The board had determined that the accident had been avoidable. Routine maintenance and a pretest of the testing device itself would have caught the problem before any damage had occurred. NASA planned for the HESSI satellite to undergo repairs at the University of California at Berkeley.(NASA, Board Finds Cause of HESSI Mishap, news release 00-80, 12 May 2000; Associated Press, NASA Identifies Causes of Test Accident that Broke Spacecraft, 12 May 2000.)
NASA controllers began sending signals to the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to perform a series of maneuvers that would ultimately end in the satellite crashing into the Pacific Ocean. The endgame commands marked the conclusion of a successful nine-year mission, which had recorded data on more than 2,500 gamma-ray bursts. The US$670 million satellite, launched on 5 April 1991 aboard Mission STS-37, had provided researchers with never-before-seen images of explosions throughout the universe. It will be like losing a member of the family, remarked one NASA scientist who had worked on the program since 1979. NASA officials had decided to end the satellites space tenure because of the possibility that the aging satellite might become unresponsive and plummet out of control to Earth. By initiating the satellites demise, NASA could control the landing area of the 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) spacecraft. Some critics charged NASA with being too conservative, because it had based its decision on the 1-in- 1,000 odds that an uncontrolled descent of the satellite to Earth would result in injuries.(James Orberg, Plan To Scrap Satellite Sacrifices Science, USA Today, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, NASA To Destroy Compton Satellite After Nine Years, 28 May 2000.)
NASA announced that scientists using the Chandra X-ray Observatory had confirmed the existence of middleweight black holes. Several groups of scientists used Chandra to focus on a mid-mass black hole located 600 light-years from the center of galaxy M82. Previous x-ray data from the German-U.S. ROSAT (Rontgensatellite) and the Japan-U.S. ASCA (Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics) had suggested the existence of a mid-mass black hole in M82. Scientists compared Chandras new high-resolution images with optical radio and infrared maps to determine that a single, bright source was emitting most of the x-rays. The scientists continued to observe M82 over an eight-month period, noting that the intensity of the x-rays rose and fell every 600 seconds. Philip Kaaret of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics explained that this behavior was similar to black holes swallowing gas from a nearby star or cloud. Martin Ward of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom remarked that the findings opened a whole new field of research.(NASA, Chandra Clinches Case for Unexpected Black Hole Discovery, news release 00-140, 12 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-140.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
After two earlier unsuccessful trials, Russia launched, without incident, a modified Proton rocket carrying a large Gorizont communications satellite. Propulsion-system flaws had triggered explosions of the Proton rocket in previous trials. The United States viewed the successful test launch as a positive sign of Russias commitment to the ISS project, a boost for the strained relationship between the two countries. After the failed tests, a joint NASA-Russian Space Agency research crew had determined that production flaws in the turbomachinery of the rockets second and third stages, including the presence of contaminants such as asbestos cloth and metal fragments, had caused the problems. Russia planned to test the Proton rocket again before scheduling the much-delayed delivery of its crew module to the ISS.
NASA announced that its Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS) had detected water vapor throughout interstellar space. However, in the very coldest areas, where temperatures are only 30 above absolute zero, the satellite had detected far less water vapor than most theories had predicted. In those areas, SWAS measurements had indicated water vapor concentrations of only a few parts per billion. Ronald L. Snell of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst remarked that the finding presented a real puzzle to our understanding of the chemistry of interstellar clouds. In warmer regions, such as those within star-producing gas clouds, SWAS had measured water concentrations as much as 10,000 times greater than in the coldest regions. The new results were the product of 18 months of observations using the compact radio observatory, launched in 1998 on a mission to study the composition of interstellar gas clouds and their collapse to form new stars.(NASA, Cosmic Gas Clouds Yield Puzzling Concentrations of Water, news release 00-126, 16 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-126.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
A Russian Proton-K rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the Russian Ministry of Defenses Raduga-1-5 spacecraft, a military communications satellite with the alternate names Globus-1 and Cosmos 2372. Although the Globus-1 was a classified program, news sources reported that the craft would use a geostationary orbit to serve as a relay link for Russian military forces. At the time of the launch, many Raduga craft remained in orbit, but only five were operational.(Justin Ray, Proton Rocket Lofts Russian Military Satellite, Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2000; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 562, 1 September 2000, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx562.html (accessed 6 August 2008). 975 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Duxbury Named Project Manager of Stardust Mission, news release 2000- 084, 30 August 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/duxbury.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Two Earth-monitoring satellites launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Boeing Delta II rocket, successfully reaching orbit. NASA launched its Earth Observing I (EO-I) satellite, part of its New Millenium Program, to test several advanced technologies for possible use in future missions. NASA planned to fly the US$193 million craft within 2 miles (3 kilometers) of the Landsat 7 satellite to collect the same images, with the Landsat 7 images serving as the benchmark for the new imager aboard the EO-I. The second satellitethe multinational SAC-C satellite, a joint venture of NASA, Argentina, Brazil, Denmark, France, and Italycarried 11 instruments for studying the Earths surface, atmosphere, and magnetic field, including an instrument to observe the migration of the Franca whale.(Associated Press, Two Earth-Monitoring Satellites, 21 November 2000.)
In a much-anticipated launch, the Astro-E satellite lifted off aboard an M-5 rocket from the Kagoshima Space Center on the Japanese island of Kyushu. However, soon after launch, Astro-E was lost when the rocket suffered a control system breakdown, propelling the satellite into a lower orbit than planned. U.S. officials monitoring the launch determined that the satellite had most likely burned up in Earths atmosphere. Astro-E, the product of a joint venture between the United States and Japan, carried new x-raysensing equipment, which scientists had hoped would further illuminate the material surrounding black holes. Scientists had designed the new equipment to sense minute changes in the heat of single protons. The specialists overseeing the launch and mission had hoped that Astro-E would orbit and gather data for five years. The satellite had cost more than US$100 million to develop.(NASA, Japanese-U.S. Satellite Ushers in Golden Era of X-ray Astronomy, news release 00-18, 2 February 2000; Associated Press, Japan Suffers Another Setback When Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, 10 February 2000; Justin Ray, Astro-E Believed Lost Following Botched Launch, Space Flight Now, 10 February 2000.)
In the second on-orbit failure of Hughes Electronic Corporations HS601-model satellite, the Spacecraft Control Processor (SCP) of Mexicos Solidaridad I communications satellite malfunctioned, disrupting television, radio, and pager services. The first incident had occurred on the Galaxy IV satellite, causing similar communications disruptions in the United States during 1998. In the current malfunction, operators in Iztapalapa and Hermosillo received a series of alarms indicating that the only functioning SCP on board the Satmex-owned craft had turned itself off. The satellite had two SCPs on board and needed only one to carry out its communications relay properly, but Solidaridad I already was running on its backup SCP, having lost its first processor a year ago. Engineers suspected that the cause of the incident was the growth of a tiny crystalline structure that leads to electrical shorts. Hughes investigators had identified this type of malfunction in their satellites containing tin-plated relay switches and, therefore, had begun to use nickel-plated switches in new satellites to prevent future occurrences of such electrical shorts. However, Solidaridad I, designed for 14 years of service in space, had launched in 1993 before the conversion to nickel-plated switches. The Solidaridad series, comprising two satellites, provided service to all of Mexico, also extending to the southwestern United States, the Caribbean, and Central and South America. The malfunction led to the loss of educational television programming in 12,000 schools in Mexico, mostly in remote rural areas where some students rely entirely on televised courses. Satmex was transferring Solidaridad I users to the three other satellites in its fleet.(Justin Ray, Satellite Failure Causes Communications Blackout, Spaceflight Now, 29 August 2000. 280)
NASA successfully launched the GOES-L satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The new weather satellite would provide the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with detailed readings on severe weather systems affecting the United States. NASA deemed the GOES-L satellite a top priority because of the declining returns of the aging GOES-8 satellite. NASA had delayed the US$220 million satellite project because of engine problems, causing anxiety to weather forecasters who depended on the satellites to track the powerful hurricanes that affected the United States in 1999. As Director of the National Weather Services Southern Region, William Proenza explained, It is vitally important that we have continuity of data or we may be finding ourselves impaired in our ability of forecasting. NASA had kept the May 2000 launch of the GOES-L on track, despite some calls to postpone it so that NASA could launch Shuttle Atlantis on an urgent repair mission to the International Space Station (ISS). However, NASA officials had determined that the risk of inadequate weather forecasting was too great to take a chance on delaying the launch.(Associated Press, NASA Launches Hurricane-Tracking Satellite, 3 May 2000; Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, Weather Satellite Has Successful Launch, Heads for Orbit, 3 May 2000.)
Iridium Satellite LLC announced that the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York had approved its bid to purchase the operating assets, property, and intellectual property of Iridium LLC. Iridium Satellite LLC would continue providing commercial satellite communication services to the U.S. government.(Iridium LLC, Statement for Iridium Satellite LLC, news release, 15 November 2000. 299)
At a ceremony at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs, Colorado, U.S. Air Force General Ralph E. Eberhart succeeded General Richard B. Myers as the nations top military space official, overseeing the U.S. Space Command, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, and the North American Aerospace Defense Command, in addition to thousands of troops and more than 100 satellites. Eberhart took over the U.S. space operations post after having led the Air Forces Air Combat Command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.(Tom Breen, U.S. Gets New Military Space Chief, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 February 2000.)
NASA released a comprehensive new study, which found that the levels of ozone in the Arctic stratosphere were declining rapidly. In some parts of the stratosphere, the atmosphere had lost 60 percent of its ozone over the course of one year. The report, compiled by hundreds of European and American scientists, also demonstrated that changes in the global climate (primarily global warming) threatened to delay the recovery of the ozone layer. The scientists were optimistic that the ozone layer would recover eventually, but perhaps not until the mid-21st century. The study had cost NASA more than US$20 million, and the European scientists contributed US$10 million. The researchers had gathered data using satellites, airplanes, and hundreds of weather balloons.(Knight-Ridder News Service, Thinning Ozone over Arctic Raises Concerns, 6 April 2000; William K. Stevens, New Survey Shows Growing Loss of Arctic Atmospheres Ozone, New York Times, 6 April 2000.)
NASA announced that SPX Services Solutions had obtained a license to use NASA-patented technology to monitor more carefully levels of exhaust produced by the United States millions of motor vehicles. NASA had developed its atmospheric, remote-sensing technology to track greenhouse gases and to monitor Earths ozone layer. Combining government and private forces, researchers intended to focus on the pollution output of motor vehicles, particularly that of individual automobiles. SPX Services planned to design a device that would enable a driver to test his or her own vehicle to determine its compliance with U.S. Clean Air Act standards, rather than requiring the driver to take it to an auto mechanic for an emissions test. The goal of self- monitoring suited the increasingly popular idea of encouraging individuals to accept personal responsibility for protecting Earth from noxious pollutants.(NASA, NASA Satellite Technology To Monitor Motor Vehicle Pollution, news release 18 July 2000.)
SkyCorp signed a commercial Space Act agreement with NASA providing that SkyCorp deploy into orbit, either from the Space Shuttle or from the ISS, a satellite containing an Internet server. NASA and SkyCorp planned to test the idea as a proof of concept for a Low Earth Orbit 544 satellite constellation, offering Internet access on a global scale. SkyCorp chose to launch an Apache server on a small satellite containing an Apple 500 MHz Power Mac G4. The agreement with NASA outlined SkyCorps novel idea of launching a partially assembled satellite aboard a Space Shuttle. Astronauts would assemble the craft in space before tossing it from a Shuttle or ISS airlock into an independent orbit. SkyCorp named its concept Gossamer. Typically, engineers assemble a satellite fully on Earth, and it must withstand the stress of launch. A satellite built according to the Gossamer concept would only need to retain structural integrity in microgravity, greatly simplifying guidance, navigation, and control requirements.(SkyCorp, SkyCorp Announces Space Act Agreement with NASA To Fly First Internet Webserver in Space, news release, 20 October 2000; Keith Cowing, SkyCorp Signs Agreement with NASA To Fly the First Webserver in Spaceand It Will Be a Mac G4, SpaceRef.com, 23 October 2000.)
Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rockets successful launch confirmed Russias ability to transport its Zvezda module: This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab, 5 July 2000.)
After detailing only a few computer glitches, which had occurred during the dreaded Y2K transition, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA had narrowly avoided a Y2K data flaw that might have redirected the orbit of its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. According to NASAs Chief Information Officer, the software that transmitted the commands directing satellite orbits had automatically reverted to 1 January 1999 commands, when it should have used 1 January 2000 commands. Attentive operators caught the potential problem before the software had sent the faulty data to any satellites. Although the episode accentuated the seriousness of the Y2K computer transition, it was notable that, in spite of the risks, very few computer crashes actually occurred during the changeover.(Paula Shaki Trimble, NASA Discovered Last-Minute Y2K Glitch, Federal Computer Week, 4 January 2000. 859 NASA, Mars Program Independent Assessment Team Begins Work, news release 00-6, 7 January 2000.)
00-114, 20 July 2000; NASA, First Opportunity Tonight for Zvezda To Dock with International Space Station, news release N00-36, 25 July 2000. satellite because it was able to meet challenging demands for bandwidth, power, and in-orbit flexibility.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Build First Interactive Broadband Multimedia Spacecraft for New Skies Satellites, news release, 4 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedContractBuildF.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA announced that, on 3 September 2000, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) aboard NASAs Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) satellite had detected an 11 million-square-mile (28.5 million-square-kilometer) ozone-depletion areasurpassing the ozone holes record of 10.5 million square miles (27.2 million square kilometers) set on 19 September 1998. Scientists investigating the extent of the ozone-depletion area expressed their surprise, suggesting that early-spring conditions and an extremely intense Antarctic vortexan upper-altitude stratospheric air current that moves around the continentmight partly explain the record-setting size. Jack A. Kaye of the Office of Earth Sciences, Research Director at NASA Headquarters, remarked that, although scientists expect variations in the size of the ozone hole from one year to the next, they plan to observe the evolution of the ozone-depletion area in the coming months, to compare it with previous years. Manager of NASAs Upper Atmosphere Research Program Michael J. Kurylo suggested that the new data reinforced concerns about the fragile nature of the ozone layer, indicating that, although international agreements had curbed the production of ozone-destroying gases, concentrations of those gases in the stratosphere were just reaching their peak levels. Therefore, he warned that it would be decades before the depletion area in the ozone layer would no longer occur annually. Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar commented that such discoveries demonstrated the value of long-term observations.(NASA, Largest-Ever Ozone Hole Observed over Antarctica, news release 00-137, 7 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-137.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
A Starsem Soyuz-Fregat rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit for the European Space Agency (ESA) the final pair of Cluster II scientific satellites, Rumba and Tango. The launch was the 10th consecutive success for the French-Russian Starsem consortium. The first pair of Cluster II satellites, named Salsa and Samba, had launched on 16 July 2000. Designed to determine the physical process of the interaction between the solar wind and Earths magnetosphere, the missions main objective was to increase understanding of space weather, viewed as an increasingly significant obstacle to satellite activity, thereby improving scientists forecasting abilities. Each of the four spacecraft contained a collection of instruments for detecting plasma fields, waves, and particles. The Cluster II mission, designed to last for two years following an initial three-month period of instrument and system commissioning, was an international effort of more than 200 scientists from Canada, China, the Czech Republic, ESA member states, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Russia, and the United States. The original Cluster mission had ended during its inaugural launch in 1996, when a malfunction had caused the explosion of Arianespace Inc.s Ariane 5 rocket.(European Space Agency, Lift Off for Second Pair of Cluster II Spacecraft, news release 52-2000, http://www. esa.int/esaCP/Pr_52_2000_p_EN.html (accessed 8 May 2008); Space Business News, Soyuz Launches Second Pair of Cluster Probes Igniting Science Mission; Tenth Successful Launch in 18 Months, 16 August 2000.)
A National Academy of Sciences task force issued a report supporting the development and deployment of the Triana research satellite proposed by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. Congress had authorized the task force in 1999, to investigate the feasibility of Gores plan, which called for a satellite to orbit Earth continuously, capturing live pictures of the planet. Gore believed that obtaining the images and making them available on the Internet would increase public awareness of environmental issues. The proposal had sparked a political controversy between Gore and the Republican Congress, prompting Congress to demand that a task force investigate the value of the project. The task force reported that the satellite had scientific merit. White House science advisor Neal Lane praised the studys results, urging House members to act with bipartisan Congressional support. The process of investigation and approval of the project had drawn public attention to the political debate about space exploration.(Warren E. Leary, Science Panel Supports Gore Satellite Plan, New York Times, 9 March 2000; Associated Press, Panel Finds Merit in Space Mission Proposed by Gore, 8 March 2000.)
The government of the Peoples Republic of China released a document outlining its policy regarding its future human spaceflight program and satellite-launch industries. The document, which provided the outside world with information about Chinas top-secret space program, described the Chinese space industry as an integral part of the states comprehensive development strategy and stated, exploration and utilization of outer space should be for peaceful purposes and benefit the whole of mankind. The paper provided details of Chinas satellite program, stating that as of October 2000, China had developed and launched 47 satellites with a success rate of over 90 percent. China had four satellite series in operation: the Dongfanghong telecommunications series; the Fengyun meteorological series; the Shijian research and technology series; and the Ziyuan Earth-observation series, which had recently launched its first spacecraft. The paper also outlined Chinas efforts toward international cooperation, notably Chinas signing of an agreement with a dozen countries, including the United States, Russia, Japan, and several European countries, allowing for scientific exchange and joint development of spacecraft components, as well as for commercial launch services. To date, China had launched 27 foreign-made satellites using its Long March series of rockets.(Stephen Clark, China Temporarily Lifts Its Veil on Its Secret Space Program, Spaceflight Now, 24 November 2000.)
After completing four months of on-orbit checkout and verification, Terra, the newest in NASAs series of Earth Observing System Satellites, became functional. NASA had developed and launched Terra to monitor Earths atmosphere on a daily basis. Researchers hoped that gathering frequent data would allow a more comprehensive assessment of Earths climate change. According to Yoram J. Kaufman, Project Scientist for Terra at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Terra is measuring and documenting the Earths vital signs, many of them for the first time. In the midst of public and scholarly discussions of global warming and climate change, the new research satellite was a step toward understanding the causes of the changes. The data will help us understand our planet, aid in our distinguishing between natural and human-induced changes, and show us how the Earths climate affects the quality of our lives, Kaufman clarified. The satellites first transmitted images thrilled scientists. The satellite surveyed North America, creating images in many different layers, to reveal how different levels of population and types of vegetation affected the climate. NASA officials planned to make the images obtained by Terra available to business, scientists, and the public.(NASA, Terra Spacecraft Open for Business, news release 00-62, 19 April 2000; NASA, New Views of Earth from Terra Satellite Wednesday, news release N00-16, 18 April 2000.)
The first of two Cluster spacecraft launches took place from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. NASA and the European Space Agency had formed a partnership to develop and build the exploration craft, designed to travel around the Earth in a tetrahedral formation, collecting data on solar wind. Space officials planned to launch two additional Cluster craft one month after the first two had entered their orbiting pattern. With four satellites launched and flying in formation, scientists expected to harvest data about the turbulent battle raging between Earths magnetic field and the solar winds blowing at an estimated rate of 12 million miles (1.63.2 million kilometers) per hour. Researchers also hoped the new information would help scientists understand other interactions between the Earth and the Sun. Each of the four Cluster spacecraft carried instruments to measure the patterns of electrons and the presence of protons and helium, as well as instruments to monitor the characteristics of electronic fields, solar wind, and plasma waves.(NASA, New Cluster Mission To Provide Unprecedented Detail about Space Weather, news release 00-105, 13 July 2000.)
NASA launched the most advanced communications satellite it had ever developed, the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-H (TDRS-H) created to provide communication between the Space Shuttles, ISS, HST, and NASA control centers. Intended to replace a communications satellite that had been in place since 1983 and had surpassed its mission-designed lifetime, the new TDRS-H was the first of three communications satellites planned to link NASAs space-bound vehicles. NASA had designated nearly US$500 million for the design, building, and launch of the three new satellites. The TDRS-H launched aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIA rocket, separating from it after about 30 minutes of flight. Once the satellite reached 171 longitude, it became operational.(Lockheed Martin Inc., International Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Provide Mission Success for NASA Satellite Launch, news release, 30 June 2000; NASA, Advanced Communications Satellite Ready To Serve New Millennium Space Projects, news release 00-98, 21 June 2000.)
NASA made data from its Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) available to the public. ASTER, a general-purpose imaging instrument featuring 14 spectral bands, extremely high spatial resolution, and stereo-imaging capabilities, had launched aboard NASAs Terra satellite in December 1999. One of ASTERs primary goals was to acquire a one-time cloud-free image of the entire land surface of Earth, intended as a baseline image for monitoring environmental change.(NASA, Terra Satellites ASTER Data Now Available to the Public, news release 2000-124, 5 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/terra.html (accessed 7 April 2008).)
Following a 24-hour delay caused by a computer anomaly, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) successfully launched the Lockheed Martinbuilt, NOAAL spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base, aboard a Titan II rocket. Ground controllers confirmed that the craft had deployed its solar array and verified a power-positive condition. NASA and NOAA had designed the satellite, the second in a series of five polar-orbiting spacecraft, to collect meteorological data and to transmit the information to users worldwide. NOAAs National Weather Service planned to use the crafts data for long-range weather and climate forecasts. Although NASA had managed the project of building and launching the satellite, it intended to transfer operational control to NOAA 10 days following the launch.(NOAA, NOAA-L Weather Satellite Successfully Launched, news release 2000-069, 21 September 2000, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2000/sep00/noaa00069.html (accessed 29 April 2008); Associated Press, Weather Satellite Launched After Delay, 21 September 2000.)
The National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Integrated Program Office (IPO) selected Raytheon Company to provide imaging-sensor instruments for the new NPOESS craft, which would replace the U.S. Department of Commerces Polar- Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellites (POES) and the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites. Under a contract valued at US$152.8 million, Raytheon would design, develop, and test the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) instrument and develop the algorithms to produce environmental data records from VIIRS data.(Associated Press, Raytheon Awarded $152.8 Million Contract for Meteorological Satellite Imaging Sensor, 28 November 2000.)
NASA launched the Kodiak Star from Kodiak Island in Alaska at 2:40 a.m. (UT), NASAs first mission ever launched into Earth orbit from that location. The Kodiak Stars payload consisted of four small satellites: PCSAT, PICOSat 9, Sapphire, and Starshine 3. The PCSAT and Starshine 3 would serve amateur radio operators; Sapphire carried a voice synthesizer to convert text messages into human voice; and PICOSat 9 would test electronic components and systems in space conditions. NASA had funded the Starshine 3, and the DOD had sponsored the other three satellites.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575; NASA KSC, Kodiak Star Scheduled for Launch from Alaska Sept. 17, news release 101-01, 22 August 2001.)
Researchers published findings from an unprecedented analysis of NASA-produced satellite data of carbon absorption by northern hemisphere forests. The researchers had used the satellite data to study the extent to which forests had absorbed carbon released into Earths atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide from fossil-fuel combustion. Many scientists consider atmospheric accumulation of carbon dioxide to be a primary cause of global climate change, because forests act as sinks, absorbing carbon dioxide, thereby reducing its atmospheric accumulation. The researchers had found that forests in Europe, Russia, and the United States annually absorbed almost 700 million tonnes (771 million tons or 1.5 trillion pounds) of carbon from 1981 to 1999. They had also found geographic variations in carbon absorption, with Russian forests accounting for nearly 40 percent of the carbon sink and Canadian forests losing carbon. The findings were significant, because they indicated which forests had lost carbon and which had stored it. The findings also validated relationships between satellite measurements and ground-based measurements of carbon absorption, demonstrating the crucial importance of satellites in monitoring forests. NASAs Earth Science Enterprise, dedicated to understanding human- induced and natural changes in Earths environment, had funded the research.
NASA announced that images provided by the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS), which NASA had launched in December 1998, showed new evidence that extra- planetary systems contain water. In particular, astronomers had studied the giant IRC+10216 star, also known as CW Leonis, and had located water vapor surrounding the celestial body. Scientists had never considered the giant star, located some 500 light-years from Earth, as a likely host of water because of its high levels of carbon. Gary Melnick of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics led the SWAS study, which concluded that the most viable explanation for the substantial concentrations of water vapor around the star was that the stars gravity had pulled the water vapor from the icy surfaces of nearby comets. The discovery had broad implications for scientists theories about how Earth might eventually end. We think we are witnessing the type of apocalypse that will ultimately befall our own planetary system, said one SWAS researcher. Several billion years from now, the Sun will become a giant star and its power output will increase five thousand fold. As the luminosity of the Sun increases, a wave of water vaporization will spread outwards through the solar system, starting with Earths oceans and extending well beyond the orbit of Neptune.(Gary J. Melnick et al., Discovery of Water Vapour Around IRC+10216 as Evidence for Comets Orbiting Another Star, Nature 412, no. 6843 (12 July 2001): 160163; NASA, Stellar Apocalypse Yields First Evidence of Water-Bearing Worlds Beyond Our Solar System, news release 01-140, 11 July 2001.)
NASA formally accepted the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteH (TDRS-H) from Boeing Satellite Systems. TDRS-H was part of a constellation of satellites that formed a communication- signal relay system, providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellites served the HST, the ISS, and other NASA programs. Boeing had built TDRS-H under contract from NASA, which had launched the satellite in June 2000. However, NASA had delayed its formal acceptance of the spacecraft, after Boeing engineers had found that the satellites multiple- access, phased-array antenna did not meet contractually specified performance standards. On 10 August 2001, NASA and Boeing had announced that they had tentatively agreed to a settlement and were finalizing negotiations for NASA to accept the satellite.(The Boeing Company, NASA To Take Control of TDRS-H Satellite, news release 10 August 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q3/nr_010810t.html (accessed 28 January 2010); NASA, Media Kit: TDRS-J Mission, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/gsfc/earth/pictures/20021127tdrs_j/)
Presiding over the launch of a Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite, Major Nina M. Armagno became the first female launch director at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Armagno assumed responsibility for a 400-person crew and for making the final decision about whether to proceed with launch plans.(Kelly Young, First Woman Directs Launch, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
A rocket carrying a NASA satellite and other payloads failed to reach orbit. The 91-foot (27.7- meter) Taurus rocket launched at 11:49 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, and within minutes, NASA observed indications of problems with the rocket, including a skewed trajectory near the time of the first-stage separation. The rockets manufacturer Orbital Sciences Corporation was uncertain about the exact details of the launch problem but presumed that the rocket had not reached orbit. The rocket was carrying NASAs ozone-analyzing Quick Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (QuikTOMS) satellite, a private imaging satellite called OrbView-4, and a private payload with the cremated remains of individuals who had paid to have their remains launched into orbit.(Associated Press, Rocket Launch with NASA, Orbital Sciences Payload Goes Awry, Satellites Probably Lost, 21 September 2001.)
In preparation for the final descent of the Mir space station, the Russian Space Agency negotiated a US$200 million insurance policy covering any damage that might occur if pieces of the craft landed in populated areas. Russian officials planned to fire the engines of the cargo ship attached to the space station, thereby pulling Mir from orbit and sending the space station hurtling into Earths atmosphere. Scientists predicted that intense heat would destroy most of the station during reentry, but that some fragments would hit Earth. Although space agencies had successfully deorbited many rockets and satellites to final resting places in the ocean, Russia faced increasing international consternation regarding the damage Mirs reentry might cause. Japan was at higher risk from fragments of Mir than other countries, because the space station would pass over Japan in its final, low orbit.
India successfully launched its first experimental geosynchronous satellite (GSAT-1) aboard the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV). The successful test suggested that India was poised to launch its own communication satellites. In a previous trial, India had halted a GSLV launch only moments before liftoff, when sensors indicated that the booster had insufficient power. Subsequent tests remedied the problem, enabling the successful 18 April launch. The Indian government praised the mission as the culmination of a decade of research and development aimed at achieving Indian launch capability.(Indian Embassy, GSLV Launched Successfully, news release, 18 April 2001, http://www.indianembassy.org/press_release/2001/april/apr_18.htm (accessed 1 July 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
NASA released new images gathered by the Terra satellites instrumentsClouds and the Earths Radiant Energy System (CERES)which revealed shrinking glaciers, as well as the most accurate global radiation measurements ever captured. Launched in December 1999, Terra monitored most of the worlds major glaciers. The CERES instruments had captured the high- resolution images from 440 miles (708 kilometers) above Earths surface. Initial analysis of the new data had revealed that most glaciers had shrunk considerably since previously measured. For example, the glaciers in the mountains of Patagonia had receded about 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) over the course of 13 years. CERES had also provided the first complete year of radiation readings since 1987, capturing readings from the May 2001 heat wave, which had produced record temperatures in the United States.(NASA, NASAs Terra Satellite Captures a World of Sunlight and Heat, news release 01-123, 21 June 2001; Kenneth Chang, Spacecrafts Supercamera Captures Earth in All Its Detail, New York Times, 19 June 2001.)
A team of European and American astronomers announced that they had obtained the first observations of energy leaving a black hole. The scientists, who had used ESAs XMM-Newton satellite to observe a supermassive black hole in the center of galaxy MCG-63015, had detected an x-ray glow emanating from iron gas that was moving at half the speed of the light that was close to the black hole. The scientists believed that the x-ray glow resulted from friction produced by matter rotating around a black hole before falling into it. Because the black holes gravity is sufficiently intense to wrap magnetic field lines around it, the entwined magnetic fields tighten around the black hole, slowing its rotation, and, as a result, increasing the temperature of the region surrounding the black hole. Observed gravity-stretching particles of light in the iron gas, the scientists had discovered unexpectedly that the total energy output of the gas was too high for only gravity and the descent of matter into the black hole to be providing the power source. The scientists had concluded that an additional power source must be increasing the energy output of the gas to the observed intensity.(NASA, New Energy Source Wrings Power from Black Hole Spin, news release 01-200, 22 October 2001; Jorn Wilms et al., XMM-EPIC Observation of MCG-6-30-15: Direct Evidence for the Extraction of Energy from a Spinning Black Hole, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 328, no. 3 (11 December 2001): L27L31.)
Gerard A. Kriss of Johns Hopkins University led a group of astronomers using NASAs Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) satellite to obtain the best observations to date of helium gas remaining from the Big Bang. The observations provided information about the universes architecture millions of years ago, giving empirical support for theories about how matter in the expanding universe had condensed into a structure that permeated space between galaxies. The FUSE satellite had observed the light of the distant quasar HE2347-4342, and scientists had used the data it produced to make comparative analyses of the lights absorption by helium and hydrogen gas on its trajectory to Earth. The astronomers had compared the ionization of the helium and hydrogen, the result of the gases absorption of light, to determine the most likely source of the energy that had heated the universe during its early formation. They concluded that, most likely, a combination of quasars and newly formed stars had produced the ionization of helium and hydrogen gases. Moreover, the presence of helium, in regions with no hydrogen, supported the theory that the universes architecture resulted from extensive gravitational instabilities during the chaos after the Big Bang.(NASA, New View of Primordial Helium Traces Structure of Early Universe, news release 01-160, 9 August 2001; G. A. Kriss, Resolving the Structure of Ionized Helium in the Intergalactic Medium with the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer, Science 293, no. 5532 (10 August 2001): 11121116.)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASAs global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASAs JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deeres NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASAs Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm, news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
The American geosynchronous relay satellite XM 1, often referred to as Roll, launched into space aboard a Russian Zenit rocket, from a floating launchpad in the Pacific Ocean. The launch of Roll followed on the heels of the March 2001 delivery to space of XM 2, known as Rock. With both Rock and Roll in orbit, XM Satellite Radio became available to subscribing listeners in the United States. The president of the company XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, DC, called Rock and Roll the newest power couple in Washington, DC, declaring that his firm was ready to compete with Sirius Radio for subscribers. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed and built the satellites.(The Boeing Company, Sea Launch on a Mission To Launch XMs Roll Satellite, 1 May 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010501s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571, 1 June 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx571.html (accessed 28 July 2008); Jim Banke, Sea Launch Sends Roll Spacecraft into Orbit for XM Satellite Radio, Space.com, 8 May 2001, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/launches/zenit_launch_010508.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
Researchers from NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) published research indicating that, during the 20th century, the worlds average temperatures had increased, and the United States average temperatures had declined. Using data from satellites and 7,200 weather stations worldwide, NASA and NOAA scientists had found that the global mean surface air temperature had increased by 1oF (0.6oC) during the 20th century. However, temperatures had not increased consistently but had undergone successive periods of warming (from 1900 to 1940), cooling (1940 to 1965), and warming again (1965 to 2000). The evidence also indicated that these temperature changes had not been uniform throughout Earth. For example, although the average surface air temperature in the United States had increased during the latter part of the 20th century, it had remained at a level comparable to average U.S. temperatures during the 1930s. In addition, the researchers had discovered evidence that humans had influenced surface air temperatures on a local scale in large urban areas, suburbs, and even in small towns. However, the data also indicated that this effect had been of modest magnitude and might reflect problems with data measurement.(J. Hansen et al., A Closer Look at United States and Global Surface Temperature Change, Journal of Geophysical Research 106, no. D20 (2001): 2394723963; NASA, Satellites Shed Light On Warmer World, news release 01-212, 5 November 2001.)
Russia launched the Coronas-F solar observatory satellite aboard a Tsiklon 3 rocket. The launch took place from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia. Engineers had designed the satellite to monitor light intensity, solar bursts, and several solar radii. The satellite carried 13 separate instruments, to gather data as the spacecraft orbited while pointing toward the Sun. The Coronas-F satellite was Russias second attempt to place in orbit such a complicated research craft. The Coronas-I, launched in 1994, had operated for only a couple of months before a control failure had caused it to lose its functionality.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573.)
Scientists announced the first confirmed observation of the optical afterglow of a gamma-ray burst (GRB). GRBs are the most energetic phenomenon in the universe. NASAs High Energy Transient Explorer (HETE) had observed a GRBdubbed GRB 010921occurring nearly 5 billion light-years from Earth in the constellation Lacerta. The astronomers had coordinated the HETE data with observations that Italys BeppoSAX satellite and ESAs Ulysses spacecraft had captured, enabling them to find the afterglow in optical light and to measure its redshiftthe warping of electromagnetic radiation by gravity. The measurement of the redshift helped them determine the GRBs distance from Earth. The observation was a special opportunity to obtain information on GRBs. Scientists hoped that with additional observations they could begin to understand the causes of this frequent, but enigmatic phenomenon.(NASA, NASAs HETE Spots Rare Gamma-Ray Burst Afterglow, news release 01-218, 7 November 2001; P. A. Price et al., GRB 010921: Discovery of the First High Energy Transient Explorer Afterglow, Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 2 (1 June 2002): L121L125; G. Ricker et al., GRB 010921: Localization and Observation by the High Energy Transient Explorer Satellite, Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 2 (1 June 2002): L127 L130.)
NASA launched the Jason-1 oceanography satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite launched on the same rocket as the TIMED spacecraft, but the two spacecraft were part of separate missions. Jason-1 belonged to a joint U.S.-French mission to monitor global climate interactions between Earths atmosphere and seas, continuing the mission that the TOPEX/Poseidon spacecraft had begun in 1992. The 500-kilogram (1,100-pound) Jason- 1 weighed about 1/5th of the TOPEX/Poseidon and carried its predecessors main instrumentthe Poseidon 2 altimeteras well as other, more advanced instruments that would provide Jason-1 with improved operational utility.(NASA, NASA/French Ocean-Observing Satellite Set To Soar, news release 01-225, 19 November 2001; NASA JPL, Ocean Surface Topography from Space: MissionsJason-1 Launch,29 July 2008, http://topex- www.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/jason-1-launch.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA launched the Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED) spacecraft on a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The purpose of the mission was to study a region called the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere/Ionosphere (MLTI), located 40 to 110 miles (60 to 180 kilometers) above Earth. The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory had designed the spacecraft to produce the first set of comprehensive, global measurements of the MLTI, a region that scientists had not yet thoroughly analyzed, in which electrical currents surge and auroras create a glow over the northern and southern hemispheres of Earth. TIMED, which launched on the same rocket as the Jason-1 oceanography satellite, was the first in a series of six spacecraft that NASA intended to send to observe the MLTI from a 388-mile (625-kilometer) orbit of Earth. NASAs GSFC would manage the TIMED spacecraft for the Office of Space Science in Washington, DC; the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory would operate the spacecraft for NASA during the mission.
NASA researchers with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the University of California at San Diego published research indicating that particles from human-produced pollution might significantly contribute to weakening the planets hydrological cycle. The hydrological cycle is the circulation of water between Earths atmosphere and its surface water and soils. Specifically, water precipitates from the atmosphere into surface water or soils and later evaporates from surface water, soils, and plants back into the atmosphere. The researchers had examined satellite data indicating aerosol distribution in the Indian Ocean region and had found that the aerosols, primarily composed of black carbon, could weaken the hydrological cycle in two ways. The aerosols could reduce the amount of sunlight reaching the ocean, thereby decreasing the amount of water evaporating into the atmosphere. In addition, when particulates enter clouds, they reduce the size of cloud droplets, thereby reducing the amount of rain over polluted regions. The particulates in aerosols comprise a mixture of substances formed by the burning of fossil fuels and rural biomass. The new research was significant because it suggested that aerosols might be more environmentally harmful than scientists had previously understood and that air pollution is both an urban and a rural phenomenon.(NASA, Tiny Pollution Particles May Carry Large Consequences for Earths Water Supply, news release 01- 239, 6 December 2001; V. Ramanathan, Aerosols, Climate, and the Hydrological Cycle, Science n.s. 294, no. 5549 (7 December 2001): 21192124.)
A group of scientists led by Liming Zhou of Boston University published research indicating that substantial portions of the northern hemisphere had experienced effects of global warming. The scientists, who were studying the responses of vegetation to temperature changes, had used satellite data collected from July 1981 to December 1999 and had found a persistent increase in the length of the growing season in the majority of vegetated areas in the northern latitudes of Asia and Europe. A similar trend was evident in North America, but in a relatively lower proportion of land area. The data had also revealed declines in vegetated area in Alaska, Canada, and some parts of Asia, which may have resulted from temperature-induced drought in those areas. In addition, the scientists discovered a statistically significant relationship between changes in vegetated area and increasing land surface temperatures, indicating that climatic changes may have led to changes in vegetative activity in much of the world.(NASA, Earths Becoming a Greener Greenhouse, news release 01-178, 4 September 2001; L. Zhou et al., Variations in Northern Vegetation Activity Inferred from Satellite Data of Vegetation Index During 1981 to 1999, Journal of Geophysical Research 106, no. D17 (16 September 2001): 2006920083.)
The Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP) launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. MAP carried two Gregorian telescopes, designed to record temperatures in selected locations throughout the sky. MAPs broad mission was to provide further insight into how the universe formed. The spacecraft cost US$95 million to build.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Delta II Helps Unlock Secrets of the Universe, news release, 30 June 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010630h.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Peter N. Spotts, Latest NASA Launch Aims To Take Cosmic Baby Picture, Christian Science Monitor, 29 June 2001;)
NASA made available the first large-scale images revealing a tail of electrified gas streaming from Earth toward the Sun. One of the images, which NASAs Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had produced, appeared on the cover of Science. The IMAGE technology had captured new views of previously unverifiable gas trapped within Earths magnetic field, known as the magnetosphere. The images placed in the context of the solar system the vast reach of the region affected by Earths magnetosphere, which extends past the Moon on the night side of Earth. Astronomers compared the perspective the new images provided them, to the perspective satellite images of Earth provide to scientists researching hurricanes.(NASA, NASAs Image Reveals Earths Invisible Magnetic Tail, news release 01-08, 25 January 2001; cover of Science 291, no. 5504 (26 January 2001).)
Konrad Dennerl, of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany, and his team of astronomers announced that they had performed the first x-ray observations of the planet Venus. The team had used NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory to conduct the observations, which revealed new information about the planets atmosphere. The x-ray observations of Venus were different from views of the planet made in visible light, because fluorescence, rather than reflection, produced the x-rays from the planet. Most of the fluorescent x-rays come from oxygen and carbon atoms located 120 to 140 kilometers (74 to 87 miles) above the surface of Venus, whereas clouds that are 50 to 70 kilometers (31 to 43 miles) above the surface reflect optical light. The observations represented a technological breakthrough. Other x-ray astronomy satellites had been unable to point steadily in the direction of Venus, because the planets relative proximity to the Sun had prevented them from locking onto guide stars that were visually distinct from the Sun.(NASA, Chandra Captures Venus in a Whole New Light, news release 01-236, 27 November 2001.)
Members of the Landsat 7 project, involving scientists from NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), announced that, in the course of mapping Antarctica, the team had discovered a giant new crack in one of the worlds largest ice sheets. The team believed that the crack, formed within the past five weeks, would result in the calving of the Pine Island Glacier, creating a major new iceberg within 18 months. NASA had obtained the image from the Landsat 7 satellite, which had passed over Antarctica 16 times daily since its 1999 launch.(NASA, NASA Image Reveals Giant Chip Off the Antarctic Ice Block, news release 01-50, 22 March 2001; Reuters, Satellite Spies Crack in Antarctica Glacier, 23 March 2001.)
Shang-Ping Xie of the University of Hawaiis International Pacific Research Center and Meteorology Department and W. Timothy Liu of NASAs JPL published in the journal Science the results of their study of Hawaiis so-called tail, demonstrating that a strong ocean current connects Hawaii with Asia. The researchers had concluded that the current was the result of the wind whipping around the small Pacific Islands and creating wakes eastward toward Asia. Scientists had long recognized that the Hawaiian Islands cause an eastward current, but common knowledge had suggested that the current reaches less than 200 miles (322 kilometers). However, using data from NASAs QuikSCAT satellite, the European Sensing Satellites, and the United States-Japan Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission, Xie and Lie had traced the eastward- flowing current farther, discovering that it actually extends nearly 5,000 miles (8,000 kilometers). From an historical perspective, the discovery provided evidence in support of the tradition that early Hawaiian settlers had sailed to the islands from the Far East.(Shang-Ping Xie et al., Far-Reaching Effects of the Hawaiian Islands on the Pacific Ocean-Atmosphere System, Science 292, no. 5524 (15 June 2001): 20572060; NASA, Satellites Reveal Hawaiis Long Tail of Wind and Water, news release 01-121, 14 June 2001.)
NASA suspended indefinitely the launch of the climate-monitoring satellite Triana, which NASA had designed to provide imagery of entire hemispheres from nearly 1 million miles away in space. By contrast, weather satellites often remain in low Earth orbit and, therefore, are only able to provide images of continents. Triana was also called GoreCam or GoreSat, because former Vice President Gore had originated the project. Gore had conceived of the satellite in March 1998, choosing to name it in honor of Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Columbuss ship who had first sighted land. NASA had planned to launch the US$120 million Earth-observation satellite by the end of 2001. However, the Republican-controlled U.S. House of Representatives had voted to eliminate the projects funding from NASAs fiscal year (FY) 2000 appropriation. A conference committee of the House and the Senate had later agreed to suspend funding for Triana and to delay its launch, so that the National Academy of Sciences could review the projects merits. Although the National Academy of Sciences had strongly endorsed the project, NASA had decided to shelve the satellite project indefinitely, as part of its effort to prioritize scientific expenditures and concentrate its resources on projects such as the HST and the ISS.(Joel Achenbach, For Gore Spacecraft, All Systems Arent Go; Earth Observation Satellite Shelved, Washington Post, 8 August 2001.)
NASAs Mars Odyssey spacecraft maneuvered into Marss orbit after a six-month, 286 million- mile (460 million-kilometer) voyage from Earth. Newspapers described the event as a major success for NASA, which had lost three previous spacecraft destined for Mars during the years from 1993 to 1999. NASA planned for Odyssey to orbit Mars for two and one-half years, mapping the mineral composition of Mars and searching for evidence of water ice beneath the planets surface. Toward the end of Odysseys orbital reconnaissance mission, the spacecraft would also function as a communications satellite for two robotic landers that NASA planned to launch to Mars in 2003.(Mark Carreau, Odyssey Slips into Orbit, Breaks String of Failures, Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2001; New York Times, At Last a Success on a Mars Mission, 24 October 2001.)
NASA scientists published research challenging prominent theories about the growth of the gravitational field at Earths equator, a phenomenon that began in 1998. Researchers had suggested that atmospheric change, or the melting of glaciers and polar ice, had caused a geographic shift in the planets gravitational field, with a decline in upper latitudes and a corresponding increase in lower latitudes. However, NASA scientists Christopher M. Cox and Benjamin F. Chao discovered that the quantity, rate, and timing of atmospheric change and ice melt did not correspond to the magnitude and rate of gravitational shift. Based on their analysis of data that 10 satellites had acquired between 1979 and 2002, Cox and Chao found a more probable explanation of this phenomenon. The data suggested that the oceans had been rapidly transporting substantial quantities of water and ice from higher to lower latitudes, thereby shifting Earths mass and causing a corresponding alteration in the planets gravitational field from the higher to the lower latitudes. The scientists noted, however, that additional data and analysis were necessary to determine whether their interpretation of the data was correct.(NASA, Satellites Reveal a Mystery of Large Change in Earths Gravity Field, news release 02-147, 1 August 2002; Christopher M. Cox and Benjamin F. Chao, Detection of Large-Scale Mass Redistribution in the Terrestrial System Since 1998, Science 297, no. 5582 (2 August 2002): 831833.)
In an article in the journal Nature, astronomers at ESA reported that they had found evidence indicating which specific type of stellar object produces gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), the universes most energetic phenomena. Prevailing hypotheses had posited that, either GRBs originate from the merger of two neutron stars, or they form from the collapse of one massive star, but researchers had discovered no conclusive proof to support either of these ideas. However, based on their analysis of the speed, temperature, and chemical elements of a GRB that had occurred on 11 December 2001, ESA astronomers found evidence supporting the latter hypothesis. The research team examined two sequential observations of the GRB, both taken by ESA satellites: the BeppoSAX satellite had made the first observation, and, nearly 11 hours later, the XMM-Newton satellite had made the second. The team had found large quantities of argon, calcium, magnesium, silicon, and sulphur, moving at 1/10th the speed of light. These findings supported the idea that a supernova explosion from a single massive star produces GRBs. If the merger of two neutron stars had produced the burst, astronomers would have expected the stars to produce large amounts of elements other than those observedparticularly ironand to emit those elements at a slower velocity.(J. N. Reeves et al., The Signature of Supernova Ejecta in the X-ray Afterglow of the -ray Burst 011211, Nature 416, no. 6880 (4 April 2002): 512515; ESA, ESAs X-ray Space Telescope Proves Supernovae Can Cause Mysterious Gamma-Ray Bursts, ESA news release 22-2002, 4 April 2002.)
U.S. Navy officials announced that the Navy had been using NASA satellite data in combat, the first time the military had done so. The officials stated that the Navy had used unclassified NASA data to help guide ships and planes engaged in combat operations in Afghanistan. Major media reported that members of Congress had voiced mixed reactions to the announcement, with some members expressing their concern that the cooperation between NASA and the military would overstep the bounds of NASAs civilian charter.(Houston Chronicle, NASA Satellite Guides Navy Warplanes, Ships, 12 April 2002.)
NASA successfully launched the third replenishment spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleet. The TDRS-J satellite launched aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:42 p.m. (EST). TDRS satellites comprised a communication-signal relay system providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(The Boeing Company, Boeing-Built NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Successfully Launched, news release, 4 December 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021204s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); National Space Science Data Center, NASAs Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS), http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
Two spacecraft comprising the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) launched on a single rocket vehicle from Russias Plesetsk Cosmodrome. The five-year missions main purpose was to map variations in Earths gravity field, using the GPS and a microwave ranging system to measure the distance between the missions two identical satellitesnicknamed Tom and Jerry. The two craft were to monitor each other while flying in a polar orbit 500 kilometers (311 miles) above Earth. This mission, to study measurements of gravity variations, could help scientists understand better the changes in the transport of mass around the planet. Changes in mass, such as ocean currents, ground-water storage, and mass within Earth, can affect climate and other aspects of the planets environment. The GRACE mission was a partnership between NASA and the Deutsche Zentrum fur Luft- und Raumfahrt (the German Aerospace Center).(University of Texas Center for Space Research, GRACE: Mission Overview, http://www.csr.utexas.edu/grace/overview.html (accessed 11 August 2002); Warren E. Leary, New Satellites To Map Gravity More Precisely, New York Times, 19 March 2002.)
ESA reported research indicating that the universe might be older than scientists had previously estimated and that a common method of estimating the age of celestial bodies might be incorrect. A group of scientists had analyzed the XMM-Newton satellites x-ray observations of the distant but exceptionally luminous quasar APM 08279+5255 and found that the quasar contains three times more iron than the Sun. Because exploding stars release iron, which increases across the universe over time, the scientists had expected APM 08279+5255 to have less iron than Earths relatively older solar system. The scientists noted that the surprising quantity of iron in the distant quasar could be the result of an unknown phenomenon that produces iron very efficiently. However, they suggested that the more likely explanation for the finding was that the conventional method of measuring the age of celestial objects by estimating the objects redshifta property of the light emitted by such objectswas flawed.(ESA, Is the Universe Older Than Expected? ESA news release, 10 July 2002; Gunther Hasinger, Norbert Schartel, and Stefanie Komossa, Discovery of an Ionized Fe K Edge in the z=3.91 Broad Absorption Line Quasar APM 08279+5255 with XMM-Newton, Astrophysical Journal Letters 573, no. 2 (10 July 2002): L77L80.)
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, NASAs Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS), http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
The Earth observation satellite Aqua launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite Aqua was a component of the Earth Observing System (EOS), which also included the Terra satellite launched in December 1999. Aquas primary purpose was to acquire information about the effects of climate change on the water cycle. The satellite would also collect data to help scientists examine biological systems dependent upon water and improve long-term forecasts of weather and climate. Brazil, Japan, and the United States planned for their joint project Aqua to continue for six years.(NASA JPL, Aqua Launched To Study Earths Water Cycle, news release, 4 May 2002; Warren E. Leary, NASA To View Interaction of Earths Water and Climate, New York Times, 30 April 2002.)
The American Association for the Advancement of Science named Senior Research Scientist David Halpern of NASAs JPL a fellow, in recognition of his work on air-sea interactions in tropical oceans and on satellite measurements of ocean-surface quantities.(NASA JPL, JPL Researcher Honored by Largest Scientific Discovery, news release, 28 February 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of Boeings Delta 2 expendable launch vehicle to launch medium-class payloads between 2006 and 2009. The selection was part of an existing NASA launch-services contract with Boeing that had a maximum value of US$1.2 billion, if NASA exercised all options. The procurement contract called for 12 definite launches, with options for an additional seven. Boeings rockets would launch both NASAs payloads and NASA- sponsored payloads.(NASA, NASA Picks Delta II To Launch Medium-Class Payloads, news release C02-ii, 6 December 2002. 335 NASA, STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 31 October 2008).)
The International Astronomical Union announced that astronomers had found 11 new moons around the planet Jupiter. The discovery increased the total number of known satellites around Jupiter to 39, more than any other planet in the solar system. Using the Canada-France-Hawaii telescope, astronomers from Cambridge University and the University of Hawaii had first detected the moons in December 2001. At 1- to 2-miles (1.6- to 3.2-kilometers) across, the newly discovered moons were far smaller than some of Jupiters other moons, which are thousands of miles (or kilometers) wide. In addition, the astronomers had discovered that the satellites have irregular orbits and, unlike the planets largest moons, spin in the opposite direction of Jupiter. The moons irregular orbits around Jupiter indicate that they may have originally orbited the Sun.(Usha Lee McFarling, 11 New Moons of Jupiter Found, Los Angeles Times, 17 May 2002; NASA JPL, Astronomers Discover 11 More Small Moons of Jupiter, news release, 17 May 2002.)
Astronomer Riccardo Giacconi received the Nobel Prize in physics for research on cosmic x-ray radiation. Giacconis projects had included NASA-funded research leading to his discovery of cosmic x-ray sources. A professor at Johns Hopkins University, Giacconi had been the first scientist to discover a source of x-rays outside Earths solar system and the first to prove that the universe contained background radiation of x-ray light. In addition, many astronomers believed that x-ray sources Giacconi had discovered contained black holes. Giacconi had also been responsible for the conception and design of the first x-ray satellite and the first operating x-ray telescope. Together with Harvey Tananbaum, he had proposed the design of the x-ray telescope that eventually became NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory. Moreover, Giacconi had been the first Director of the Hubble Space Telescope Science Institute and the Principal Investigator for the Chandra Ultra-Deep Survey, which had obtained the deepest x-ray exposures with a millionth-second observation.(NASA, Nobel Physics in Physics Awarded to Astronomer for NASA-Funded Research, news release 02-197, 8 October 2002; Nobel Foundation, Advanced Information on the Nobel Prize in Physics 2002, news release, 8 October 2002, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2002/phyadv02.pdf (accessed 17 October 2008). 306 Gwyneth K. Shaw, Military Influence To Grow at NASA, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 October 2002.)
The United States launched the fifth Milstar satellite on a Titan 4B-Centaur from Cape Canaveral, Florida, completing a fleet of communications satellites designed to provide government leaders and military troops with jam-resistant transmission nearly anywhere on Earth.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002 Activities (Washington, DC, 2002), p. 114, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2002.pdf (accessed 29 July 2002); Jesco von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002: The Year in Review, NASA, http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2002/yearinrev/ 02YearReview.html (accessed 23 July 2002).)
NASA and the USGS announced a partnership to acquire data from the Earth Observing-1 (EO- 1) satellite and to provide that data to the private sector for applications such as land-cover analysis, ecosystem monitoring, and petroleum prospecting. NASA and the USGS made the announcement one year after the launch of EO-1, a year in which the spacecrafts nine breakthrough instruments had all successfully satisfied test objectives. The instruments included Earth-viewing technologies, such as a hyperspectral imager that could view Earths surface with unprecedented spectral discrimination and an Advanced Land Imager that could provide better views of Earth than NASAs Landsat, at a lower cost. Under the terms of the agreement, NASA would maintain command and control of the EO-1, and the USGS would take orders for spacecraft data at prices set to cover the nearly US$5 million annual cost of operating the satellite, processing data, and interacting with customers.(NASA, Technology Mission Accomplished, NASA Goes for More, news release 02-12, 18 January 2002.)
Boeing successfully launched its first Delta 4 rocket, which the U.S. Air Force would use in 2003 in the EELV program. The purpose of the EELV program was to develop reliable and cost- efficient launch capabilities for commercial and government payloads. The launch occurred at 5:39 p.m. (EST) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Delta 4, a Medium+ configuration of Boeings five-member Delta 4 family of rockets, deployed Eutelsats (European Telecommunications Satellite Organizations) commercial telecommunications satellite W5 into geosynchronous transfer orbit. During the next scheduled Delta 4 launchthe first mission for the EELV programthe Air Force planned to use a Delta 4 Medium rocket to deploy the DSCS III A3 satellite for the Defense Satellite Communication System.(The Boeing Company, Successful First Launch for Boeing Delta IV, news release, 20 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021120s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U. S. Air Force, U.S. Air Force Fact Sheet: Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle, http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/space/factsheets/eelv.htm (accessed 28 October 2008).)
ESA launched the environmental satellite Envisat on an Ariane-5 rocket. The primary mission of Envisat, designed to provide continuous monitoring of Earths atmosphere, ice caps, and land, was to measure sea color in coastal areas and in oceans. To perform this monitoring, Envisat was equipped with 10 optical and radar instruments, including the Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Medium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer. ESA planned for the satellite to orbit Earth every 100 minutes, examining each region of Earth once every 35 days.
NOAAs Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES), NOAA-M, launched on a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA intended the satellite, which was renamed NOAA-17 upon reaching orbit, to collect meteorological data to improve weather forecasting. The satellite was the third in a series of five satellites collectively referred to as the POES system. NOAA planned to transmit the satellites data to its National Weather Service, as well as to organizations in other countries. Lockheed Martin Space Systems had built and launched the satellite for NOAA, with NASAs GSFC managing the project and providing technical guidance.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 46; NOAA, NOAA-M Environmental Satellite Successfully Launched, 24 June 2002, http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories/s929.htm (accessed 18 August 2008); NOAA, Polar Operation Environmental Satellite: Polar Orbiting Satellites, http://www.oso.noaa.gov/poes/ (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Engineers succeeded in returning NASAs Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) spacecraft to full operational status. Some of the satellites guidance components had failed in December 2001, and engineers had feared that the mission would terminate prematurely. Mission engineers on Earth had been able to revive FUSE with a new, innovative guidance system, which used the satellites electromagnets to push and pull on Earths magnetic field, thereby pointing the satellite in the desired direction. Engineers had originally developed the innovative guidance system as a contingency for a failure of this type, but NASA had never before used the system to navigate a satellite with the accuracy required for scientific observations.(NASA, NASAs FUSE Satellite Lit Again, news release 02-45, 6 March 2002; Johns Hopkins University Department of Physics and Astronomy, Fuse Mission Status Report (mission status report no. 56, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 25 March 2002), http://fuse.pha.jhu.edu/facts/ miss_rep56.html (accessed 10 August 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of TRW Inc. to lead the team to build the HSTs successor, a new space-based observatory planned to launch in 2010. NASA planned to call the new satellite the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), in honor of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Under the US$824.8 million contract, TRW and its partner organizations would build an observatory capable of viewing deeper into space than the HST. The telescopes main mirror would unfold to a diameter of at least 20 feet (6.1 meters), thereby providing six times more light-gathering area than the HST, which had an 8-foot (2.4-meter) primary mirror. The telescope would also have instruments highly sensitive to infrared light, which would help astronomers understand the universes creation and evolution. In addition, NASA planned for the new telescope to orbit 940,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth, within the second Lagrange point or L2, where a spacecraft maintains a balance between the gravity of the Sun and of Earth. Although the L2 orbit would be too far from Earth to allow astronauts to service the observatory, it would enable the observatory to cool to very low temperatures without the use of complex refrigeration equipment.(NASA, NASA Announces Contract for Next-Generation Space Telescope Named After Space Pioneer, news release 02-171, 10 September 2002.)
The first Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), the product of a long-term program designed to provide military and other satellites with enduring, reliable access to space, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Lockheed Martin had developed the rocket, called the Atlas 5. The EELV placed the European television satellite Hot Bird 6 in its preliminary orbit 31 minutes after its launch, and the satellites thrusters later maneuvered it into its final orbit. The EELV program had resulted from the U.S. governments research into the 1986 Challenger disaster. The U.S. Air Force had reportedly paid Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company more than US$500 million each to design an EELV. The U.S. Air Force had requested an EELV that was an advanced version of existing rockets, rather than an entirely new system, estimating that, through 2020, the EELV could reduce the cost of placing military satellites into orbit by approximately US$10 billion. France-based Eutelsat (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization) owned the Hot Bird 6 broadcast satellite, which Alcatel Space had built.(William Harwood, Into Space, A New Kind of Rocket, Washington Post, 22 August 2002; Lockheed Martin, Inaugural Atlas V Scores Success for ILS, Lockheed Martin, news release, 21 August 2002, http://www. lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/InauguralAtlasVScoresSucceslForILSL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The National Weather Service Aviation Weather Center in Kansas City, Missouri, placed in operation a computer-based warning system called the Current Icing Potential (CIP), designed to alert aviation controllers to the potential for icing along flight routes. The National Center for Atmospheric Research had developed the warning system with funding from the FAA. The CIP used information from satellite data, ground observations, and other sources to produce information on the likelihood of airplanes experiencing icing along flight routes. The FAA had supported the development of the CIP to improve flight planning and aircraft safety.(Federal Aviation Administrations R&D Review, Spring 2003, 2, 6, 11, http://www.airporttech.tc.faa.gov/RD/2003_spring.pdf (accessed 3 March 2009).)
Data from NASAs Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) satellite provided support for a decades- old, unproven theory that winds converge in two large areas near Earths equator, driving ocean circulation south of the equator. The two areas, known as the northern and southern portions of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, are part of a belt circling Earth near the equator, where trade winds of both the northern and southern hemispheres converge. The region affects north-south atmospheric circulation, significantly influencing precipitation and temperatures in many regions of the globe. Previously, researchers had identified the double Intertropical Convergence Zone as a limited seasonal phenomenon. However, since 1969 the zones existence, location, and seasonality had remained controversial. The QuikSCAT data confirmed, not only that the double Intertropical Convergence Zone exists all year long, but also that it is more extensive than scientists had suspected. The finding provided important information about how Earths atmosphere and oceans interact near the equator, data that could assist scientists in climate modeling and weather forecasting.(NASA JPL, Satellite Sees Double Zone of Converging Tropical Winds Around the World, news release, 9 July 2002; W. T. Liu and X. Xie, Double Intertropical Convergence ZonesA New Look Using Scatterometer, Geophysical Research Letters 29, no. 22 (30 November 2002): 2072.)
Astronomers used images from NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory and Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer to observe, for the first time, the life cycles of x-ray jets ejected from a black hole. Scientists considered x-ray jets an extremely important phenomenon to understand, because they could reveal information about the dynamics of matter that accumulates in intense gravitational fields. From 1998 to 2002, the two satellites had collected the images showing the progressive changes of two jets of high-energy particles emitted from a black hole, microquasar XTE J1550- 564. The images revealed that the jets had initially traveled at nearly half the speed of light, later decelerating and eventually disappearing. Astronomers were surprised to discover that the x-ray jet farthest from Earth was three times brighter than the jet that traveled closer to Earth, a finding that was not explained by existing models of x-ray jets.(NASA, Chandra Discovers the History of Black Hole X-ray Jets, news release 02-189, 3 October 2002; S. Corbel et al., Large-Scale, Decelerating, Relativistic X-ray Jets from the Microquasar XTE J1550-564, Science n.s. 298, no. 5591 (4 October 2002): 196199.)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) announced its first successful launch of a satellite into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. ISRO launched METSAT, a meteorological satellite, from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India, using it own rocket, the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The new version of the PSLV reflected a significant enhancement of the rockets capabilities and a substantial improvement in ISROs overall launch capabilities. Previous versions of the PSLV had been capable of placing 900- kilogram (2,000-pound) satellites in a 900-kilometer (560-mile), polar Sunsynchronous orbit, whereas the PSLV-C4 had placed the 1,055-kilogram (2,325-pound) METSAT in a highly elliptical orbit with an apogee (the farthest point from Earth) of 34,700 kilometers (21,600 miles).(ISRO, PSLV-C4 Launch SuccessfulPlaces METSAT in Orbit, news release, 12 September 2002, http://www.isro.org/pressrelease/Sep13_2002.htm (accessed 3 October 2008); Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
NASAs KSC launched the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) on a Pegasus XL rocket from a Lockheed L-1011 aircraft. The purpose of HESSIs two-year mission was to analyze particle acceleration and explosive energy released in solar flares, using imaging and spectroscopic instruments. Solar flares can release in a few minutes, or even just a few seconds, an amount of energy nearly equal to that released by the explosion of 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT, disrupting communications satellites and power grids. Scientists at the University of California at Berkeley, which would manage the US$85 million mission, had designed the 645-pound (290-kilogram) probe.(Houston Chronicle, New NASA Probe To Analyze High-Energy Flares from Sun, 5 February 2002; Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
167Inside Wallops, Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees, 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement, news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy, news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad OConnor, Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader, New York Times, 14 January 2002.)
With the aid of NASAs High Energy Transient Explorer (HETE), scientists were able to capture the first images ever taken of an unusual gamma-ray burst (GRB) that signals the birth of a new black hole. With the exception of the Big Bang, GRBs are the most powerful type of explosion known. The bursts last for only a few seconds, yet their afterglows can last for days or even longer. However, scientists had been unable to detect an optical afterglow produced by a fast- fading type of dark GRBuntil the HETE indicated that such a burst was occurring. NASA had created the satellite to alert ground-based observatories to GRBs. On 11 December 2002, HETE had detected a GRB and, within 22 seconds, had notified observatories of the events location. In the following minutes, ground-based telescopes captured images of the bursts afterglow, which disappeared in 2 hours. The event was a rare subcategory of dark GRBs known as a transitional bursta burst with an afterglow lasting longer than that of the short-duration type, but shorter than that of a long-duration burst. Moreover, these transitional bursts are the rarest type of GRB. Scientists hoped the images would help them learn more about the causes of GRB in general, as well as providing specific data indicating the reason that dark bursts have no detectable afterglow.(NASA, Scientists Catch Their First Elusive Dark Gamma-Ray Burst, news release 02-257, 23 December 2002.)
The U.S. Air Force chose Boeing Integrated Defense Systems to produce the first three satellites for the GPS IIF satellite program. The U.S. Air Force had designed the GPS IIF program to provide new capabilities for civilian and military GPS usersa new civilian signal within the protected Aeronautical Radio Navigation System frequency band and secure operational military codes for military aircraft. The Air Force had also intended the GPS IIF to be compatible with the U.S. Air Forces Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV). Boeing had designed the GPS IIF to accommodate incremental technology upgrades, enabling the satellites to serve both the immediate needs of the GPS IIF program and the long-term needs of the planned next generation satellite system, GPS III.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Receives GPS IIF Production Approval, news release, 11 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021111t.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U.S. Coast Guard)
After several unsuccessful attempts to contact the Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) satellite, NASA and Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory concluded that CONTOUR was lost. The objectives of the CONTOUR mission had been to maneuver to a distance of 60 kilometers (100 miles) from at least two comets, capturing high-resolution images and performing various compositional analyses of the comets near-nucleus-environment compositional material. NASA had launched CONTOUR on 3 July 2002 but had lost contact with the satellite on 15 August 2002 after a maneuver intended to shift CONTOUR from Earth orbit to an orbit in which it would encounter the comet Encke.(NASA, Discovery Mission: CONTOUR, http://discovery.nasa.gov/contour.html (accessed 31 October 2008). 103)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although OKeefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
ESA launched the International Gamma Ray Astrophysics Laboratory (INTEGRAL) observatory from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 10:41 a.m., local time12:41 a.m. (EST). ESA had designed the satellite, and Italys Alenia Spazio had developed it, with support from more than 30 European firms. INTEGRAL would study dense objects that are sources of high-energy radiation, such as neutron stars and black holes. Project scientists hoped that INTEGRAL would produce images that would help confirm the presence of black holes at the center of galaxies, beginning with the Milky Way. INTEGRAL had two main instruments for analyzing gamma-ray sources: the Spectrometer on INTEGRAL, or SPI spectrometer, and the Imager on Board the INTEGRAL Satellite, or IBIS imager. The spectrometer and imager had an extremely sharp angular resolution, enabling them to conduct spectral analyses with an energy resolution 40 times better than that provided by any previous satellite. INTEGRAL also carried an x-ray imager and a charged-coupled device (CCD) imager that operated within the visible spectrum waveband. Using the combined data from the four instruments, project scientists would be able to make simultaneous observations of high-energy phenomena, from visible light to gamma rays.(ESA, Europe Opens a Window onto a Violent Universe, ESA news release 66-2002, 17 October 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAKXQTHN6D_index.0.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
The White House unveiled the U.S. Commercial Remote Sensing Policy, which President George W. Bush had approved on 25 April to replace former President William J. Clintons 1994 Presidential Decision Directive-23. The new policy loosened government restrictions on the collection and sale of commercial satellite imagery, directing military and civilian agencies first to approach the commercial sector to fulfill satellite imagery needs. The NSC had created the new guidelines as part of a review of U.S. national space policy, which the White House had directed the NSC to conduct in June 2002 with the support of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. The new policy retained the governments ability to restrict operations of commercial satellite imaging companies for national security reasons, but emphasized that the U.S. military should plan actions in the knowledge that adversaries also had access to commercial satellite imagery. The policy encouraged companies to use the most capable systems possible. However, at the same time, the government retained the right to restrict the sale of the most advanced imagery to U.S. government customers. The policy named the U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) as the interface between government and industry for national security applications of commercial satellite imagery. The U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Interior, and NASA would fulfill that role for civilian applications.(Jason Bates, White House Loosens Curbs on Commercial Satellite Imaging, Space News, 13 May 2003; Dan Caterinicchia, Commercial Satellite Policy Released, Federal Computer Week, 15 May 2003.)
Frances Alcatel Space signed a US$148 million contract with South Koreas state-operated KT Corporation to build South Koreas first satellite with military capabilities. South Korea planned to place Koreasat 5 in orbit by early 2006. KT Corporation spokesperson Cho Chul-Je told the media that South Koreas military would use military transponders on the satellite for communication and operation, but he declined to confirm reports that the craft would assist the military in collecting security information in Northeast Asia. The craft would also be equipped with commercial transponders. Koreasat 5 would replace Koreasat 2, which had launched in 1996, allowing telecommunications companies to expand mobile networks to Japan, the Peoples Republic of China, Taiwan, and the Philippines.(Agence France-Presse, French Company To Build South Koreas First Military Satellite, 8 June 2003.)
The newest Boeing Delta rocket, the Delta 4, launched the USA 167also known as the Defense Satellite Communications Systems Phase 3 (DSCSIII-A3), or Discus satelliteinto orbit, from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The American geostationary military communications satellite was the first U.S. Air Force craft launched atop Boeings newest Delta rocket, as well as the first mission for the U.S. Air Forces Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program. The craft, a triaxially stabilized spacecraft with solar power of 1.24 kilowatts, operating at six superhigh frequencies between 40 and 85 megahertz, joined the DSCS III constellation of eight similar craft to provide very secure global links to the U.S. military. The launch of the Discus satellite featured the smallest of the Delta 4s several possible configurations, with two stages and no booster rocket.
A 66-foot-high (20-meter-high) VLS-1 O3 rocket exploded on its launchpad during tests at Alcantara Launch Center in Brazil, delivering a serious blow to Brazils nascent space program. Brazil had hoped to be the first Latin American nation to place a satellite in orbit. According to the Brazilian Ministry of Defence, the accident, which occurred three days before a scheduled launch, killed 21 people, mostly civilian technicians, injured 20 others, and destroyed two research satellites. The rocket had successfully completed two days of tests before the explosion. Brazils Minister of Defence Jose Veigas Filho stated that, for unknown reasons, one of the four main motors of the US$2.2 million rocket had ignited, leading to the explosion that destroyed the launchpad. The accident was Brazils third failed attempt to launch a rocket with a research satellite.(Brazils Rocket Test Kills 21, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 August 2003; Stan Lehman, Brazil Mourns Dead, Vows to Reinforce Space Program, Houston Chronicle, 25 August 2003.)
Scientists studying data from NASAs Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) satellite and ESAs four-satellite Cluster constellation published a study in the journal Nature reporting that solar wind creates large cracks in Earths magnetic field, allowing the wind to penetrate the magnetic field and causing geomagnetic storms. The leader of the study, Harald U. Frey of the University of California at Berkeley, stated that the data showed that the cracks do not open and close sporadically, as scientists had previously thought, but rather, that the cracks can remain open for several hours. Using this information, scientists would be able to create a better model of the affect of space weather on Earth, helping them to predict geomagnetic storms, which disrupt power, interfere with satellites, and endanger astronauts. IMAGE had monitored a spot in Earths upper atmosphere, revealing an area of heavy particles (ions) striking the ionosphere above the Arctic region, thereby creating an aurora with enough energy to power 75,000 homes. Unlike the auroras known as the northern and southern lights, this aurora was not visible to the human eye. Far above the IMAGE satellite, the Cluster constellation had flown through the opening created by the solar winds interaction with Earths protective magnetic field. The scientists estimated that the size of the crack was twice that of Earth. The crack occurred at the edge of the magnetic field, 38,000 miles (61,155 kilometers) above the planet.(H. U. Frey et al., Continuous Magnetic Reconnection at Earths Magnetopause, Nature 426, no. 6966 (4 December 2003): 533537; Maggie Fox for Reuters, Cracks Let Solar Wind Disrupt Earths Atmosphere, 4 December 2003; Chris Kridler, Protective Layers Cracks Make Earth Vulnerable, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 December 2003.)
A Russian Cosmos-3M rocket launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia carrying three 100-kilogram (0.1-tonne or 0.11-ton) satellites into orbit for Nigeria (NigeriaSat-1), Turkey (BILSAT-1), and the United Kingdom (UK-DMC). The satellites joined a similar satellite from Algeria, launched in November 2002, to form the Disaster Monitoring Constellation (DMC). The DMCs purpose was to provide environmental information regarding floods, earthquakes, and fires. Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd. of Guildford, United Kingdom, which specialized in small satellites, had initiated the DMC project. The four craft had ground resolution of 32 meters (105 feet), and each image produced by the satellites showed 600 square kilometers (231.7 square miles). The Cosmos-3M also carried two military satellites for Russia. One of the satellites, Rubin-4 DSI, was a Russian communications experiment in transmitting telemetry data via standard e-mail, using Orbcomm communications satellites. Another, Mozheyets-4, built by students at the Mozhaisk Military Space Academy, tested hardware for future use on Russias GLONASS (Global Satellite Navigation System). The third was South Koreas KAITSAT-4 scientific-research microsatellite, a demonstration platform to test new satellite systems, hosting five science experiments from an international team of researchers.(Peter B. de Selding, Disaster Monitoring Satellites Launched, Space News, 30 September 2003; Jim Banke, Kosmos 3M Booster Carries Six Satellites to Earth Orbit, Space News, 29 September 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched a Titan 4B rocket with a Centaur upper stage carrying USA 171, an Orion classified satellite serving the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The Air Force provided no comment on the payloads destination or its whereabouts following the separation of the second stage of the Centaur. The Air Force had delayed the launch of USA 171 since April 2002 because of a series of technical problems and issues with the payload. The launch was likely the last of the Titan-Centaur launches, with only three Lockheed Martinbuilt Titan 4 rockets and one Titan 2 remaining to launch. The Air Force had contracted with Boeing and Lockheed Martin to replace the Titan 4 family with the Boeing Delta 2 and the Lockheed Martin Atlas 5, to provide the Air Force with cheaper, more reliable access to space for military payloads.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 599, 1 October 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx599.html (accessed 3 February 2009); Associated Press, Air Force Launches Titan 4B Rocket Carrying Secret Military Payload, 9 September 2003; Chris Kridler, Titan Carries Spy Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 2003.)
Officials from Boeing and Finmeccanica, an Italian aerospace corporation, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in a joint ceremony held in Rome and at the Italian Embassy in Washington, DC. The purpose of the MOU was to explore joint initiatives and to pursue growth opportunities in aerostructures and commercial aircraft, aircraft modification, UAVs, satellite systems, navigation, launch services, missile defense, space infrastructure, and avionics. The MOU called for the creation of an executive steering committee to investigate the possibilities of collaborative activity in space navigation, satellite services, launch services, and services to the ISS. The committee would make the final decision about which activities the partnership would pursue.(UV Online.com, Finmeccanica and Boeing To Collaborate on UAVs, 23 January 2003, http://www.shephard.co.uk/news/category/1/uvonline/.)
The U.S. Air Force launched an Atlas 2-AS rocket carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), marking the final launch of the II-AS model from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch cleared the way for officials from the military and from Lockheed Martin to begin renovating Launch Complex 3 to accommodate the Atlas 5 rocket. Renovation plans included raising the mobile service tower 30 feet (9.14 meters) to accommodate the taller launch vehicles, building a fixed launch platform, modifying the umbilical tower, and enlarging the flame trench. The Lockheed Martin Atlas team planned to launch the first Atlas 5 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2005.(Associated Press, Air Force Sends Spy Satellite into Space, 2 December 2003; Justin Ray, Atlas Soars on Secret Mission Under Cover of Darkness, Spaceflight Now, 2 December 2003.)
CBERS 2, a China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS) launched aboard a Long March 4B rocket from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in the Peoples Republic of Chinas Shanxi province. The 1.6-tonne (1.76-ton or 1,600-kilogram) CBERS 2 remote-sensing satellite, designed to collect data related to the environment, agriculture, urban planning, and water pollution, would be under Chinese control for 18 months before transferring to Brazilian control for a minimum of six months.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Reuters, China Launches Satellite Developed with Brazil, 21 October 2003; Stephen Clark, Earth Monitoring Satellite Launched by China and Brazil, Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
In its first mission to the Moon, ESA launched its Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART-1) spacecraft aboard an Ariane 5 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. SMART-1 was the first spacecraft since NASAs 1998 Lunar Prospector to attempt the journey to the Moon. ESA planned for the 770-pound (349.2-kilogram) craft, powered by an ion- propulsion engine, to reach the Moon in early 2005. SMART-1 carried 33 pounds (15 kilograms) of miniature instruments, which researchers from Finland, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom had provided, including a color camera the size of a human eye, a 4.4- pound (2-kilogram) infrared spectrometer, and an 11-pound (5-kilogram) x-ray spectrometer. The purpose of the SMART-1 mission was to solve certain mysteries about the Moons formation, its mineralogical composition, and the amount of water it has, if any. The Ariane 5 also carried into orbit two telecommunications satellitesthe INSAT 3-E for India and the European e-BIRD. ESA had delayed the launch of e-BIRD since 28 August to allow the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to make further checks on its satellite.(Frank D. Roylance, Europe Finally Ready for Mission to Moon, Baltimore Sun, 29 September 2003; Agence France-Presse, European Rocket Places Lunar Explorer, Two Satellites into Orbit, 29 September 2003.)
Telesat Canada selected Astrium, Europes largest space company, to manufacture a replacement for its Anik F1 satellitethe Anik F1R. Engineers had determined that the Anik F1, based on the 702 platform of Boeing Satellite Systems, was defective. Several of the Boeing-built 702 satellites were afflicted with a solar panel malady expected to shorten each crafts operational lifetime. Telesat planned to base the Anik F1R, which would carry 24 C-band and 32 Ku-band transponders, on Astriums Eurostar 3000 platform.(Telesat, Telesat Selects European Manufacturer for New Anik F Satellite, news release, 4 February 2003, http://www.telesat.ca/news/releases/2003/03-02-e.asp (accessed 12 August 2008); Sam Silverstein, Telesat Canada Selects Astrium to Replace Anik F1, Space News, 4 February 2003.)
The National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron, Ohio, inducted 17 aviation and aerospace inventors, among them Harold A. Rosen, recognized for his pioneering work in developing the worlds first 24-hour commercial communications satellite and for his subsequent contributions to satellite communications. Rosen had led the Boeing Satellite Systems team that had begun developing the geostationary Syncom in 1959. The team had planned for Syncom to communicate directly and continuously with any ground station in its line of sight, in contrast to the communications satellites in use at the time, which required expensive tracking computers. The first Syncom had failed to launch successfully, but Syncom 2 had reached its synchronous orbit on 26 July 1963. Later that year, Syncom 2 had relayed by satellite the first live two-way call between heads of statea phone call between President John F. Kennedy in Washington, DC, and Nigerian Prime Minister Abubaker Balewa in Africa. Syncom 3 had brought live coverage of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics to U.S. viewers. The satellites had remained active through 1966, surpassing their one-year design life. David L. Ryan, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Satellite Systems, remarked that contemporary satellites that deliver video, voice, and data communications are all descendants of Syncom, and when Harold Rosen and his colleagues launched Syncom, they launched a revolution and changed the world.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Satellite Pioneer Harold Rosen Inducted to National Inventors Hall of Fame, news release, 1 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030501n.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
JAXA officials announced that mission controllers had lost contact with the Advanced Earth Observing Satellite 2 (ADEOS 2), nicknamed Midori 2. The environmental research satellite was conducting a joint mission of the United States and Japan designed to study ocean winds, sea surface temperatures, sea ice, and water vapor distribution in the atmosphere; to monitor plant life and vegetation in marine areas; and to monitor Earths ozone layer. The craft had launched 14 December 2002 to replace Midori 1, which had been lost in 1997 when a solar-array malfunction had left it with no power supply.(Justin Ray, Earth Monitoring Satellite Goes Silent, Spaceflight Now, 25 October 2003; Jason Bates, Japan Loses Contact with ADEOS-2 Satellite, Space News, 27 October 2003.)
NASA released topographic data collected during its Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM), which had lasted from 11 to 22 February 2000, producing three-dimensional measurements of more than 80 percent of Earths landmass between 60 north and 56 south of the equator. Because of South Americas proximity to the equator and its frequent tropical cloud cover, traditional satellites had encountered difficulty acquiring imagery of its topography, but the cloud-penetrating radar on board the SRTM had produced information with scientific and commercial value that would help improve life on the continent. SRTM Project Scientist Michael Kobrick of NASAs JPL remarked that the data would assist governments to prepare for natural hazards like earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, and floods. In addition, the information would help improve aviation safety in mountainous areas, and would help land-use planners make better-informed decisions about the development of critical infrastructure. The mission was a cooperative project of NASA, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) of the U.S. DOD, and the German and Italian space agencies.(NASA, South America Shines in NASAs Latest Space Radar Map Release, news release 03-204, 19 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03204_S_Amer_Space_Radar.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
JAXA officials announced that the chances of restoring the operations of ADEOS 2, known as Midori 2 in Japan, were extremely slight. JAXA had lost contact with ADEOS 2 on 25 October and had been unable to restore communications with the US$654 million craft. Analyses of the malfunction had provided little hope for recovery. ADEOS 2 had replaced the ADEOS 1 mission of 1996, which Japan had abandoned after 10 months when its solar panel had broken down as a result of a design fault. Japanese officials stated that they believed ADEOS 2 had not suffered exactly the same fate as its predecessor but, rather, had experienced a problem with its power circuitry. A JAXA spokesperson suggested that recent solar flares might have affected the craftone of the solar flares had been the largest in three decades.(Agence France-Press, Japan Bids Adios to ADEOS Earth Observation Satellite, 31 October 2003; Justin Ray, Hope of Salvaging Japanese Environmental Satellite Fades, Spaceflight Now, 31 October 2003.)
SuccessfulI.html (accessed 19 September 2008); The Boeing Company, Boeing-Built AsiaSat 4 Communication Satellite Successfully Launched, news release, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/
An American GPS satellite, GPS 2R-9, launched atop a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS 2R-9also known as NAVSTAR 52 and USA 168replaced the aging GPS 2-5, which had been in orbit since 1989. The fleet of GPS satellites consisted of 28 spacecraft.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Kelly Young, Delta 2 To Carry GPS Satellite into Space, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 2003.)
An Atlas 5 rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 11:45 p.m. (UT), carrying the Rainbow 1 satellite into orbit. The 4.3-tonne (4.7-ton or 4,300-kilogram) Cablevision Systems Corporation satellite would provide direct-to-home television services in the contiguous United States. The Atlas 5, on its third flight since its inaugural flight in August 2002, carried for the first time two 64-foot (19.5-meter), Aerojet-built solid rocket boosters, which enabled the rocket to clear the launchpad in just 7 secondsonly half of the time required in the two previous launches. The launch marked the completion of flight-testing of all major new systems in the Atlas line. The U.S. military had designed Atlas 5 under its Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597; Associated Press, Most Powerful Atlas Rocket Carries Cablevision Satellite into Space, 18 July 2003.)
While moving NOAAs 14-foot (4.3-meter) NOAA-N Prime weather satellite from a vertical to a horizontal position, workers at a Lockheed Martin plant dropped the nearly completed US$239 million craft, causing serious damage. Lockheed Martin spokesperson Buddy Nelson stated that the cart holding the spacecraft was not in the proper configuration for the planned activity. NASAs GSFC was responsible for overseeing the construction and launch of the satellite, and NOAA would assume control of the craft once it was in orbit. Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company had been building weather satellites since the NOAA satellites initial launch in the early 1960s.(Associated Press, $239M Satellite Damaged at Lockheed Plant, New York Times, 10 September 2003.)
A European Ariane 5 rocket launched two satellites into orbit from Kourou, French GuianaPanAmSats Galaxy 12 commercial telecommunications satellite and the Indian Space Research Organisations (ISROs) INSAT 3A satellite. The Ariane 5G standard version was the first launch of an Ariane rocket since the enhanced Ariane 5 ECA had failed in December 2002, a failure that had prompted a complete review of the Ariane 5 system, particularly its main-stage cryogenic engine. The 1.8-tonne (2-ton, 1,800-kilogram, or 3,968-pound) Galaxy satellite built by Orbital Sciences Corporation carried 24 C-band transponders to provide voice, video, and data transmissions to North America and South America from its position at longitude 72o west. The 3-tonne (3.3-ton, 3,000-kilogram, or 6,614-pound) INSAT 3A geostationary communications and weather-monitoring satellite carried 12 C-band, 6 extended C-band, and 6 Ku-band transponders, to provide voice, video and data transmission to western Asia, eastern Asia, and India from its position at longitude 93.5o east. The ISRO satellite carried the typical INSAT package of visual, infrared, and water-vapor band sensors to monitor clouds and storms, as well as a separate transponder for an international search-and-rescue program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Peter B. de Selding, Ariane 5 Successfully Returns to Flight, Space News, 11 April 2003.)
A Delta 2 rocket launched, carrying a GPS-2R8 satellite and an Experimental Spacecraft System (XSS-10) microsatellite into orbit. The U.S. Air Force was launching the GPS-2R8 to replace the 22nd GPS satellite, which had launched 10 years earlier, joining a constellation of 26 operational GPS spacecraft. Although the military GPS created in the 1970s had generated a commercial industry with sales in excess of US$6 billion, the system had continued to exist primarily to serve the U.S. military. The U.S. Air Force was launching the 62-pound (28-kilogram) XSS-10 spacecraft to test new guidance and navigation software and to demonstrate new technologies, such as a miniature communications system, a lightweight propulsion system, and advanced lithium polymer batteries.(Jim Banke, Delta 2 Rolls, Launches GPS and Experimental Satellites, Space.com, 29 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030129.html (accessed 23 July 2008).)
The Dutch-Italian satellite known as BeppoSAX reentered Earths atmosphere and splashed into the equatorial Pacific Ocean seven years after its launch into orbit on 30 April 1996. The Italian Space Agency and the Netherlands Agency for Aerospace jointly operated the 3,086-pound (1,400-kilogram) x-ray satellite, best known for its discovery of 50 gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). The Italian Space Agency had estimated that as much as 1,325 pounds (601 kilograms) of the craft could survive reentry, with individual pieces weighing 220 pounds (99.7 kilograms) and had, therefore, notified 39 countries that pieces of the spacecraft could potentially land in their territory. However, the debris falling closest to land splashed into the ocean 186 miles (299 kilometers) northwest of the Galapagos Islands.
Progress M-48 12P launched on a Soyuz FG rocket, carrying 2.6 tonnes (2.87 tons or 2,600 kilograms) of food, fuel, water, and equipment to the ISS. Among the supplies Progress M-48 carried were an Iridium satellite phone and GPS equipment for the use of the Expedition 7 crewRussian Commander Yuri Malenchenko and NASA Science Officer Edward T. Luwhen they returned to Earth in the Soyuz TMA-2 spacecraft in October. The Russian Space Agency had added the satellite phone and GPS equipment to the supplies because Soyuz TMA-1 had experienced an internal glitch while returning the Expedition 6 crew to Earth, resulting in a long, tense search for the craft and crew.
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station, 27 October 2003.)
A NASA four-engine, P3-turboprop, flying laboratory airplane flew its last flight in a two- week-long series of flights scanning a section of Alaskas coast. The scanning was part of a collaborative project between NASA, NOAA, and representatives from the University of Colorado and the University of Alaska at Fairbanks. The project, called Arctic 2003, had collected data about sea-ice variability for comparison with data that NASAs Aqua satellite had collected. The Aqua had launched in May 2002 with a state-of-the-art radiometer for studying water systems. The P3 had carried equipment similar to Aquas radiometera Japanese- developed microwave scannerbut because it had flown closer to the ground than the Aqua, the P3 had been able to collect sharper images. P3 flights had traveled over Norton Sound, St. Lawrence Island, St. Matthew Island, Point Hope, and Barrow. In addition to the P3 and Aqua data, ground crews had traveled to some areas to collect samples of ice and snow.(Associated Press, Flights Help Scientists Understand Sea Ice Changes, 24 March 2003.)
NASA announced the successful implementation of new software in three computers controlling the precision pointing of NASAs Far Ultraviolet Spectroscope Explorer (FUSE) satellite. In mid-April 2003, NASA had installed the software for the spacecrafts Attitude Control Instrument Data System and the processor for the Fine Error Sensor guide camera, and testing of the new configuration had been ongoing since that time. George Sonneborn, FUSE Project Scientist at NASAs GSFC, explained that the uploaded software would allow FUSE to operate with any number of gyroscopes, or none, in the event of gyroscope failure. Tests showed that FUSE could operate with no gyroscopes without experiencing any degradation in quality of scientific data and with only a slight loss of efficiency in scheduling observations. Before the new software installation, FUSE had required at least one operating gyroscope on each of its three axes to conduct normal scientific operations.(NASA, NASA Team Gives Fuse Spacecraft Triple Brain Transplant, news release 03-243, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03243_fuse_transplant.html (accessed 23 December 2008).)
After a series of delays, a Titan 2 rocket carried into orbit the U.S. militarys Coriolis research satellite, launching from the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The refurbished Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missile placed the spacecraft in orbit 512 minutes after launch, and the rockets second stage deployed its payload approximately 1 hour later. The US$224 million Coriolis mission carried the Navys Windsat microwave polarimetric radiometer and the Air Forces Solar Mass Ejection Imager. The U.S. military had designed Windsat to measure wind speed and direction at or near the surface of Earths seas, providing improved weather forecasting to assist in planning naval operations. The Air Force intended the Solar Mass Ejection Imager to provide an early warning of coronal mass ejections from the Sun that impact Earth, disrupting communications and power grids.(Justin Ray, Coriolis Launched To Track Ocean Winds, Solar Storms, Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2003. 105)
Japan launched two reconnaissance satellitesInformation Gathering Satellites (IGSs), IGS 1A and IGS 1Batop an H-2 rocket from Tanegashima Space Center. The pair, the first of at least four such spacecraft that Japan intended to place in orbit as part of a US$2.05 billion program, were capable of monitoring global natural disasters and hurricanes, as well as observing nuclear explosions and missile launches in nearby countries. Because the craft were able to monitor weather events, the launch did not violate the terms of the Japan-North Korea Declaration of September 2002. However, Japanese space officials acknowledged that Japan had developed the program in reaction to the Taepodong shock, when a North Korean Taepodong ballistic missile flew over Japans main island in 1998. North Korea protested the IGS program as a hostile act that violates the spirit of the countries bilateral agreement. One of the IGS craft carried optical cameras with 1-meter (3.3-foot) resolution and the other carried synthetic-aperture radar to capture images with resolutions of several meters. Japanese space officials provided no information about which craft carried which instrument.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, Japans First Spy Satellites Reach Earth Orbit, 27 March 2003.)
NASA announced that NOAA, Lockheed Martin, and NASA had formed teams to investigate the 6 September accident involving the NOAA-N Prime satellite. While moving the spacecraft from a vertical to a horizontal position, Lockheed Martin workers had dropped it, significantly damaging the craft. NASA and Lockheed Martin had placed the satellite under guard, securing all records. NASA and NOAA were waiting for an assessment of the damage to determine how the accident would affect satellite programs.(NASA, NASA, NOAA and Lockheed Martin Investigate Satellite Accident, news release 03-287, 9 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03287_satellite_accident.html (accessed 28 January 2009). 514 Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Boeing Names New ISS Leader, 12 September 2003.)
A Delta 2 rocket carried NASAs Ice Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) into orbit, launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. ICESat was one in a series of Earth Observing System (EOS) spacecraft to follow the Terra satellite, launched in December 1999, and the Aqua satellite, launched in May 2002. NASA had designed the 661-pound (299.8- kilogram) craft to measure the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica, so that scientists could determine whether global sea levels were rising or falling. The crafts only instrument, the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System, would beam rapid pulses of laser light to the icy surface, and the ice sheets would reflect the light back to the satellite, acting like radar. The GPS would determine the ICESats location as it fired its laser, enabling program scientists to measure the ice sheets topography. The rocket also carried a second, smaller craft into orbitCHIPSat, NASAs 131-pound (59-kilogram), University Explorer Class probe, the Cosmic Hot Interstellar Plasma Spectrometer. CHIPSat would gather data on the origin, physical processes, and properties of the hot gas between stars. The CHIPSat mission was the first U.S. mission to use end-to-end satellite operations over the Internet, treating the craft something like a node on the Internet.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches ICE and CHIPS Satellites, news release 03-011, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-011.txt (accessed 22 July 2008); Associated Press, Rocket Carrying NASA Satellites Launched, 12 January 2003; Jim Banke, Boeing Launches Pair of Science Research Satellites for NASA, Space.com, 12 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030112.html (accessed 22 July 2008).)
In its first launch since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in February, NASA launched its Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) research satellite aboard a Pegasus XL rocket released from an L-1011 cargo plane that had flown out of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. GALEX carried a telescope measuring 19.7 inches (50 centimeters) in diameter, designed to provide a wide-angle view of the ultraviolet light that distant galaxies emit. NASA had planned the mission, which would survey the light emitted by a million galaxies over 28 months, to learn more about galaxies dominated by hot, short-lived stars that give off a great deal of energy as ultraviolet light. The mission cost US$103.7 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Associated Press, NASA in 1st Launch Since Columbia Breakup, 28 April 2003. 427 Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, BeppoSAX Satellite Falls Harmlessly into Ocean, 30 April 2003.)
U.S. Representative William L. Jenkins (R-TN) announced that NASA had awarded East Tennessee State University a grant valued at US$363,310 to study light patterns of stars located hundreds of light-years away. The award would grant researchers of the universitys physics and astronomy department access over the next five years to data from COBEthe Cosmic Background Explorer satellite. The scientists would use the COBE data to study the infrared variability of asymptotic giant branch stars, older stars with shells of gas and dust around them. During its mission in 1989 and 1990, the COBE satellite had surveyed the sky on 10 infrared wavelengths, observing the cosmic backlight of the universe, as well as asymptotic giant branch stars. Although astronomers in the field had conducted significant research on the backlight data, they had done little with COBEs infrared data on the stars.(Sam Watson, NASA Grant To Fund ETSU Study of Stars, Johnson City Press (TN), 9 January 2003.)
ESA launched aboard an Ariane 5G rocket Optus-1, a Japanese-built, hybrid communications/military satellite jointly owned by Australia and Singapore, and B-Sat 2C, a Japanese geostationary communications satellite from Kourou, French Guiana. The Australian Defence Force and Optus, the Australian telecommunications firm and subsidiary of Singapore Telecommunications, had jointly funded the Optus-1 craft. To avoid mixing up data between defense and commercial applications, the two portions of the Optus-1 payload operated independently, one devoted to military use and the other to television broadcasts, high-speed Internet services, and voice and data communications across Australia and parts of Asia. B-Sat 2C would provide direct digital broadcasts to Japan and neighboring countries using Ku-band transponders.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, Europe Launches Japanese-Built Australian Military Satellite Half Owned by Singapore Government, 12 June 2003.)
The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post; Stephen Clark, Proton Lifts Military Satellite, Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
The Boeing Company announced that, because commercial launches were costly and in relatively low demand, it would not seek commercial satellite launch contracts for five years, focusing instead on providing service for the U.S. military and NASA. However, Boeing was a member of the consortium International Launch Services (ILS), which would continue to offer commercial launch services. ILS used Russian-made Zenit 3-SL rockets to launch commercial payloads from a floating platform known as Sea Launch. Boeing indicated that it would accommodate customers that preferred to use Delta rockets instead of the Russian-made rockets. The company stated that the change in business strategy would not affect any employees who worked on the launch programs.(Brian Monroe and Wayne T. Price, Boeing To Bail Out of Commercial Launches, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 July 2003.)
to 62.1 miles). Designed to last two years, the craft would orbit Earth 15 times each day, focusing on the chemical processes that control the distribution of ozone in the atmosphere.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, Canadian Ozone Satellite Successfully Launched from Plane Off California Coast, 13 August 2003.)
NASA announced that scientist David Atlas of NASAs GSFC and University of Colorado scientist Christopher Williams had created the first full-body scan of an evolving tropical thunderstorm, using data collected from an unusual storm over the Amazon rain forest, which had occurred in February 1999. At that time, a team of scientists from NASA, NOAA, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, and several universities had used sensitive radar equipment, such as scanning Doppler and vertically oriented Doppler, to detect and measure different types of particles from the storms base to its top, approximately 8.7 miles (14 kilometers) above the rainforest floor. Participants from the University of North Dakota had operated a jet aircraft to gather some of the data. One of the studys goals had been validating the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite measurements, to help plan the TRMMs successor, the Global Precipitation Mission. TRMM had provided data about how such storms operate, thus enabling scientists to understand how wind circulates in the upper atmosphere. The research, which Atlas and Williams had published in the American Meteorological Societys Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, provided new insight into the intense and hazardous conditions within storms. Scientists expected the research to improve forecasts, helping aircraft avoid dangerous storms and making air travel safer, and to improve satellite measurements of precipitation.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA Scientists Take First Full-Body Scan of Evolving Thunderstorm, news release 03-07, 15 January 2003, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/2003/03- 07.htm (accessed 28 July 2008); Reuters, NASA Takes First Full-Body Scan of Thunderstorm, 15 January 2003; Lee Bowman for Scripps Howard News Service, Probing the Inner Workings of Storm Clouds, 16 January 2003.)
Japans Unmanned Space Experiment Recovery System (USERS) capsule splashed down 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) south of Tokyo, Japan, near the Ogasawara Islands, while the USERS Service Module continued to orbit Earth. Japans NASDA had launched the system aboard an H- 2A booster from the Tanegashima Space Center in September 2002, along with a Japanese Data Relay Test Satellite. The capsule contained a superconductive product, created within the capsule during its 10 months in space, using an electrically heated furnace. Japanese researchers were investigating contamination-free, high-quality crystals, created in a microgravity environment, for their potential use in the superconductive magnets needed in flywheel-type, electric-energy storage systems and magnetically levitated train transportation. Scientists planned to collect data from the USERS Service Module to use in the design and production of future satellite hardware. The Institute for Unmanned Space Experiment Free Flyer, a group established in 1986 to promote the industrialization of space, had initiated the USERS project.
The U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin launched the Milstar II military communications satellite into orbit aboard a Titan 4B launch vehicle with a Centaur upper stage. The satellite joined four other Milstar satellites already in orbit, completing the constellation. The Milstar constellation provided secure, global communication links for U.S. military joint forces, transmitting voice, data, and imagery, as well as providing video-teleconferencing capabilities. Milstar II was the third satellite to carry the Boeing Satellite Systemsbuilt, medium-data-rate payload, which had 32 channels, each capable of processing data at speeds of 1.5 megabits per second. The craft carried a low-data-rate payload as well, built by Northrop Grumman Space Technology.(Lockheed Martin, U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin Team up to Successfully Launch Final Milstar II Satellite on a Titan IV B Rocket, news release, 8 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/USAirForceLockheedMartinTeamUpSucce.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
The Russian military successfully launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome a military communications satellite aboard a Molniya-M booster. The purpose of the satellite Molniya 1-92 was to orbit above the far northern regions of Russia relaying commands and communications among military forces. At the lower end of its orbit, the craft would sweep quickly over the Southern Hemisphere, returning to orbit above northern Russia. From this position, the craft would serve users who were out of range of most communications satellites, which, traditionally, orbit at geostationary positions above the equator.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594, 1 May 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx594.html (accessed 14 October 2008); Stephen Clark, Military Spacecraft Launched by Russian Forces, Spaceflight Now, 2 April 2003.)
Hellas-Sat, a geostationary communications satellite jointly owned by Greece and Cyprus, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard an Atlas 5 rocket with a Russian RD-180 motor. The 3.45-tonne (3.8-ton or 3,450-kilogram) Astrium Eurostar 2000+ model carried 30 Ku-band transponders to provide voice, video, data, and broadcast services to Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. The launch, the second for the Atlas 5 series, was the 65th consecutive successful flight for the Lockheed Martinbuilt Atlas rocket and for mission provider International Launch Services (ILS).(Lockheed Martin, ILS Launches Hellas-Sat on Atlas V65 Successes in a Row for Atlas, news release, 13 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/ILSLaunchesHellasSat)
Russia successfully conducted its first test of a modified Soviet RS-18 Stiletto missile, launching the missile from an underground silo at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Stiletto, renamed Strela, or Arrow, carried a dummy satellite into low Earth orbit. Originally designed to carry six individually guided nuclear warheads, Russia planned for the modified Stiletto to become the worlds cheapest booster rocket for commercial satellite launches. Spokesperson for the Russian military Lieutenant-Colonel Igor Zatula stated that Russia would need to conduct several more test launches before the rocket would become available for commercial use.(Reuters, Russia Tests New Role for Cold War Nukes, 8 December 2003.)
NASA announced its selection of the Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) project for the next mission of NASAs Medium-class Explorer (MIDEX) program. The mission would study the causes of auroras. THEMIS comprised five small satellites with identical suites of electrical, magnetic, and particle detectors. With a launch date set for 2007, NASA would place the craft in carefully coordinated orbits, where they would line up along Earths magnetic tail every four days, to track disturbances. THEMIS satellite data would combine with data gathered from a network of observatories across the Arctic Circle. NASA also announced that it had the opportunity to select an instrument for ESAs Extreme Universe Space Observatory mission aboard the ISS, which would observe the blue light generated when high-energy cosmic rays collide with Earths atmosphere.(NASA, NASA Selects Next Medium-Class Explorer Mission, news release c03h, 20 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03h.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the crafts unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecrafts descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the crafts antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction, 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russias Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission, 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency, news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, NASA Names New Chief of Staff, news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
NASA announced its collaboration with Japans NASDA and the Japanese Meteorological Research Institute to study snowfall over Wakasa Bay, Japan. The study would use NASAs EOS Aqua satellite in conjunction with research aircraft, which would gather data for the study using the coastal radar systems. NASA had begun the Wakasa Bay Field Campaign on 3 January 2003, scheduling the study to run through 14 February 2003. Although, historically, scientists had found it difficult to quantify contributions to the global hydrologic cycle from the northern Pacific Ocean, they expected that the new satellite instruments, which could detect precipitation over water, would provide data needed to interpret the effect of Pacific Ocean hydrology on the world.(NASA, NASA Joins Snow Study over the Sea of Japan, news release 03-025, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-025.txt (accessed 29 July 2008).)
Russias Space Forces launched a Molniya 3-53 military communications satellite aboard a four- stage Molniya-M rocket from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region of Russia. Molniya 3-53 was the second Molniya communications satellite launched in 2003.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, Russia Lofts Military Payload from Plesetsk, Makes Plans for Commercial South American Shots, 20 June 2003; Stephen Clark, Molniya Satellite Deployed from Plesetsk Spaceport, Spaceflight Now, 20 June 2003.)
From its floating platform Odyssey, Sea Launch launched a telecommunications satellite Thuraya-2 aboard a Zenit 3-SL rocket. The satellite belonged to Thuraya Satellite Telecommunications Company based in Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, a company providing mobile telephone services to more than 100 countries in the Middle East, Europe, Africa, and Asia. Sea Launch had launched Thuraya-1 in October 2000.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, Communications Satellite Launched, 10 June 2003; Jim Banke, Sea Launch Soars Again Carrying Thuraya-2 to Orbit, Space.com, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/zenit_launch_030610.html (accessed 15 December 2008).)
The U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) announced that it had awarded a five- year contract worth up to US$500 million to the Colorado-based companies Space Imaging and DigitalGlobe. Under the contract, which stipulated a base performance period of three years with two additional one-year options, NIMA agreed to purchase a minimum of US$72 million worth of data from DigitalGlobe and a minimum of US$120 million from Space Imaging during the first three years. The contract and accompanying agreements marked the Pentagons strongest commitment yet to buy products and services from the U.S. commercial satellite imaging industry. Space Imaging, based in Thornton, Colorado, operated the Ikonos satellite launched in September 1999, which was capable of distinguishing ground objects as small as 1 meter. DigitalGlobe, based in Longmont, Colorado, operated the QuickBird satellite, launched in October 1999, which, under certain conditions, was capable of distinguishing objects as small as 0.61 meter.(NIMA, NIMA Partners with Remote Sensing Industry, media release 03-05, 17 January 2003, http://www.nga.mil/NGASiteContent/StaticFiles/OCR/nima0305.pdf (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren Ferster, NIMA Awards Lucrative Contracts to U.S. Satellite Imaging Firms, Space News, 17 January 2003; Satellite Imaging Corporation, About the Ikonos Satellite, http://www.satimagingcorp.com/ satellite-sensors/ikonos.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Satellite Imaging Corporation, About the QuickBird Satellite Sensor, http://www.satimagingcorp.com/satellite-sensors/quickbird.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
JAXA launched an H2-A rocket carrying two classified satellites intended to monitor North Korea, but aborted the launch when one of the vehicles two boosters failed to separate. Because the malfunction meant that the rocket would be unable to attain sufficient height and speed to achieve orbit, JAXA destroyed the rocket 10 minutes after launch. In March 2003, Japan had launched its first two spy satellites to monitor North Koreas missile and nuclear programs.(Audrey McAvoy for the Associated Press, Failed Launch Blamed on Rocket Booster Malfunction, 30 November 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched its Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F16 craft aboard a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, marking the final launch of the Lockheed Martin launch vehicles. In keeping with its 1986 agreement with the U.S. Air Force, Martin Marietta had converted 14 Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) into space launch vehicles. The Air Force had used the converted missiles to launch weather and spy satellites into low Earth orbit; the first such converted missile launched in September 1988. The Titan 2 that launched the DMSP F16 satellite was the 13th of the 14 converted ICBMs to launch; the Air Force had no plans for the 14th converted ICBM except to hold it as a spare. The successful launch of the satellite marked the end of the 33 months of postponements of the US$450 million mission that had resulted from technical problems. The Air Force intended for the craft to track clouds, storm systems, and hurricanes, planning to use the data that the satellite collected to forecast weather and to monitor ice and snow coverage, pollution, and fires. The constellation of two primary DSMP satellites and older backups provided meteorologists with information for generating forecasts, which commanders and troops relied upon for strategic and tactical planning. DSMP F16 replaced DSMP F15, which had launched in December 1999, as the lead craft in the constellations mid-morning orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Justin Ray, US Weather Satellite Finally Escapes Grasp of Hard Luck, Spaceflight Now, 14 October 2003; Roger Fillion, Titan II Rocket Soars into Retirement, Rocky Mountain News (Denver, CO), 21 October 2003.)
The Peoples Republic of China and ESA launched Double Star 1 from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest China. Double Star 1 was the first of two spacecraft in the Double Star mission to study Earths magnetic fieldsthe first joint project between China and ESA. Known in China as Tan Ce 1, Double Star 1 carried eight instruments for investigating Earths magnetospherefive from ESA and three from the Chinese National Space Administration. ESA and China had designed the mission to study how magnetized and charged particles streaming off the Sun affect Earth. The space agencies had scheduled the second of the two craft to launch six months after the first.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 602, 1 January 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx602.html (accessed 26 March 2009); United Press International, China-EU Launch Space Project, 30 December 2003.)
The CAIB released its first two official recommendations, suggesting that before resuming Shuttle missions, NASA should 1) improve its inspections of the leading edge of the orbiters wings, and 2) ensure that U.S. spy satellites would capture detailed images of the orbiters during each mission. Although the Board had not yet begun developing its final report, the CAIB released preliminary recommendations so that NASA could begin to implement them expeditiously. The CAIB made the first recommendation because it had found that inspection techniques in place did not enable engineers to assess the structural integrity of the orbiters heat shield, considered a criticality one item. The failure of the heat shieldcomprising the reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC) panels that protect the front of the orbiters wings during reentry, the RCC panels supporting structure, and the attaching hardwarewould lead to the loss of the vehicle and crew. The CAIB made the second recommendation because it had discovered that NASA officials had cancelled an informal request that the U.S. military capture images of Columbia to check for possible damage caused by launch debris. NASA already had a new memorandum of agreement with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) to provide NASA with images of orbiting Shuttles. Previously, NIMA had only made images available upon request, but the CAIB recommended that NASA and NIMA make imaging each Shuttle flight a standard requirement.(Jim Banke, Columbia Board Releases Two Recommendations to NASA, Space.com, 17 April 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030417.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
Beidou 1C, a Peoples Republic of China geostationary navigational satellite, launched from Xichang Satellite Launching Center in Sichuan province aboard a Long March 3A rocket, joining two other Beidou craft launched in 2000 to complete the satellite constellation. Xinhua, the Chinese national media outlet, reported that the transportation industry, telecommunications industry, weather forecasters, environmental planners, emergency personnel would be able to use the global positioning and navigational satellites. However, western analysts speculated that China was more likely to use the Beidou satellites capabilities to make its own military and weapons systems more precise.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Stephen Clark, China Lofts Navigation Craft on Long March Booster, Spaceflight Now, 25 May 2003.)
A telecommunications satellite jointly owned by the United States and Japanknown as Horizons 1 or Galaxy 13launched aboard a Sea Launch Zenit 3-SL rocket from a platform in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. Connecticut-based PanAmSat and Tokyo-based JSAT corporations launched the craft to provide digital video, Internet, and data transmission services to Hawaii and to Central America and North America. PanAmSat owned the satellites C-band payload Galaxy 13 and planned to use it as part of the companys Galaxy cable constellation. President and CEO of PanAmSat Joseph R. Wright Jr. remarked that the addition of Galaxy 13 to the companys fleet would create the first high-definition neighborhood and would help to meet the growing demand for high-resolution television. The two companies would jointly operate the satellites Ku-band payload Horizons 1, which would offer a variety of digital video, Internet, and data services, as well as creating new IP-based content-distribution networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600, 1 November 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx600.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Justin Ray, Communications Satellite Launched from Pacific Ocean, Spaceflight Now, 2 October 2003.)
From its Odyssey Platform in the Pacific Ocean, Sea Launch lifted off its 10th commercial mission, launching the shared commercial communications satellite Echostar 9also known as Telstar 13atop a Ukrainian Zenit 3-SL rocket. Space Systems/Loral had built the 10,443- pound (4,737-kilogram) satellite, which two companies shared. Echo Star Communications Corporation operated the Ku-band and Ka-band transponders to provide additional direct- broadcast television service, via the corporations DISH network. Loral Skynet operated the 24 C-band transponders to provide cable television service to North America, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Central America.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598, 1 September 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx598.html (accessed 21 January 2009); Jim Banke, Shared Communications Satellite Lofted into Orbit by Sea Launch, Space News, 8 August 2003.)
Administrator Sean OKeefe announced an agreement between NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which provided for NIMA to capture detailed satellite images of Space Shuttles in orbit. NASA had sought this agreement with NIMA because of critics pointed questioning of NASAs decision not to capture satellite images that it could have used to check for damage to Columbias heat shields while the Shuttle was in orbit. The agreement would enable NASA to employ NIMA assets during targets of opportunity without requiring NASA to make a specific request for imaging. Before the disaster, NASA had turned down a NIMA offer to capture images of Columbia, and NASA officials had withdrawn an unofficial request for U.S. Air Force telescopes to capture images. OKeefe stated that the agreement did not represent any NASA decision about whether those images might have helped determine damage to Columbia.(Associated Press, Military To Capture Future Shuttle Flight Images, 29 March 2003. 123)
NASA announced the release of the first scientific product of the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) mission, a joint effort of NASA and the German Aerospace Center. The GRACE mission had produced the most accurate map to date of Earths gravity field, using preliminary data collected over 111 days. Project scientists had created the map from selected data, which they had used to calibrate and validate the instruments of the pair of American and German satellites comprising GRACE. The satellites had measured Earths gravitational force from orbits 500 kilometers (310.7 miles) high, with 220 kilometers (136.7 miles) separating them, making a pass of the entire planet once each month, and producing measurements of unprecedented accuracy. The measurements provided precise views of ocean currents and tidal changes, enabling scientists to better understand how the oceans affect climate. Although the data was preliminary, NASA had released it to oceanographers immediately, months in advance of the scheduled start of routine GRACE scientific operations, underscoring the missions importance and the datas value.(NASA, Oceanographers Catch First Wave of Gravity Missions Success, news release 03-244, 21 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03244_gravity_success.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Larry OHanlon, Gravity Map Shows Earth Is Very Lumpy, Discovery News, 29 July 2003.)
Undersecretary of the U.S. Air Force Peter B. Teets testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Environment, Technology, and Standards that the National Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) System spacecraft would not be available until late 2009 or 2010, at the earliest. The U.S. Air Force and NOAA had jointly funded the system, the first of its kind, originally planning to deliver it in early 2008. The Bush administration had decided to request less money for the project in the near term than it had previously planned, and that decision had reportedly caused the delay. Because of the postponement of the delivery date, the Air Force and NOAA would need to restructure the contract to account for anticipated cost growth. The new system would replace the polar-orbiting systems that the agencies had previously operated separately. Greg Withee, NOAAs Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, stated that the delay could result in a 21-month gap in coverage if NOAA encountered problems with its existing fleet.(Jeremy Singer, Delay Means Cost Growth for New Weather Satellites, Space News, 17 July 2003.)
The Canadian Space Agency successfully launched its scientific satellite SciSat 1 aboard a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet flying out of Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The 330-pound (150-kilogram) atmospheric-research satellite carried two instrumentsthe Fourier Transform Spectrometer and the Measurements of Aerosol Extinction in the Stratosphere and Troposphere Retrieved by Occultation (MAESTRO)intended to monitor atmospheric ozone and dust composition in an altitude range of 4 to 100 kilometers (2.(Associated Press, Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program, 11 January 2001; Associated Press, Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth, 16 January 2001.)
NASA awarded its Commercial Invention of the Year to the Video Image Stabilization and Registration System (VISAR) and its Government Invention of the Year to the Computer Implemented Empirical Mode Decomposition Method, also known as the Hilbert-Huang Transformation (HHT) Method. David H. Hathaway, a solar physicist, and Paul Meyer, an atmospheric scientist, both of NASAs MSFC, had created the basis for the VISAR technology, which turns dark, jittery images into clearer stable images. NASA had developed VISAR in response to an FBI request for assistance. The FBI first used VISAR in 1996 to analyze video of the bombing at the Olympic Summer Games in Atlanta. At the time of the award, investigators were using VISAR to help isolate images collected during the launch of the ill-fated Space Shuttle Columbia, images that they were examining to locate possible damage to the orbiter. Norden E. Huang, Director of the Goddard Institute of Data Analysis at NASAs GSFC, had invented the HHT Method, which had applications in a variety of fields. Researchers could use the HHT Method in the study of topics as diverse as climate cycles, earthquake engineering, geophysical exploration, submarine design, turbulence flow, basic nonlinear mathematics, satellite data analysis, structural damage detection, nonlinear wave evolution, variations in solar neutrinos, blood pressure variations, and heart arrhythmias. NOAA had used the HHT Method to analyze sea-surface temperature data collected by Earth-orbiting spacecraft, successfully linking environmental changes with weather changes.(NASA, NASA Selects Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year, news release 03-120, 26 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03120.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Brian Lawson,  NASA Cites Two for Imaging Work: Invention Has Been Used To Help Law Enforcement Effort, Huntsville Times (AL), 27 March 2003.)
The German-Russian Eurockot Launch Services Rockot launch vehicle, a modified Russian ballistic missile, lifted off from Russias Plesetsk Cosmodrome carrying nine satellites and nanosatellites. The Rockot booster fired its Breeze upper stage twice, the first time releasing the 145-pound (66-kilogram) Czech Micromeasurements of Satellite Acceleration (MIMOSA) satellite into orbit and, the second time, leaving the Canadian Microvariability and Oscillation of Stars (MOST) scientific satellite and six Japanese, Danish, and U.S. nanosatellites in a Sun- synchronous orbit. A mock-up of a Russian Earth observation satellite that remained attached to the upper stage would gather mission data before de-orbiting. The Czech Astronomical Institute had launched MIMOSA to gather data on the density of Earths upper atmosphere, using a sensitive accelerometer designed to detect slight drag forces. President of the Canadian Space Agency Marc Garneau described the 113-pound (51.3-kilogram) MOST as the worlds smallest space telescope, with an aperture of just 15 centimeters (6 inches), about the size of Galileos telescope. Using an ultra-high-precision attitude-control system, the craft would very finely point toward targets, such as neighboring stars, studying how stars eject gas into the interstellar medium and seeking data to answer fundamental questions about the universe. Students had designed the two Japanese nanosatellitesCubeSat XI-IV and CUTE-1to test various space technologies in flight. Three more student-built nanosatellites deployed via a launch tubethe Canadian CANX-1and the Danish AAU CubeSat and DTUSATwould image stars. Quakesat, an American photo-imaging nanosatellite, would conduct an earthquake detection experiment.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597, 1 August 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx597.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Stephen Clark, Rockot Booster Successfully Launches 9 Payloads, Spaceflight Now, 30 June 2003; Peter B. de Selding, Rockot Delivers Multiple Satellites to Earth Orbit from Russia, Space.com, 30 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/rockot_ launch_)
NASA launched SORCEits Solar Radiation and Climate Experiment satellitefrom a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from a jet plane 140 miles offshore over the Atlantic Ocean. On board the satellite were five instruments designed to help scientists better understand how the Sun affects Earths climate. SORCEs high-precision instruments could measure total radiation from the Sun, and its spectrometers could analyze light in all its various wavelengths, capturing information that scientists hoped would help them build a long-term data set that future generations would use.(NASA, NASAs SORCE Satellite Soars into Space To Catch Some Rays, news release 03-022, 27 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-022.txt (accessed 9 July 2008); Associated Press, NASA Launches Satellite To Measure Suns Radiation, 25 January 2003.)
NASA announced the publication in the Journal of Geophysical Research of the conclusions of a research team that had used data spanning the years 1991 through 2000, which the Microwave Limb Sounder on NASAs Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite had collected. The team had found that ozone depletion over Earths Arctic region varies in amount, timing, and pattern of loss, confirming previous variations in Arctic ozone-loss estimates. The teams findings provided the first consistent, three-dimensional picture of ozone loss during multiple Arctic winters. (NASA, NASA Finds Wide Annual Fluctuations in Arctic Ozone Loss, news release 03-125, 28 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03125.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
NASA announced that the Demonstration for Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft had completed the lengthy design-certification review for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program, verifying the crafts safety, performance, and functional requirements. The DART team, based at NASAs MSFC, planned to demonstrate the vehicle without a human pilot in 2004, launching it on a Pegasus rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet. At 40,000 feet (12,192 meters) over the Pacific Ocean, the Pegasus rocket and the DART craft would separate, and DART would travel from a parking orbit to maneuver close to a target satellite or to rendezvous with it. The demonstration would require 24 hours. DART was the first of three flight-testing demonstrators: Boeing Expendable Launch Systems was developing the X-37 flight demonstrator, and Lockheed Martin Corporation was developing the launchpad-abort demonstrator. DART was NASAs first completely computer-controlled, rendezvous-capable spacecraft.(NASA, Space Flight Demonstrator Completes Design Certification, news release 03-274, 21 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03274_dart_design.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
ESAs Science Programme Committee (SPC) dropped the Eddington mission and scaled back the BepiColombo mission because of budgetary concernsthe SPC had determined that ESA would only have sufficient resources to fund one new mission in the next decade. For that mission, the Committee had selected the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) Pathfinder mission, which would launch in 2006 or 2007 and would test technologies and strategies for the planned 2012 LISA mission to detect gravitational waves. ESA had planned for the Eddington mission, scheduled for launch in 2008, to monitor the brightness of stars, study their interiors, and search for planetsof the size of Earth or smallerpassing in front of the stars. Japan and Europe had scheduled BepiColombo, their joint mission to Mercury, for launch in 2011 and had originally planned to send a lander to Mercury as part of that mission. Although the SPC had cancelled the lander portion of the mission, it still planned for ESA to launch two satellites to orbit the planet.(Vanessa Thomas, ESA Axes Planet-Finding Mission and Mercury Lander, Astronomy.com, 12 November 2003; Peter B. de Selding, European Planet-Finding Mission Cancelled, Space News, 10 November 2003.)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the Boeing-built AsiaSat 4 satellite aboard a Lockheed Martinbuilt Atlas 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, marking 64 consecutive successful launches for the Atlas rocket over 10 years. The mission was ILSs third launch for AsiaSat, the dominant satellite operator in its region. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed the AsiaSat 4 craft, a high-power 601HP spacecraft, to provide 15 years of direct-to-home communications and broadband services to customers in Asia and Australia.(Lockheed Martin, Atlas III Launch of Asiasat 4 Successful in 1st ILS Mission of 2003, news release, 11 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/AtlasIIILaunch OfAsiaSat4)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched the Geostationary Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV)D2 rocket from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The main payload was the GSAT-2, a geostationary communications and space-monitoring satellite, which carried four C-band and two Ku-band transponders that would provide voice and video transmissions to India and neighboring countries. The GSLV-D2 also carried into orbit experimental payloads: a Coherent Radio Beacon Experiment, a Solar X-ray Spectrometer, an external Total Radiation Dose Monitor, a Radiation Sensitive Field Effect Transistor, and a Surface Change Monitor. However, its main mission was to test the GSLV-D2, an improved version of the GSLV first launched in April 2001.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595, 1 June 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx595.html (accessed 20 November 2008); K. S. Jayaraman, India Launches Second GSLV Rocket with GSAT, Space.com, 8 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/gslv_launch_030508.html (accessed 1 December 2008).)
NASA confirmed that its satellites observations had provided the first evidence that the rate of ozone depletion in Earths upper atmosphere was decreasing, a possible indication of the first stage of ozone-layer recovery. Scientists had analyzed data that NASAs first and second Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment (SAGE) and Halogen Occultation Experiment (HALOE) satellite instruments had collected, discovering a decrease in ozone depletion after 1997. The scientists had found that the rate of depletion was consistent with the decline in abundance of the human-made chemicals that contribute to ozone destruction. However, according to Michael J. Newchurch of the University of Alabama, the lead scientist for the study, ozone depletion was still occurring, although its rate had decreased. Joseph M. Zawodny, a scientist on the SAGE II satellite-instrument science team at NASAs LaRC, remarked that the finding would not have been possible if the two satellites had not lasted so long past their normal mission lifetimes. SAGE II was approaching its 19th launch anniversary, and HALOE had returned data for 11 years. Scientists had also used international ground networks to corroborate the satellites data. The findings indicated the effectiveness of international treaties in encouraging countries to curb pollutionspecifically the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its amendments.(NASA, NASA Observations Confirm Expected Ozone Layer Recovery, news release 03-253, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03253_Ozone_Recovery.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Peter N. Spotts, After 30 Years, Ozone Is Recovering, Christian Science Monitor, 1 August 2003.)
Scientists published research demonstrating that changes in Earths gravitational field can affect the planets climate and weather. Experts described the findings as an important advance in climate research. Bryon D. Tapley of the University of Texas at Austin led the team of scientists, who had discovered that changes in Earths gravitational field are associated with changes in the distribution of water and ice masses. Their findings demonstrated that scientists could use satellite measurements of Earths gravitational field to measure changes in the distribution of Earths mass and to determine the causes of those changeschanges that included variations in climate and weather. In their analyses, the scientists had examined data from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), consisting of two spacecraft that measure variations in Earths gravitational fielda project of NASA and the German Aerospace Center.(NASA, NASAs GRACE Gravity Mission Weighs In on Earths Changing Climate, news release 04-286, 9 September 2004; Bryon D. Tapley et al., GRACE Measurements of Mass Variability in the Earth System, Science 305, no. 5683 (23 July 2004): 503505.)
Scientist Menglin Jin of NASAs GSFC published research based on the first use of satellites to create a multiyear record of Earths land-surface temperatures. Jin had used remote-sensing data, which satellites had collected from 1981 to 1998, to develop an 18-year record of global land- surface temperatures more comprehensive and detailed than data derived from ground-station measurements. According to the satellite data, average global land-surface temperatures had increased by 0.43 C (0.77 F) per decade, whereas ground-station data had indicated an increase of 0.34 C (0.61 F). The different findings produced different measurements because satellites measure actual land-surface temperaturesalso known as skin temperaturesand ground stations measure air temperatures 6.6 feet (2 meters) above land surfaces. However, Jin also noted regional variations in temperature changes, with the central regions of North America and Asia experiencing some declines in temperatures.(NASA, Satellites Act as Thermometers in Space, news release 04-121, 20 April 2004; Menglin Jin, Analysis of Land Skin Temperature Using AVHRR Observations, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 85, no. 4 (April 2004): 587600.)
NASA launched its Gravity Probe B (GP-B) on a Boeing Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 12:57 p.m. (EDT). NASA had designed the satellite to test two fundamental aspects of Albert Einsteins theory of relativity. According to Einsteins theory, time and space create a veritable fabric in space. When massive objects, such as Earth and other planets, distort the fabric of space, causing relatively smaller objects to move towards them, they create gravity. Einsteins theory of relativity also states that large objects twist the fabric of space around them as those objects spin on their axes. Gravity Probe A, which NASA had launched in 1975, had tested the former part of the theory, and GP-B would test both aspects. GP-B contained some of the most accurate scientific instruments ever constructed, including the most precise gyroscopes ever built.
Scientists reported that they had produced the first three-dimensional views of the large solar eruptions known as coronal mass ejections, or CMEs. CMEs, the most powerful eruptions in the solar system, can disrupt power systems, radio communications, and satellite links with Earth. Although uncertain of the origin of these eruptions, scientists know that CMEs occur when billions of tons of electrified gas explode from the Suns atmosphere into space at speeds of millions of miles per hour. The team had used data from ESA and from NASAs Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to construct the images, which they hoped would help scientists learn more about the structure of CMEs and the manner in which they affect Earth.(ESA, First 3D View of Solar Eruptions, ESA news release SNR 13-2004, 2 July 2004; Thomas G. Moran and Joseph M. Davila, Three-Dimensional Polarimetric Imaging of Coronal Mass Ejections, Science 305, no. 5680 (2 July 2004): 6670.)
Scientists announced research demonstrating that planets form according to a different process than scientists had previously thought. Comparing recent observations from NASAs Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) with data obtained earlier from other satellites, George H. Rieke of the University of Arizona at Tucson had led a team of scientists examining images of the dust clouds surrounding 266 stars of similar size. The prevailing theory of planetary formation held that small rocky planets collide to form larger planets, and the collisions produce a substantial quantity of dust, which steadily fades away over time. However, the teams SST observations had significantly challenged that theory, revealing that some relatively younger stars have no surrounding dust clouds and that older stars tend to have large, bright discs of orbiting dust. The presence of dust clouds around the older stars indicated that planetary collisions continue far after initial planetary formation. The team concluded that planetary formation is a longer and more chaotic process than scientists had previously assumed.(NASA, Astronomers Discover Planet Building Is Big Mess, news release 04-347, 18 October 2004; John Noble Wilford, A New Look at How Planets Are Formed, New York Times, 19 October 2004.)
NASA researchers discovered a previously unknown property of Arctic sea ice, challenging conventional models of climate change that had incorporated data on Arctic sea ice. A group of scientists led by Ronald Kwok of NASAs JPL had used satellite data from Canadas RADARSAT and NASAs ICESat to examine changes in Arctic sea ice. In the past, scientists had tended to examine data from ocean buoys to determine changes in Arctic sea ice, rather than using satellite data. The NASA researchers had discovered that, during 12-hour intervals, Arctic sea ice makes subtle, back-and-forth motions, which result in approximately 20 percent of ice growth during the Arctic winter. Although conventional models of the dynamics of Arctic sea ice had incorporated data regarding the ices motion, those models had not incorporated ice motion occurring during such brief periods and, thus, may have inaccurately simulated large-scale changes in the ice and underestimated the production of Arctic sea ice.(NASA, NASA Arctic Sea Ice Study May Stir Up Climate Models, news release 04-132, 22 April 2004; Ronald Kwok, H. Jay Zwally, and Donghui Yi, ICESat Observations of Arctic Sea Ice: A First Look, Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 16 (18 August 2004): L16401L16405.)
The State Council of the Peoples Republic of China appointed Sun Laiyan as Administrator of the China National Space Administration (CNSA). Laiyan had become the CNSAs Vice Administrator in 1999 and had served as Deputy Director of the Beijing Institute of Satellite Environment Engineering. Laiyan replaced Luan Enjie, who was retiring as head of the CNSA.(China National Space Administration, Mr. Sun Laiyan Appointed as Administrator of CNSA, news release, 12 May 2004, http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620682/n639462/54319.html (accessed 19 March 2009); China National Space Administration, Resumes of Leaders: Prof./Dr. Sun Laiyan, http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620681/n639436/53299.html (accessed 19 March 2009).)
NASA scientists published research showing that the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the single most important factor in interannual rainfall variability throughout the world. The scientists had used data from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite to identify geographic areas with the greatest variations in rainfall between 1998 and 2002. After comparing the TRMM data with rainfall patterns over the previous 50 years, they had found that changes in the ENSO directly correlated with local changes in rainfall patterns around the world. The TRMM satellite, a joint project of NASA and JAXA, used microwaves to measure precipitation over the tropics.(NASA, TRMM Satellite El Nino Holds the Reins on Global Rains, news release 04-369, 8 November 2004; Z. S. Haddad et al., Global Variability of Precipitation According to the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission, Journal of Geophysical ResearchAtmospheres 109, no. D17 (16 September 2004): D17103.)
NASA and NOAA announced that the two agencies would extend the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) by five months, effectively reversing an earlier decision to terminate the weather satellites mission. NASA and NOAA also announced that they had requested the National Academy of Sciences to evaluate the utility of extending the satellites mission for an additional 18 months. Launched in 1997, the TRMMdesigned to measure rainfallwas a joint project of NASA and JAXA. NASA and JAXA had originally planned for the satellites mission to last three years, but meteorologists and climate researchers, who continued to find the satellites data highly valuable, particularly for analyzing tropical storms, had advocated to prolong the mission.(Guy Gugliotta, Weather Satellite Gets Reprieve for Hurricane Season, Washington Post, 8 August 2004. 673 Guy Gugliotta, NASA Plans Robotic Fix for Hubble, Washington Post, 11 August 2004.)
Japans Mobile Broadcast Corporation and South Koreas Sun Kyung Telecom launched the Loral Mobile Broadcasting Satellite (MBSAT), which the two companies had designed to provide the worlds first digital multimedia broadband broadcasting system. The MBSAT, launched on a Lockheed Martin Atlas 3 rocket, carried a 40-foot-diameter (12.2-meter-diameter) antenna designed to provide audio, video, and data services to users of portable audio and visual devices in Japan and South Korea. International Launch Services (ILS), a U.S.-Russian private company, provided the launch services for the Japanese-South Korean joint venture.(Craig Covault, Mobile Milestone, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 12 (22 March 2004): 35; International Launch Services, About Us, http://www.ilslaunch.com/about-us/ (accessed 18 March 2009).)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the stations management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASAs other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISSs hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the stations operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the stations exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program, New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, Space Station Safety Problems Noted, Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
Sirpa Hakkinen of NASAs GSFC announced that a research team had discovered changes in the North Atlantic Ocean indicating significant changes in the oceans climate. Using data from several NASA and European satellites, the researchers had found a dramatic weakening in a particular current in the ocean, which circulates water between Ireland and Canada. The change in the current indicated substantial climate variability in high-latitude areas, but the research remained uncertain of whether or not the change related to global warming. However, the scientists emphasized that the North Atlantic Ocean region is key for analyzing climate and that changes in the oceans current could influence the circulation of the entire Atlantic Ocean system.(NASA, Satellites Record Weakening North Atlantic Current, news release 04-130, 15 April 2004; Sirpa Hakkinen and Peter B. Rhines, Decline of Subpolar North Atlantic Circulation During the 1990s, Science 304, no. 5670 (23 April 2004): 555559.)
NASA launched an Earth-observation satellite called Aura from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 3:01 a.m. (PDT). The spacecraft was one of three satellites in NASAs Earth Observing System (EOS)the two others were Terra, which monitored land, and Aqua, which monitored the planets water cycle. NASA had created Aura to collect scientific data on global air quality, ozone recovery, and climate change, equipping the satellite with four instruments: the High Resolution Dynamics Limb Sounder, the Microwave Limb Sounder, the Ozone Monitoring Instrument, and the Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer. Project engineers hoped that the instruments would enable the spacecraft to collect the most detailed measurements to date of atmospheric pollution, climate change, and the ozone layer.(NASA, Aura Launched, To Better Understand the Air We Breathe, news release 04-217, 15 July 2004; Eric D. Tytell, Satellite To Study Atmospheric Pollutants, Los Angeles Times, 16 July 2004.)
vehicle manufacturing, satellite services, and remote sensingaffect economic activity, employee earnings, and the amount of employment in all major industry sectors. Based on data from 2002, the FAA had found that the commercial space-transportation industry had contributed US$95 billion to economic activity in the United States, including US$23.5 billion in employee earnings. The report also stated that demands for commercial space transportation and its products and services had resulted in the employment of nearly 600,000 people. In addition, the FAA had found that much of this economic impact was the result of increased demands for satellite services and ground-equipment manufacturing, which includes satellite-related hardware and consumer electronics used with satellite services.(FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation, The Economic Impact of Commercial Space Transportation on the U.S. Economy: 2002 Results and Outlook for 2010 (study, Washington, DC, March 2004), 16.)
A NASA-funded study provided the first direct evidence that aerosols affect the absorption and release of carbon by ecosystems. Because carbon, in the form of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, acts as a heat-trapping greenhouse gas, the research team sought to identify the factors that influence carbon transfer between the atmosphere and soils. Led by Dev S. Niyogi of North Carolina State University, the scientists had used NASA satellite data to examine atmospheric aerosol content and carbon absorption in different ecosystems. They had discovered that high aerosol levels increase carbon absorption in croplands and forests but decrease carbon absorption in grasslands. The researchers suggested that this variation occurs because of the way that aerosols interact with different types of vegetation canopies to affect the dispersion of radiation from sunlight. In the dense vegetation canopies of croplands and forests, aerosols scatter sunlight in a manner that enables more radiation to reach a greater quantity of plant leaves and increases carbon absorption through plant photosynthesis. However, in the less dense vegetation canopy of grasslands, aerosols scatter sunlight in a manner that raises ground temperatures, causing the soil to release more carbon dioxide.(NASA, NASA Study Finds Tiny Particles in Air May Influence Carbon Sinks, news release 04-394, 16 December 2004; D. Niyogi et al., Direct Observations of the Effects of Aerosol Loading on Net Ecosystem CO2 Exchanges over Different Landscapes, Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 20 (29 October 2004): L20506.)
NASA launched the Swift satellite from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA and an international team of participants had designed the spacecraft to detect and analyze gamma-ray bursts (GRBs)ephemeral explosions that occur throughout the universe, usually far from Earth. GRBs may indicate a number of significant cosmological events, such as the collision of extremely dense celestial bodies or the formation of black holes. Swift was equipped with three telescopes to study GRBs, including the Burst Alert Telescope, which could detect and locate GRBs, and the X-ray Telescope (XRT) and Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope (UVOT), two telescopes that could study the bursts afterglows. Among the many participants in the Swift mission were the Italian Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches Swift Satellite, news release 04-382, 22 November 2004; New York Times, NASA Starts Hunt for Celestial Bodies, 21 November 2004.)
The European Union (EU) and the United States signed a cooperative agreement on their satellite navigation servicesthe EUs planned Galileo system and the United States GPS. According to the agreement, the Galileo and GPS satellites would broadcast a common civil signal. They also agreed not to discriminate in commercial trade of satellite-navigation goods and services. In addition, the agreement stipulated that Galileo signals would not interfere with the efforts of the United States to prevent its adversaries accessing satellite-based positioning signals. European Commission Vice President Loyola de Palacio, Irish Foreign Minister Brian Cowen, and U.S. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell signed the agreement in Dublin, Ireland.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2004 Activities (Washington, DC, 2004), p. 95, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2004.pdf (accessed 7 April 2009); United States Mission to the European Union, U.S., EU Reach Agreement on Satellite Navigation Services, news release, 27 June 2004, http://useu.usmission.gov/Article.asp?ID=E195E969-EFF9-4EE3-8E7B-58D02983E7C3 (accessed 7 April 2009).)
A NASA-funded study found that artificial surfaces in urban areas often cause temperatures to increase, enabling longer growing seasons in cities than in surrounding rural areas. Using data from NASAs Terra satellite, a team of Boston University scientists led by Xiaoyang Zhang compared the growing seasons of 70 North American cities with those of adjacent rural areas. The scientists discovered that the growing season in urban areas lasted nearly 15 days longer than the growing season in rural areas. In addition, the data revealed that urban climates affect vegetation located up to 10 kilometers (6 miles) from urban land cover. According to the scientists, high concentrations of artificial surfaces in urban areas cause surface temperatures to be relatively higher in urban areas than in surrounding rural areas. In addition, the scientists suggested that their findings demonstrated how land use and other human activities affect Earths environment.(NASA, NASA Plays Key Role in Largest Environmental Experiment in History, news release 04-242, 27 July 2004; X. Zhang et al., The Footprint of Urban Climates on Vegetation Phenology, Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 12 (25 June 2004): L12209.)
The U.S. Air Force awarded the Boeing Company a US$472 million contract to develop a military satellite system capable of secure, high-capacity global communications for NASA, the U.S. intelligence community, and the DOD. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would lead a team of companies that would conduct risk-reduction and system-definition studies for the Transformational Communications MILSATCOM (Military Satellite Communications) Space Segment, which uses laser communications, advanced processors, and other advanced technologies to provide communications for airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The companies selected to conduct research on the project included Ball Aerospace, Cisco Systems, and Raytheon.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Awarded $472 Million for Next-Generation Military Satellite System, news release, 23 January 2004, http//www.boeing.com/news/releases/2004/q1/nr_040123s.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
A NASA-funded study found that some climate-forecasting models might have incorrectly estimated future increases in Earths temperatures. Scientists Kenneth R. Minschwaner of the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology and Andrew E. Dessler of the University of Maryland had determined that some climate models might have incorrectly estimated the amount of water vapor that enters Earths atmosphere as the planet warms. For years, scientists had debated the extent to which water vaporthe most important heat-trapping greenhouse gas in Earths atmosphereinfluences Earths surface temperatures. Using data from NASAs Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, the scientists had found that, although the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere had increased with surface warming, the increase had not been as high as previous researchers had assumed. The findings also cast doubt on research suggesting that Earths temperatures would decrease because of a lack of water vapor in the atmosphere.(NASA, Satellite Finds Warming Relative to Humidity, news release N04-090, 15 March 1990; New York Times, Study Disputes Idea of Global Warming, 18 March 2004.)
Scientists published the first direct evidence of one of the fundamental elements of Einsteins theory of general relativity: an effect known as frame dragging. Frame draggingthe distortion of space and time around rotating celestial bodies, such as Earthoccurs because the gravity of those objects pulls space and time along with them. Ignazio Ciufolini of the University of Lecce in Italy and NASA scientist Erricos C. Pavlis of GSFC had measured distortions in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellites, LAGEOS and LAGEOS2, to obtain the evidence of frame dragging. They had discovered that, although irregularities in Earths surface account for some of the variation in the satellites orbits, the remainder of the variation is the effect of space-time distortions.(NASA, As the World Turns, It Drags Space and Time, news release 04-351, 21 October 2004; Guy Gugliotta, Theory of Relativity Evidence Found, Washington Post, 22 October 2004.)
William H. Pickering, a former Director of NASAs JPL, died at the age of 93. Pickering had begun his career at JPL in 1944 and had served as Director from 1954 to 1976. Soon after becoming Director of JPL, Pickering had led a project that had successfully launched the first U.S. satellite Explorer 1 into Earth orbit on 31 January 1958. During the remainder of Pickerings tenure, JPL had launched the Ranger and Surveyor missions to the Moon and the Mariner missions to Mars and Venus. Pickering had received numerous awards during his lifetime: NASA had presented him with its Distinguished Service Medal, President Gerald R. Ford had awarded him the National Medal of Science, and the Queen of England had given him an honorary knighthood.(NASA, NASA Remembers William H. Pickering, Former Director of JPL, news release 04-094, 16 March 2004.)
A NASA study revealed that clouds that form from small haze particles do not reduce Earths temperatures as much as previous research had suggested. Scientists had thought that low-lying clouds cool Earth by reflecting sunlight away from the planets surface, and that the reflectivity of clouds increases as their volume of water increases. However, NASA scientist Andrew S. Ackerman led a group of researchers who found that polluted, low-lying clouds neither hold more water nor reflect more solar energy than do cleaner clouds. Using measurements from polar-orbiting satellites and from NASA aircraft flying through clouds, the scientists discovered that water tends to decrease in polluted clouds, rather than to increase. Because most predictions of climate change had incorrectly assumed that polluted clouds counteract greenhouse warming, this finding could significantly influence how scientists predict changes in climate.(Andrew S. Ackerman et al., The Impact of Humidity Above Stratiform Clouds on Indirect Aerosol Climate Forcing, Nature 432, no. 7020 (2330 December 2004): 10141017; NASA, NASA Finds Polluted Clouds Hold Less Moisture and Cool Earth Less, news release 04-404, 23 December 2004.)
At a hearing held by the U.S. House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, officials from NASA and the Pentagon stated that they expect to work together on President Bushs exploration strategy for Mars and the Moon, without altering the traditional divisions between the two organizations. According to officials, NASA and the Pentagon would cooperate on technical issues of concern to both agencies, including the development of lightweight fabrication systems and systems for unpiloted docking of spacecraft. The two agencies would also explore sharing launch systems, including NASAs possible use of the Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rockets, which the Pentagon had developed to launch its own satellites. According to major media, House subcommittee members were interested in the possibility of saving money through the collaboration between NASA and the Pentagon, but they were also concerned about the possibility of the two agencies repeating their previous collaborative failures. As an example of such a failed collaboration, they cited the Advanced Launch System project, a collaborative project between the two agencies during the 1980s and 1990s.(Mark Carreau, NASA, Military To Work Closely on Space Effort, Houston Chronicle, 19 March 2004. 190)
A team of researchers led by scientist Marc L. Imhoff of NASAs GSFC published research indicating that increasing urbanization in the United States had reduced the amount of fertile land available for agriculture. Using data from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) and NOAAs polar-orbiting satellites, the scientists had discovered that cities covered 3 percent of the land area in the continental United States. Moreover, the team found that the urbanized areas were capable of producing an amount of food and fiber rivaling that produced on agricultural lands, which covered 29 percent of the land area in the continental United States. Furthermore, they found that the urbanized land areas had the potential to produce enough food to meet the caloric requirements of 16.5 million people, nearly 6 percent of the U.S. population. The authors explained that, throughout history, human settlement has tended to occur on lands best suited for growing food. The research results, which were consistent with this trend, strongly suggested that urbanization should occur in conjunction with agricultural and environmental considerations.(NASA, Cities Built on Fertile Lands Affect Climate, news release 04-059, 11 February 2004; Marc L. Imhoff et al., The Consequences of Urban Land Transformation on Net Primary Productivity in the United States, Remote Sensing of Environment 89, no. 4 (29 February 2004): 434443.)
NASA announced the establishment of the DART Mishap Investigation Board to determine why the DART spacecraft had failed to complete its mission on 15 April. Initially, NASA had believed that DART had come within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the target satellite before low fuel readings prompted it to abort its mission. However, NASA spokesperson Kimberly D. Newton later explained that new data had indicated that DART had bumped the satellite, boosting its orbit by as much as 5.75 miles (9.3 kilometers). However, DART had abandoned its target approximately halfway through its 24-hour mission. The Board consisted of seven voting members from NASAs MSFC, NASAs GSFC and ARC; the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; and the U.S. Air Force Space Command. NASA assigned eight federal employees to serve as advisors to the Boardsix from MSFC, and one each from NASAs JSC and NASA Headquarters. NASA selected Scott D. Croomes of MSFC to chair the Board and Kerry L. Remp of GRC to serve ex officio, to assure that board activity conformed to NASAs procedural requirements.(NASA, NASA Announces Dart Mishap Investigation Board Members, news release 05-105, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05105_DART_mishap_board.html (accessed 29 June 2009); NASA Engineering and Safety Center, NESC Review of Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) Mission Mishap Investigation Review Board (MIB) (NESC Request No. 05-020-E, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, December 2006), http://klabs.org/richcontent/Reports/Failure_Reports/dart/ 167813main_rp-06-119_05-020-e_dart_report_final_dec_27.pdf (accessed 18 November 2009); Chris Kridler, Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
Russian space officials and officials from the French rocket company Arianespace signed an agreement in Moscow allowing Russia to launch medium-weight satellite payloads from ESAs spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. Under the agreement, Europe would provide 344 million euros to build a launchpad for Russian Soyuz rockets, and Russia would erect a tower for the launchpad, ship the rockets from Russia, and make any changes to the rockets necessary for them to operate in the equatorial climate. Locating launches at the equator would allow Russia to increase the weight of its payloads from 1.6 tonnes (1,600 kilograms or 1.7 tons) to about 3 tonnes (3,000 kilograms or 3.3 tons). The arrangement also filled a niche that Arianespaces two rocket fleets did not. Arianespace Vega rockets launched small scientific satellites weighing no more than 1.5 tonnes (1,500 kilograms or 1.65 tons) into a low orbit. The two models of Ariane 5 rockets could launch payloads weighing 6.6 tonnes (6,600 kilograms or 7.3 tons) or 10 tonnes (10,000 kilograms or 11 tons), respectively, into geostationary transfer orbit. Expecting to launch three or four Soyuz rockets per year, beginning in 2008, Arianespace had already booked three launches from Kourou using the Russian Soyuz rocketlaunches of one Australian telecommunications satellite and two French scientific satellites.(Maggie McKee, Russian Rockets To Launch from South American Base, New Scientist, 13 April 2005. 772 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618, 1 May 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx618.html (accessed 8 September 2009); Peter B. de Selding, Apstar 6 Launched from China, Space News, 13 April 2005.)
ESA successfully launched from its base in Kourou, French Guiana, an Ariane 5 ECA rocket, the worlds most powerful commercial launcher, more than two years after its inaugural flight in December 2002 had ended in disaster. Capable of carrying up to 10 tons (9,071 kilograms or 9.07 tonnes) into space, the rocket lifted a 7.3-ton (6,623-kilogram or 6.62-tonne) payload consisting of two satellitesthe U.S.-Spanish XTAR-EUR satellite and the Dutch experimental SLOSHSAT-FLEVO microsatellite. Fitted with 12 wideband, X-band transponders, the XTAREUR geostationary satellite would provide military communications for the United States and Spain. For 10 days, the Netherlands microsatellite SLOSHSAT-FLEVO, weighing just 127 kilograms (0.127 tonnes or 0.139 tons), would test the dynamics of de-ionized water in orbit. FLEVO was the acronym for Facility for Liquid Experimentation and Verification in Orbit, as well as the name of the latest Dutch province that the Netherlands had reclaimed from the sea. ESA also sent aloft a monitor, MAQSAT, which remained attached to the rocket to gather data about the rockets dynamic behavior, from launch through the release of the two satellites. In its inaugural launch, the rocket had veered off course, prompting Mission Control to destroy it. An inquiry board had determined that the cooling system of the rockets Vulcain engine had malfunctioned.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616, 1 March 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx616.html (accessed 26 August 2009); Associated Press, European Rocket Delivers Payload, 14 February 2005; Laurent Marot for Reuters, Upgraded Ariane-5 Rocket Orbits Satellites, 13 February 2005.)
NASA-funded researchers reported that they had discovered that lightning in clouds a few miles above the ground clears a safe zone in the Van Allen Beltthe radiation belt located thousands of miles above Earth. Without this zone, satellites would have no safe area in which to orbit. The discovery, which NASA described as unexpected, resolved a 40-year debate about how the safe zone forms and how the region clears after magnetic storms fill it with radiation. Previously, the prominent theory held that turbulence in the zone generates radio waves in space, which clear the radiation. However, lightning also generates radio waves. The research team had confirmed the lightning theory using a global map of lightning activity created from data that the Micro Lab 1 spacecraft had collected. The team had also collected radio-wave data from the Radio Plasma Imager aboard the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft, combining that data with archival data from the Dynamics Explorer spacecraft. These two data sets showed that radio-wave activity in the safe zone closely follows terrestrial lightning patterns; if the radio waves had originated in space rather than Earth, no such correlation would exist. Therefore, the team had concluded that lightning clears radiation within a few days following magnetic storms. According to NASA, engineers could eventually design spacecraft that generate radio waves at the correct frequency and location to clear radiation belts around other planets, enabling humans to explore planets and moons such as Jupiters Europa.(NASA, NASA Finds Lightning Clears Safe Zone in Earths Radiation Belt, news release 05-070, 8 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05070_radiation_belt.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Agence-France Presse, Lightning Cuts Safe Zone Between Earth Radiation Belts: NASA, 9 March 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force launched the most technologically advanced GPS satellite ever developed, the GPS IIR-14, on a Delta-2 rocket at 11:37 p.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS IIR-14 was the first of eight satellites planned for the new GPS, which the Air Force had created to provide improved encryption and GPS antijamming capabilities for the U.S. military, as well as an improved GPS signal for civilian users. At the time of the launch, the GPS constellation consisted of 28 satellites, which the Air Force was operating for both civilian and military users.(Lockheed Martin, First Modernized GPS Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully by the U.S. Air Force, news release, 26 September 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/ FIRSTMODERNIZEDGPSSATELLITEBUILTBYL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
JAXA launched its Suzaku astronomy satellite at 3:30 a.m. (GMT) from Uchinoura Space Center (formerly called the Kagoshima Space Center) on an M-5 rocket. Suzaku, known as Astro-E2 before the launch, was JAXAs replacement for its first Astro-E satellite, which had been lost during launch in 2000. JAXA and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science had built the satellite to monitor space in conjunction with NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESAs XMM-Newton. The Suzaku satellite was equipped with three telescopes: a Hard X-ray Detector, an X-ray Spectrometer, and an X-ray Imaging Spectrometer.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 621, 1 August 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx621.html (accessed 12 June 2009); NASA, Suzaku: Mission Overview, 3 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/astro-e2/ main/index.html (accessed 12 June 2009).)
The U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the December 2004 inaugural launch of Boeings Delta 4 Heavy Rocket, which had failed when engines shut down prematurely. The Air Force and Boeing had intended the launch of the rocket, which was transporting a dummy payload, as a full dress rehearsal. The plan had been to test the newest and largest member of Boeings next-generation rocket series before critical national security satellites began using it. Boeing had designed the rocket with three Common Booster Cores, each with a cryogenic main engine. The three cores, secured together, formed a craft capable of launching large cargo into space. The investigation had determined that each boosters engines had undergone premature shutdown during the launch, after internal sensors incorrectly determined that the engines had exhausted their liquid-oxygen fuel supply. Investigators had concluded that cavitationbubbles in the liquid oxygen plumbinghad caused the glitch. Major Rodney Houser, the lead investigator for the Air Force, stated that the investigating team would focus on determining the cause of the cavitation within the liquid-oxygen feed system and on implementing corrective measures to prevent the problems repetition.(Justin Ray, Delta 4-Heavy Investigation Identifies Rockets Problem, Spaceflight Now, 17 March 2005. 235)
Japan successfully launched a geostationary weather satellite MTSAT-1R aboard an H-2A rocket from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima prefecture, after a glitch in communications between the rocket and ground systems had caused a 76-minute delay. The launch was Japans first launch of a heavy-lift vehicle since November 2003, when one of the H-2As solid boosters had failed to jettison as expected after completing its burn, causing the launch to fail. In the failed launch, Japan had lost the second pair of the four spy satellites that it had built after North Korea had fired a missile into Japanese territory in 1998. The other pair of the four satellitesone optical and one radar-sounding satellitewere all Japan had left to monitor its threatening neighbor. Furthermore, the launch failure had dashed Japans plans to enter the commercial satellite-launch business and had caused Japan to lose its international credibility. The successful launch of the MTSAT-1R restored morale to Japans rocketry program. A second mission of the MTSAT-1R was to replace a satellite lost in November 1999 when the final H-2 rocket, the predecessor of H-2A, had failed to reach orbit. Japan had designed the MTSAT-1R to service the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency, fulfilling the two missions of facilitating air-traffic management and obtaining satellite imagery for meteorologists.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616; James Brooke, After Failures, Space Effort in Japan Gets a Lift, New York Times, 28 February 2005; Justin Ray, Beleaguered H-2A Rocket Roars Into Orbit, Spaceflight Now, 26 February 2005.)
NASA scientists led by Karel J. Schrijver announced the results of their research on the development of better methods of forecasting solar storms. Radiation from solar stormsextremely powerful explosions in the Suns atmospherecan affect unprotected astronauts and airplane passengers, as well as satellites. In the past, scientists had usually analyzed changes in solar magnetic fields to forecast solar storms (also called solar flares), but this method had demonstrated limited reliability. However, a team of NASA scientists using NASAs Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) had found that strong electrical currents in the solar atmospherecurrents associated with changes in solar magnetic fieldsare the primary drivers of solar flares. Therefore, observing the electrical currents is a more reliable method of forecasting solar flares than the method previously used. The researchers had also discovered that solar flares are strongest and most likely to occur in regions of the Sun where electrical currents accumulate until they have reached an explosive threshold. According to Schrijver and the other researchers, these findings would enable scientists better to forecast periods of potentially hazardous space weather.(NASA, NASA Scientists Closer to Timely Space Weather Forecasts, news release 05-226, 16 August 2005; Carolus J. Schrijver et al., The Nonpotentiality of Active-Region Coronae and the Dynamics of the Photospheric Magnetic Field, Astrophysical Journal 628, no. 1 (20 July 2005): 501513.)
Astronomers announced that they had discovered the source of short gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), which had been an enigma for decades. Gamma rays are the most energetic and deadly form of electromagnetic radiation. Although scientists had already discovered that supernovas cause long GRBs, which last for approximately 2 seconds, they had remained uncertain of the causes of short GRBs, which last less than 1 second. Using data from numerous NASA satellites, 130 astronomers from around the world found that short GRBs originate from neutron stars and notas some theories had suggestedfrom supernovas. More specifically, satellite data showed that short GRBs originate from collisions involving a neutron star and either another neutron star or a black hole. However, the data was not conclusive regarding the exact type of collision that causes short GRBs, because the brevity of these events makes them difficult to observe directly.(Luigi Pir, Short-Burst Sources, Nature (London) 437, no. 7060 (6 October 2005): 822823; Dennis Overbye, Scientists Trace Gamma Rays to Collision of Dead Stars, New York Times, 6 October 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bushs plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet, 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, Space Policy Goes Private, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, White House Releases New Space Strategy, Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
ESA and JAXA performed the first bidirectional, optical, interorbital communication, a form of communication in which satellites use lasers to transmit and receive commands and data over long distances. Laser-based communications have numerous advantages over communications using radio waves, including freedom from interference and higher data-transmission speeds and volumes. ESA and JAXA performed the communication between ESAs Advanced Relay and Technology Mission satellite and JAXAs Optical Inter-Orbit Communications Engineering Test Satellite. Previously, ESA and JAXA had conducted unidirectional, optical communications between their satellites, but this event was the first bidirectional form of this type of communication.(ESA, Successful Optical Data Relay Link Between OICETS and Artemis, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMIJVVLWFE_index_0.html (accessed 27 July 2009); JAXA, Toward the Era of Optical Communications in Space, news release, 9 December 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/12/ 20051209_oicets_e.html (accessed 27 July 2009).)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched its Cartosat-1 Earth- mapping and remote-sensing satellite aboard a Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle-C6 (PSLV-C6) from the newly built launchpad at Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The 1.56-tonne (1,560-kilogram or 1.72-ton) Cartosat-1, the heaviest payload that the PSLV had ever ferried to space, carried two f/4.5 Panchromatic cameras, which together would enable the production of a stereoscopic image at a resolution of 2.5 meters (8.2 feet). ISRO planned to use the images to generate digital terrain-elevation maps, which would aid in assessing and monitoring land use, forest cover, and river flow. The launch vehicle also carried into orbit HAMSat, a 43-kilogram (0.043-tonne or 0.047-ton) microsatellite designed to relay amateur VHF radio communications.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619, 1 June 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx619.html (accessed 17 September 2009); K. S. Jayaraman, India Launches Cartosat-1 Satellite, Space News, 6 May 2005.)
Spaceway 1, a DirecTV satellite, launched from Sea Launchs Odyssey floating platform at the equator aboard a Zenit-3SL rocket. Sea Launch used a self-propelled launch platform and a command ship that had sailed from Long Beach, California, to the equator. At the equator, the physics of Earths rotation make it possible to launch heavier payloads than elsewhere. Sea Launch announced that the 13,376-pound (6,067.3-kilogram or 6.1-tonne) satellite was the heaviest commercial satellite ever launched.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Associated Press, DirecTV Satellite Launched from Sea Launch Ocean Platform, 27 April 2005.)
NASA and NOAA announced their joint development of procedures to improve the accuracy of medium-range weather forecasts in the Northern Hemisphere. NASA and NOAA scientists had incorporated into weather prediction models the data from the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) on NASAs Aqua satellite, improving the accuracy range of experimental six-day weather forecasts of the Northern Hemisphere by 6 hours. Observers called this improvement of 4 percent a significant development in weather forecasting. NASA had launched Aqua on 4 May 2002, enabling the AIRS to produce three-dimensional maps of air and surface temperature, cloud properties, and water vapor. Moreover, the instrument had a spectral resolution more than 100 times greater than that of other infrared sounders.(NASA, NASA/NOAA Announce Major Weather Forecasting Advancement, news release 05-231, 24 August 2005; NASA JPL, AIRS: Overview, http://airs.jpl.nasa.gov/overview/ overview/ (accessed 2 July 2009).)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched two military satellites aboard an Atlas 3B, the last of Lockheed Martins Atlas 3 rockets. The launch marked the 145th and final launch from Complex 36 at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after 43 years of operation. NASA had built the complex in the early 1960s, specifically for its Atlas-Centaur program, which included the launches of NASAs historic Surveyor, Mariner, and Pioneer missions. Launches from the site had proved highly successful; the launch of the last Atlas 3B marked the 75th consecutive successful Atlas rocket launch, including all six Atlas 3 flights. Launch Complex 36 was one of the United States oldest continuously operating launch sites and the last of the U.S. launch sites to use a traditional blockhouse to control the launch. The final Atlas 3B carried a pair of formation-flying, classified satellites, which analysts believed were part of the Naval Ocean Surveillance System (NOSS) of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). Satellites in the NOSS, a network for monitoring ships around the globe, were reportedly capable of detecting radio transmissions from ships to pinpoint their locations precisely.(Justin Ray, Last Atlas 3 Rocket Launches a Pair of Spy Satellites and Atlas Rocket Workers Say Goodbye to Complex 36, Spaceflight Now, 4 February 2005; Todd Halvorson, Atlas 3 Climbs Through Fog to Final Successful Mission, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 February 2005.)
ESA launched the satellite Giove A on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket at 5:19 a.m. (UT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The satellite was the first component of a satellite navigation system called Galileo. According to ESAs plan, the Galileo system would consist of 30 satellites and would commence operations by 2008. ESA had created Galileo to reduce European dependence on the United States for satellite navigation services and to provide more accurate civilian services than the GPS, a system that the U.S. military had created. According to ESA, users who had mobile phones with integrated chips would be able to use Galileo to find directions to particular destinations, such as parks and restaurants. Galileo would be capable of providing civilian users with real-time positioning accuracy to within 1 meter (3.28 feet). Civilian services from the GPS were accurate to nearly 5 meters (16 feet).(Molly Moore, With Satellite Launch, E.U. Positions Itself to Compete, Washington Post, 29 December 2005; ESA, First Galileo Satellite on Orbit to Demonstrate Key Technologies, ESA news release 61-2005, 28 December 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_61_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
NASA launched a new environmental satellite for NOAA, aboard a Boeing Delta 2 7320-10 expendable launch vehicle, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The NOAA-18 (N), the fourth in the series of five Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellites (POES) carrying improved imaging and sounding capabilities, would improve weather forecasting and monitor environmental events globally, collecting data about Earths surface and atmosphere. The craft also carried instruments used in COSPAS-SARSAT, the international Search-and-Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking System (COSPAS is the Russian acronym for Cosmicheskaya Sistema Poiska Avariynyh Sudo, which means Space System for the Search of Vessels in Distress). Established in 1982, COSPAS-SARSAT had saved 5,000 lives in the United States and 18,000 worldwide.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619; NASA, NASA Successfully Launches Environmental Satellite, news release 05- 129, 20 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05129_ NOAA_)
A group of scientists led by David N. Burrows of Pennsylvania State University announced that they had found evidence of black holes behaving in a manner previously unknown. Using observations from NASAs Swift satellite, the scientists had discovered newly formed black holes that were simultaneously consuming matter while propelling away other material. They also observed that, after the black holes had emerged from large star explosions, the energy from the black holes initial formative activities had caused several subsequent explosions during the following minutes, with a gamma-ray burst (GRB) from the first explosion followed by x-ray flares from later explosions. Previously, scientists had believed that black holes and GRBs were only associated with single explosions of collapsing stars, rather than with a rapid succession of explosions. The scientists had been able to conduct their analyses because NASAs Swift satellite could observe GRBs within minutes after their occurrence, whereas other satellites had only been able to observe GRBs hours after they had occurred.
NASA announced it had accepted an invitation to join the National Invasive Species Council (NISC), a cabinet-level council established in 1999 to coordinate federal responses to harmful invasive species. As a member of the council, NASA would provide data acquired using Earth- observation spacecraft and predictive models to assist 12 other federal agencies efforts to combat invasive species nationwide. The council had extended the invitation because of NASAs previous work monitoring invasive species: NASA had provided data, predictive models, and systems engineering to the USGS, information that had helped the USGS build predictive maps of invasive species in Utahs Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. With NASAs assistance, USGS had converted data from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer aboard NASAs Terra satellite, as well as other data, to create predictive maps of plant species distribution. USGS had used the National Invasive Species Forecasting System to help improve the nations response to invasive species.(NASA, NASA Research to Aid Federal Invasive Species Council Efforts, news release 05-035, 2 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05036_Invasive_Species.html (accessed 19 August 2009). 739 Warren E. Leary, Repair Costs for Hubble Are Vexing to Scientists, New York Times, 3 February 2005; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, Hubble Repair Could Hinge on Who Pays at NASA, 3 February 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Options for Hubble Science, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 2 February 2005.)
J. Stephen Fossett landed the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer experimental aircraft in Salinas, Kansas, after flying the first solo, nonstop, non-refueled, around-the-world airplane trip. The flight had lasted three days, during which Fossett had not slept and had only consumed 12 milkshakes. The craft, designed by X Prizewinning SpaceShipOne creator Burt Rutan, carried NASAs advanced experimental Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) transceiver, the Low Power Transceiver (LPT) that NASA researchers believed would provide a flexible and inexpensive option for relaying information between spacecraft. NASA had placed the new transceiver on board GlobalFlyer to test the devices function during a real flight, especially its performance in delivering a constant video feed. NASA had loaned GlobalFlyer a modified version of its Personal Cabin Pressure Monitor to alert the pilot of potentially dangerous or deteriorating cabin pressure. Because the background noise in GlobalFlyers cockpit was too loud for the pilot to hear an alarm, the modified monitor vibrated to signal a problem. The mission had successfully overcome periodic failures of GlobalFlyers navigation system. Furthermore, while passing through Japanese airspace, the aircraft had appeared to be running out of fuel too quickly, but a solid tailwind had helped Fossett avoid making a landing in Hawaii.(NASA, NASA Technology Supports Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer, news release 05-068, 3 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05068_globalflyer_congrats.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, NASA Helps Record Flight, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2005.)
NASA scientists announced the first measurements ever taken of changes in sea level that were unrelated to changes in land height. Although researchers believed that rising sea levels were related to global warming, they were unsure of how much sea levels had changed, the degree to which sea-level changes were attributable to upward and downward land movements, and the causes of those changes. However, using data from numerous satellites, NASA scientists had discovered that global sea levels had increased during the previous 50 years, at an estimated rate of 1.8 millimeters (0.07 inches) annually, and that the rate of increase had accelerated to 3 millimeters (0.12 inches) annually in the previous 12 years. The scientists attributed half of the rise in sea levels to the expansion of water from warmer ocean temperatures and the remainder to various other sources, such as the melting of ice covers in Antarctica, Greenland, and elsewhere.(Juliet Eilperin, NASA Able To Pinpoint Changes in Sea Levels, Washington Post, 8 July 2005; NASA, NASA Satellites Measure and Monitor Sea Level, news release 05-175, 7 July 2005.)
NASA announced that scientists analyzing images from the its Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and from the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had discovered that Earths northern and southern auroras are not mirror images of each other, as previously thought. Images from the two spacecraft showed that auroras move and change, depending on the tilt of Earths magnetic field toward the Sun and on solar wind conditions. Knowing more about how auroras react to the solar wind could help scientists predict space weather. Timothy J. Stubbs of the Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics at NASAs GSFC remarked that the analysis was the first to track the locations of the auroras using simultaneous observations, in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, of the auroras in their entirety.(NASA, NASA Study Finds Earths Auroras Are Not Mirror Images, news release 05-089, 5 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05089_aurora_images.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASAs Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probesViking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral, Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
ISS Expedition 10 Commander Leroy Chiao and Flight Engineer Salizhan S. Sharipov completed the second and final spacewalk of their mission 1 hour ahead of schedule, returning into the ISS after 4.5 hours. To help in navigation, Chiao and Sharipov installed a set of space-to- space antennas around a section of Zvezda, the Russian service module that would aid in the docking operations of Europes Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) during a future cargo mission. The crew also attached a GPS unit to the Zvezda module to help the ATV. The ATV, scheduled to arrive during the next year, had the capability to deliver up to 8.5 tons (7,711 kilograms or 7.71 tonnes) of cargo, including 10,000 pounds (4,536 kilograms or 4.54 tonnes) of propellant. After the crew finished connecting the antennas, Sharipov returned to the Pirs docking compartment to retrieve a small satellite called NanoSputnik. The satellite, which weighed just 11 pounds (5 kilograms) and measured only 1 foot (0.31 meter) long, carried a transmitter designed to test control and orientation systems for small spacecraft during its 100- day mission. Sharipov released the satellite into a retrograde orbit by hand, while Chiao photographed the launch.(Tariq Malik, Spacewalking Astronauts Outfit ISS for New Cargo Ship, Space.com, 29 March 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_eva2_050328.html (accessed 3 September 2009); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Two Astronauts Complete Spacewalk Work, 29 March 2005.)
The Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft, a NASA technology demonstrator, launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, aboard a Pegasus-XL HAPS rocket released from an L-1011 cargo aircraft. NASA intended the launch to test the 360-kilogram (793.76-pound or 0.4-ton or 0.36-tonne) satellites video-guidance-system technology, which would enable DART to rendezvous with an experimental military communications satellite and maneuver around it. The technology would allow future spacecraft to approach and dock with another craft automatically.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
The Apstar 6 satellite launched aboard a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in Chinas Sichuan Province. The 4.8-tonne (4,800-kilogram or 5.3-ton) satellite carried 38 C-band and 12 Ku-band transponders. Replacing the ageing Apstar 1A, the craft would provide digital, multimedia transmissions to Australia, India, and countries in eastern Asia. The satellite was the first Western-built, commercial telecommunications spacecraft to carry almost no U.S.-made components, as well as the first commercial Chinese satellite with an antijamming payload. Hong Kongbased APT Satellite Company had requested that Alcatel Space include the antijamming technology in response to the threat of satellite-signal piracy, which had occurred several times over the previous two years. The new Alcatel Spacebus 4000 C1 satellite platform selected for Apstar 6 included no U.S. parts subject to the export controls of the U.S. Department of State. Because the U.S. government had refused to grant export licenses for U.S. satellite parts destined for launch in China, Alcatel Space had substituted European, Russian, and other non-U.S. components.
Astronomers announced the detection of the most distant explosion ever observed, at approximately 12.6 billion light-years from Eartha gamma-ray burst (GRB) occurring after a massive stars collapse and transformation to a black hole. The explosion, which astronomers had named GRB 050904, had occurred nearly 1.1 billion years after the Big Bang, which itself had happened 13.7 billion years ago. The astronomers used ground-based telescopes and NASAs Swift satellite to detect GRB 050904s emitted infrared light. Because the event had occurred so far away, the infrared light had just begun to reach Earth. However, the explosion was not the most distant object or event that astronomers had ever observed. Scientists had detected a quasar and a galaxy located 12.7 billion light-years from Earth.(Guy Gugliotta, Satellite Detects Massive Explosion, Washington Post, 13 September 2005; NASA, Most Distant Explosion Detected, Smashes Previous Record, news release 05-259, 12 September 2005.)
Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company announced the formation of a joint venture called United Launch Alliance, combining the production, engineering, testing, and launch operations associated with U.S. government launches of Boeing Delta and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. The merger ended a two-year legal battle between the two largest government contractors, in which Lockheed Martin had accused Boeing of cheating to win rocket-launch work. The venture eliminated market competition for launching weather satellites for NOAA, scientific satellites for NASA, spy satellites for the National Security Agency, and communications satellites for the U.S. Air Force. According to the agreement, the joint venture would produce both Boeings Delta and Lockheeds Atlas rockets, consolidating production at Boeings Decatur, Alabama, facility. Lockheeds Denver, Colorado, office would serve as headquarters, housing the engineering and administrative functions. Lockheed Martins Vice President of Financial Strategies Jeffrey D. MacLauchlan remarked that the preservation of the two separate rocket families was the crux of the ventures appeal to the federal government.(Lockheed Martin, Boeing, Lockheed Martin To Form Launch Services Joint Venture, news release, 2 May 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/BoeingLockheedMartin FormLaunchServi.html (accessed 17 September 2009); Renae Merle, Boeing, Lockheed Join Rocket Division, Washington Post, 3 May 2005.)
NASA announced findings from research exploring the impact of black carbon or soot on Earths climate, findings that provided new and additional evidence that pollution generated through the process of incomplete combustion contributes to the accelerated melting of sea ice and snow, as well as to the changing atmospheric temperatures in the Arctic region. Dorothy M. Koch, of Columbia University and NASAs Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), and James E. Hansen, also of GISS, coauthored the study, using satellite data and computer models to recreate the climate and to track pollution. In addition to confirming past findings regarding the relationship between pollution and climate change in the Arctic region, the study had found that most of the pollution in the environment and the atmosphere of the Arctic did not originate in the developed world, but rather in southern Asia, which had the highest level of industrial soot emissions in the world. Using the GISS General Circulation Model (GCM) to locate the origins of Arctic soot, Koch and Hansen had found that one-third of the pollution originated in southern Asia, one-third was the result of burning vegetation and natural materials around the world, and the remainder originated in Russia, Europe, and North America.(NASA, NASA Study Finds Soot May Be Changing the Arctic Environment, news release 05-084, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05084_arctic_soot.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Miguel Bustillo, Airborne Soot Adds To Arctic Melting, Study Finds, Los Angeles Times, 24 March 2005.)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the European satellite Inmarsat 4-F1 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a stretched version of the Atlas 5 rocket. Weighing 13,138 pounds (5,959 kilograms or 5.96 tonnes), the EADS Astrium-built Inmarsat 4 was the largest commercial satellite ever to launch. As part of a three-satellite constellation comprising the new Broadband Global Area Network, the spacecraft would provide wireless, broadband connections to ships, planes, and remote areas that had not previously had reliable access to ground-based, high-speed networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 617, 1 April 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx617.html (accessed 31 August 2009); Associated Press, Atlas 5 Rocket Hauls Satellite into Space, 12 March 2005.)
The first successful launch at a commercial spaceport in the United States took place when the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport launched a rocket called the Minotaur, carrying two satellites. The state governments of Virginia and Maryland had funded the spaceport to serve the commercial space launch market. Other institutions contributing to the venture included Old Dominion University and several aerospace companies. The facility was located on land leased from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) near Chincoteague, Virginia. Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, had built the rocket. One of the satellites it carried was a U.S. Air Force tactical surveillance satellite called TacSat-2. The other was a 10-kilogram (22-pound) NASA satellite called GeneSat 1, designed for experiments on E. coli bacteria.(Michael E. Ruane, At Va. Spaceport, Rocket Launches 1,000 Dreams, Washington Post, 17 December 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 638, 1 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx638.html (accessed 1 July 2010).)
Russia launched the Resurs DK1 satellite aboard a Soyuz-U rocket at 4:00 a.m. (EDT) from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The civilian Earth-observation satellite would operate for three years, the first in an upgraded series of spacecraft with improved capabilities in imaging resolution and communications. Navigating with a system based on Russias global navigation system Glonass, Resurs would be capable of surveying up to 700,000 square kilometers daily. Unlike previous Russian civilian remote-sensing craft, Resurs DK1 would carry an advanced communications system enabling it to quickly download recent images of natural resources, natural disasters, sea-ice conditions, and polar weather to Russian ground stations. Russian government agencies would use the images, making them available to national and international organizations, as well as private commercial customers. The satellites would have two attached instrumentsItalys Payload for Anti-Matter Exploration and Light-Nuclei Astrophysics (PAMELA), which would monitor cosmic rays, and a Russian particle detector, which would identify probable electromagnetic precursors of earthquakes.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin no. 632, July 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx632.html (accessed 6 August 2010); Stephen Clark, Civil Remote Sensing Craft Launched by Russia, Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2006; RIA Novosti, Survey Satellite Launched from Baikonur, 16 June 2006.)
ISROs launch of a Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) failed when the GSLV malfunctioned, taking with it an INSAT-4C communications satellite. ISRO had created the GSLV series of rockets to put heavy satellites weighing 2.02.5 tonnes (2,0002,500 kilograms or 2.22.8 tons) into geosynchronous orbit. The Indian National Satellite system, INSAT, is a series of domestic communications satellites. ISRO launched the rocket (formally designated GSLV-F02) from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, an island off the coast of the southern state of Andhra Pradesh in India. Soon after liftoff, the GSLVs first stage failed to separate, causing the rocket to veer from its trajectory, falling into the Bay of Bengal. The 85 unsuccessful launch, ISROs fourth launch of a GSLV, was the first GSLV launch ever to fail.
Frances CNES launched the COROT (Convection, Rotation and planetary Transits) satellite on its mission to study stars and to discover exoplanetsplanets outside of Earths solar system.
Speaking at the 22nd National Space Symposium, in Colorado, Vice Administrator of China National Space Administration (CNSA) Luo Ge reviewed the landmark achievements of the Peoples Republic of China and outlined its ambitious future space exploration plans. Luo Ge recapped Chinas accomplishments to date46 consecutive successful launches since 1996, including 23 satellites and six Shenzhou spacecraft, the most recent of which were crewed missions. He stated that Chinas total annual investment in space programs was equivalent to US$500 million. China planned to achieve a lunar flyby in 2007, to develop a nonpolluting launch vehicle by 2010, to land a rover on the Moons surface by 2012, to establish an orbiting space laboratory by 2015, and to launch robotic lunar-sample-return missions by 2017. Furthermore, Luo Ge stated that China expected to launch approximately 100 Earth-orbiting satellites over the next five to eight years, ranging from oceanographic, navigation, and telecommunications satellite systems to constellations of Earth-observing and disaster-mitigation spacecraft. (Leonard David, China Unveils Ambitious Space Plans at National Space Symposium, Space.com, 5 April 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060405_nss_china.html (accessed 24 June 2010); Xinhua News Agency, China Reveals Space Exploration Plans, 6 April 2006.)
James A. Van Allen, a major figure in physics and space exploration, died at the age of 91. Born in 1914, Van Allen had played a prominent role in early American rocket research, including the development of the radiation detectors contained in the United States first successful satellite, Explorer 1. Launched January 1958, Explorer 1 had captured data revealing two belts of charged particles above Earths magnetic fieldphenomena later known as the Van Allen radiation belts. The finding was among the first major scientific discoveries of the early space age. In 1958 Van Allen had chaired a group of scientists who recommended that the United States create an independent national space agency by 1960 and launch a human mission to the Moon by 1968. Van Allen later became involved in several NASA projects, including the development of Galileo, Pioneers 10 and 11, and several Mariner spacecraft. During his lifetime, Van Allen had received numerous awards, including the National Medal of Science and NASAs Medal of Exceptional Achievement.(Walter Sullivan, James A. Van Allen, Discoverer of Earth-Circling Radiation Belts, Is Dead at 91, New York Times, 10 August 2006; NASA, James A. Van Allen (19142006), http://history.nasa.gov/sputnik/vanallen.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
Japan launched into space the Advanced Landing Observing Satellite (ALOS), known as Daichi, on an H-IIA rocket, from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima in southern Japan, at 10:33 a.m. (JST). ALOS had the capability to produce maps of a scale of 25,000 to 1, without using reference points on Earths surface. Japan would also use the satellite for precise regional land- coverage observation, disaster monitoring, and resource surveying. Three instruments aboard ALOS would accomplish these tasks: the Panchromatic Remote-Sensing Instrument for Stereo Mapping (PRISM), an optical camera measuring land elevation; the Advanced Visible and Near Infrared Radiometer type 2 (AVNIR-2), observing the material that covers land surfaces; and the Phased Array type Lband Synthetic Aperture Radar (PALSAR), enabling day-and-night and all- weather land observation. Japan had designed ALOS to operate for at least three years, with a program objective for a mission lasting up to five years.(Stephen Clark, New Earth Observer Launched into Orbit, Spaceflight Now, 24 January 2006; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), Satellites and Spacecraft: Advanced Land Observing Satellite DAICHI (ALOS), 25 February 2009, http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/alos/index_e.html (accessed 12 November 2009); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 627, 1 February 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/ spx627.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
An Ariane 5-ECA rocket launched from the space center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 21:09 (GMT), placing two telecommunications satellites into geostationary transfer orbit at 36,000 kilometers (22,400 miles) above Earths equator. The two satellites, Mexicos Satmex 6 and Thailands Thaicom 5, had a combined mass of 8.2 tonnes (8,200 kilograms or 9.04 tons), the largest payload ever carried by a European rocket. Satmex 6 would provide telecommunications and television services to North America and South America, and Thaicom 5 would provide those services throughout the Asia-Pacific region.(Space Daily, Ariane 5 Rocket Launches Two Satellites into Orbit, 30 May 2006; ESA, Ariane 5 ECA Carries Record Payload Mass to GTO, news release, 28 May 2006, http://www.esa.int/easCP/SEMXIO9ATME_index_). html (accessed 26 March 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 631.)
A Soyuz-U rocket launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia at 17:38 (UT), carrying Kosmos 2420, a Russian military satellite. The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos stated that the launch took place in the interests of the Defense Ministry. Observers in the United States speculated that Kosmos 2420 might be a spy satellite intended to bolster Russias declining military-intelligence presence in space.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 631, 1 June 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx631.html (accessed 17 March 2010); Stephen Clark, Russian Soyuz Rocket Launches New Spy Satellite, Spaceflight Now, 3 May 2006; RIA Novosti, Russia Launches Kosmos Military Satellite from Plesetsk Base, 3 May 2006.)
The European Space Agency (ESA) and Galileo Industries S.A. of Brussels, a consortium of European space-hardware manufacturers, signed a 950 million (US$1.15 billion) contract for the construction of four Galileo navigation-system satellites, planned for launch in 2008. ESA had created Galileo as a civilian-controlled operation, designed to increase Europes strategic independence from the U.S. militarys Global Positioning System (GPS) and to provide a more precise navigational tool. The first experimental Galileo satellite, Giove-A, which ESA had launched on 28 December 2005, had transmitted the first Galileo navigational signals on 12 January 2006.(Agence France-Presse, ESA, Galileo Industries Set Deal for First Four Galileo Satellites, 20 January 2006; European Space Agency (ESA), Contract for In-Orbit Validation of Galileo System, press release 4-2006, 13 January 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_4_2006_p_EN.html (accessed 5 October 2009); ESA, First Galileo Signals Transmitted by GIOVE-A, press release 3-2006, 12 January 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ Pr_3_2006_ p_EN.html (accessed 5 October 2009); Peter B. de Selding, Giove-A Permits Early Registration of Galileo Frequencies, Space.com, 20 January 2006.)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center in Moscow, announced that a rocket carrying an Arabsat 4A telecommunications satellite had failed to reach its proper orbit. The Russian Proton Breeze M rocket, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:10 p.m. (EST), failed to burn its upper-stage engine for as long as its designers had planned, leaving the satellite stranded in low orbit. EADS Astrium engineers had designed Arabsat to expand and optimize capacity for direct-to-home TV broadcasting, telephony, and data transmission over a coverage zone encompassing North Africa, the Middle East, and part of Western Europe. If the launch had been successful, it would have placed Arabsat in a geostationary transfer orbit with an apogee of 36,000 kilometers (22,369 miles). ILS announced that it would form a failure-review oversight board to review reasons for the anomaly and define a corrective action plan. An investigatory Russian state commission would conduct a similar review.(Sergi Manstov, Proton FailureArian Re-sets, NASASpaceFlight.com, 1 March 2006; Jefferson Morris, Proton Launch Failure Leaves Arabsat 4A Stranded, Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 2 March 2006.)
NASA launched two meteorological satellites, CloudSat and CALIPSO (Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations), aboard a Boeing Delta 2 rocket, at 11:02 (UT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellites would eventually circle 438 miles (705 kilometers) above Earth in a Sun-synchronous polar orbit. CloudSat, an experimental mission designed to study the effects of clouds on climate and weather, was 1,000 times more sensitive than typical weather radar, using millimeter-wavelength radar to measure the altitude and properties of clouds. CALIPSO carried three instruments to study the role that clouds and atmospheric aerosols (airborne particles) play in regulating Earths weather, climate, and air quality. The two satellites would become part of a constellation of Earth-observing satellites known as the A-train, joining the satellites Aqua, Aura, and PARASOL.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630; NASA, NASA Launches Satellites for Weather, Climate, Air-Quality Studies, news release 06-190, 28 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/apr/HQ_06190_Cloudsat_ CALIPSO_launch.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Jesco von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2006The Year in Review, July 20, 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2006/us.html (accessed 3 March 2010).)
JAXA released the most accurate images yet taken of the Large Magellanic Clouds (LMC), pictures that had the potential to provide important new information about the formation of stars and galaxies. Collectively known as the Magellanic Clouds (MC), the LMC and the Small Magellanic Clouds (SMC) are galaxies that orbit the Milky Way. Because of the slow, active star formation in the two galaxies, astronomers regard them as excellent sites for studying the evolution of galaxies and stars. JAXAs Akari satellite, also known as Astro-F, had captured multiple-wavelength images of the LMC as part of its mission to create images of the entire sky. The Akari images revealed stars forming within dust and gas clouds, numerous older stars outside of those clouds, and a distinct spindle-shaped cluster of stars in one area of the LMC. According to JAXA, the images of stars at different stages of their life cycles would help scientists study stellar evolution.(JAXA, The Quest To Unravel the Mysteries of Galaxy Formation: Infrared Images of the Large Magellanic Cloud, press release, 1 November 2006, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2006/11/20061101_akari_e.html (accessed 27 April 2010).)
NASA launched the Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO) mission from Cape Canaveral in Florida at 00:52 (UT). The STEREO mission consisted of two nearly identical observatories that would orbit the Sun, collecting data that scientists could use to predict the arrival of coronal mass ejections (CMEs) on Earth. CMEs, solar eruptions of matter, can disrupt satellites and power grids on Earth. NASA had designed the two spacecraft to conduct stereographic imaging of the Sun and its emissions, in order to trace the flow of energy and matter from the Sun to Earth. One spacecraft, STEREO-A (Ahead), would orbit the Sun ahead of Earth, while the other, STEREO-B (Behind), would orbit the Sun behind Earth. Scientists would be able to use the observatories three-dimensional images of CMEs to predict with accuracy the arrival times of CMEs on Earth.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636; NASA, STEREO: Studying the Sun in 3-D, 17 February 2010, http://www.nasa. gov/mission_pages/stereo/main/index.html (accessed 2 April 2010).)
NASAs DART (Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology) Mishap Investigation Board (MIB), chaired by NASA engineer Scott D. Croomes, released a summary of its findings and recommendations regarding the DART spacecrafts failure to complete its critical technology mission objectives. The MIB did not make the complete text of the official report public because it contained information protected by U.S. International Traffic in Arms Regulations and Export Administration Regulations. NASA had designed DART, successfully launching it on April 2005, to rendezvous with MUBLCOM (Multiple Paths, Beyond-Line-of- Sight Communications) and to perform maneuvers in proximity to that satellite. However, less than 11 hours into the mission, DART had collided with MUBLCOM. The MIB concluded that an error in the spacecrafts global-positioning receiver had prevented DART from accurately determining its distance and speed in relation to MUBLCOM. Because of the incorrect on-board navigational data regarding its velocity, DART had failed to take effective action to avoid a collision and had responded with repeated excessive thruster firings. Shortly after the collision, the craft had determined that its pressurized nitrogen gas maneuvering fuel was low, and had initiated preprogrammed departure and retirement maneuvers. The MIB also found that a lack of training and experience led the [DART] design team to reject expert advice because of the perceived risks involved in implementing the recommendations. This error had led to inadequate navigation system design and testing. The MIB reported that the DART team could have addressed many of DARTs shortcomings if the team had reviewed and applied the documented data and experience of previous missions.(NASA, NASA Releases Accident Report Summary, media advisory M06-081, 15 May 2006, http://www.nasa. gov//home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_M06081_dart_report.html (accessed 1 October 2009); NASA, Overview of the DART Mishap Investigation Results, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/148072main_DART_mishap_overview.pdf (accessed 1 October 2009); Tariq Malik, NASA Releases Summary of DART Mission Mishap, Space.com, 16 May 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060515_dart_mishap_summary.html (accessed 24 June 2010; Space Daily, Lots of Little Errors Caused DART Spacecraft Mishap, 17 May 2006.)
Scientists reported that the ozone outside of Earths polar regions had begun recovering in 1997. This finding provided evidentiary support for international efforts to limit ozone-depleting substances. Researchers led by Eun-Su Yang of the Georgia Institute of Technology had examined ozone data that NASA satellites and other instruments had collected over a 25-year period. They had discovered that ozone in Earths stratospherethe layer of atmosphere from 11 to 50 kilometers (6 to 31 miles) above Earths surfacehad declined in thickness from 1979 to 1997 and then had ceased depleting. The results confirmed that the 1987 Montreal Protocolan international treaty banning the production of ozone-depleting substanceshad helped stop the loss of ozone, especially in the part of the stratosphere 18 kilometers (11.2 miles) above the surface of Earth. That stratospheric region contains the greatest concentrations of the chemicals banned by the treaty. The researchers also found substantial improvement of ozone in the stratospheric region below 18 kilometers (11.2 miles); they hypothesized that this alteration could be the result of changes in atmospheric winds.(NASA, NASA, NOAA Data Indicate Ozone Layer Is Recovering, news release 06-300, 30 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06300_Ozone.html (accessed 15 March 2010); Eun-Su Yang et al.,)
NASAs CloudSat meteorological satellite, which had launched on 28 April 2006, began sending early images, indicating that the satellite was observing all types of major cloud systems. CloudSat carried a millimeter wavelength radar called the Cloud-Profiling Radar, a type of radar never used before. Scientists had concluded that the new radar was penetrating through all but the heaviest rainfall. According to CloudSat Deputy Principal Investigator at JPL Deborah Vane, scientists were no longer looking at clouds like images on a flat piece of paper, but instead [were] peering into clouds and seeing their layered complexity. CloudSats radar had enabled scientists to observe for the first time clouds and snowstorms over the Antarctic, as well as providing new views of sloping, frontal clouds and thunderstorms over Africa, both as individual storms and as part of larger tropical storm systems.(NASA, First Images from NASAs CloudSat Have Scientists Sky High, news release 06-234, 6 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_06234_CloudSat_First_Light.html (accessed 22 February 2010).)
Using data collected by NASAs Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) satellite, scientists announced the discovery of new evidence supporting the concept known as inflation. Proposed 25 years before WMAP, inflation theory attempted to explain the distribution of matter and energy in the Big Bang, the theoretical beginning of the universe. Inflation theory posits that, at the outset of the Big Bang, approximately 13.7 billion years ago, the universe underwent a rapid expansion. According to WMAP researcher David N. Spergel, during this growth spurt, a tiny region, likely no larger than a marble, grew in a trillionth of a second to become larger than the visible universe. The rapid inflationary expansion converted quantum fluctuationsshort- lived bursts of energy at the subatomic levelinto fluctuations of matter that ultimately enabled the formation of stars and galaxies. WMAP, first launched in 2001, was providing observations of the cosmic microwave background (CMB), the afterglow light produced when the universe was less than a million years old. The first WMAP data, released in 2003, had focused on the temperature variations of this light, providing an accurate age of the universe and insights into its geometry and composition. The new WMAP observations provided not only a more detailed temperature map, but also the first full-sky map of the polarization (the way light is changed by the environment through which it passes) of the CMB.(NASA, NASA Satellite Glimpses Universes First Trillionth of a Second, news release 06-097, 16 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06097_first_trillionth_WMAP.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Ker Than, Astronomers Detect First Split-Second of the Universe, Space.com, 16 March 2006, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/060316_wmap_results.html (accessed 12 July 2010); Dennis Overbye, Astronomers Find the Earliest Signs Yet of a Violent Baby Universe, New York Times, 17 March 2006.)
The Russian space agency Roskosmos announced its plans to launch dozens of spacecraft between 2006 and 2015, including probes to conduct atmospheric and surface studies of Mars and Venus. Roskosmos also intended to launch 30 fixed communications-and-broadcasting satellites and 10 satellites to provide mobile communications services. In addition, Roskosmos planned to create a pair of geostationary satellites that would provide meteorological services, part of a satellite network under the auspices of the World Meteorological Organization.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), Russia Plans Space Probes To Explore Mars, Venus, 30 August 2006.)
NASA announced plans to decommission the oceanography satellite known as the Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation, or Topex/Poseidon, a joint mission between NASA and Frances space agency, Centre National dEtudes Spatial (CNES). Mission managers had decided to end the spacecrafts 13-year, 62,000-orbit mission, following the failure in October 2005 of its pitch-reaction wheel, which maintained the satellites orientation. According to Lee- Lueng Fu, Project Scientist at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), the satellite had allowed scientists to compare models of ocean circulation with global observations and to improve climate predi os. Topex had also enabled the mapping of the elevation of the oceans surface. Fu noted that, although Topex/Poseidon was built to fly up to five years . . . it became historys longest Earth-orbiting radar mission.(John Antczak for Associated Press, U.S.-French Oceanography Satellite Decommissioned After 13 Years, 6 January 2006; Ayinde O. Chase, NASA Satellite Ceases To Operate, All Headline News, 6 January 2006; CBC News (Canada), Ocean Satellite Ends 13-Year Mission, 6 January 2006.)
A team of scientists, led by Eric J. Rignot of NASAs JPL and Pannir Kanagaratnam of the University of Kansas Center for Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets, reported in the journal Science that, in the last 10 years, Greenlands glaciers had doubled the rate at which they were losing ice into the Atlantic Ocean, from 96 cubic kilometers (23 cubic miles) per year in 1996, to 220 cubic kilometers (53 cubic miles) in 2005. Using interferometric synthetic-aperture radar data that Canadian Space Agencys (CSAs) Radarsat-1 and ESAs Envisat Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar and Earth Remote Sensing Satellites 1 and 2 had collected between 2000 and 2005, the researchers calculated the volume of ice breaking off the edges of the glaciers and falling into the ocean. They attributed the change in glacial ice flow to an increase in global temperature, suggesting that the resulting melting water was making the undersides of the glaciers more slippery and accelerating the pace at which the glacial ice was sliding into the ocean. This study represented the most comprehensive data on glacial ice flow to date. Researchers noted that, based on this research, scientists might need to revise previous computer models predicting the rate of ocean-level increase.(Andrew Bridges, Greenland Glaciers Dumping More Ice, Washington Post, 17 February 2006; NASA Greenland Ice-Loss Doubles in Past Decade, Raising Sea Levels Faster, press release 06-066, 16 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06066_Greenland_ice_melting_ corrected.html (accessed 2 September 2010); see also Eric Rignot and Pannir Kanagaratnam, Changes in the Velocity Structure of the Greenland Ice Sheet, Science 311, no. 5763 (17 February 2006): 98690.)
NASA launched the first three microsatellites in the Space Technology 5 (ST 5) mission, aboard a Pegasus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, at 9:04 a.m. (EST). The ST 5 mission was part of NASAs New Millennium Program, created to identify, develop, build, and test innovative technologies and concepts for use in future missions. NASA launched the three satellites to a near-Earth polar elliptical orbit that would enable them to travel from approximately 300 kilometers (190 miles) to approximately 4,500 kilometers (2,800 miles) above Earth. Once in orbit, the satellites would form a row, with each satellite approximately 40 to 200 kilometers (25 to 125 miles) away from the others. Miniature boom-mounted magnetometers on each satellite would collect data enabling coordinated multi-point measurements of Earths magnetic field. This type of measurement would be useful in future missions studying the effect of solar activity on Earths magnetosphere, the bubble that protects Earth from harmful space radiation. The satellites would remain operational for approximately 90 days.(NASA, NASAs Space Technology 5 Satellites Soar into Space, news release 06-104, 22 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06104_ST5_Successful_Launch.html (accessed 14 September 2009); NASA, Space Technology 5: Mission Overview, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/st-5/main/index. html (accessed 4 January 2010).)
NASA announced the appointment of retired U.S. Air Force Brigadier General Simon P. Pete Worden as Director of NASAs ARC in California. Worden, a research professor of astronomy at the University of Arizona, Tucson, had served as Director and Deputy Director at the U.S. Air Force Space Command and had specialized in advanced satellite and launch concepts. He had also served as second deputy for technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, where he had received NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal for directing the 1994 Clementine lunar probe mission.(NASA, NASA Names Worden New Ames Director, news release 06-193, http://www.nasa.govhome/hqnews/ 2006/apr/HQ_06193_Worden_named_director.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Warren Ferster, Worden Named Director of NASA Ames, Space.com, 21 April 2006.)
NASA announced that its Imager for Magnetopause-to-Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) satellite had ceased operations after a successful six-year mission. IMAGE had enabled researchers to study the global structure and dynamics of Earths inner magnetosphere (the area of space around Earth that is controlled by Earths magnetic field), as it responded to energy from solar winds. According to Barbara L. Giles, IMAGE Program Scientist at NASA Headquarters, The IMAGE mission showed us space around the Earth is anything but empty, and that plasma clouds can be imaged and tracked just as we do from space for Earths surface weather. The satellite had launched on 25 March 2000 and had provided data until December 2005, when its power supply subsystems had failed.(NASA, Magnetospheres, http://nasascience.nasa.gov/heliophysics/magnetosphere-ionosphere (accessed 7 December 2009); NASA, NASA Magnetic Field Mission Ends, news release 06-030, 20 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06030_IMAGE_quits.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
An Atlas 5 rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 4:27 p.m. (EDT), carrying the 4.3- tonne (4,300-kilogram or 4.74-ton) geostationary Astra 1KR telecommunications satellite. Lockheed Martin had designed and built the satellite for Luxembourg-based SES ASTRA. International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Center in Moscow, had marketed the mission. Once the satellite had achieved its final orbital slot over the equator at 19.2 east longitude, its 32 Ku-band transponders would transmit analog, radio, and digital television signals, as well as Internet and multimedia services throughout Europe.(United Press International, ASTRA Satellite Ready for Thursday Launch, 20 April 2006; Justin Ray, Atlas 5 Rocket Launches TV Broadcasting Craft for Europe, Spaceflight Now, 20 April 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630, 1 May 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx630.html (accessed 1 March 2010).)
that climate warming was affecting Earths largest storehouse of ice and snow. Results of studies measuring the ice sheets covering Greenland and Antarctica indicated that Greenlands ice sheets had experienced a net loss between 1992 and 2002a reduction equivalent to 20 billion tons (18.14 tonnes or 18,143 kilograms) of wateralong with a corresponding rise in sea level. The researchers had used a new satellite map showing the height of Greenlands ice sheets, based on data that two ESA satellites had captured. They had compared it with NASAs previous map of the edges of the ice sheets to determine the rate at which the thickness of the ice was diminishing. The survey documented for the first time the extensive thinning of the West Antarctic ice shelves, the increase in snowfall in the interior of Greenland, and the thinning at the edges of the ice shelves. Zwally remarked, the contribution of ice sheets to recent sea-level rise during the decade studied was much smaller than expected, just 2 percent of the recent increase of nearly 3 millimeters a year. NASA would continue to monitor the polar ice sheets using data from the Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite (ICESat), which had launched in 2003.(NASA, NASA Survey Confirms Climate Warming Impact on Polar Ice Sheets, news release 06-089, 8 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06089_polar_ice_sheets_melting.html (accessed 14 September 2009); see also H. Jay Zwally et al., Mass Changes of the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets and Shelves and Contributions to Sea-level Rise: 19922002, Journal of Glaciology 51, no. 175 (December 2005): 509527.)
79Juliet Eilperin, Study Confirms Past Few Decades Warmest on Record, Washington Post, 23 June 2006; National Academies Office of News and Public Information,  High Confidence That Planet Is Warmest in 400 Years; Less Confidence in Temperature Reconstructions Prior to 1600, press release, 22 June 2006, http://www8. nationalacademies.org/onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=11676 (accessed 9 August 2010); Andrew C. Revkin, Panel Supports a Controversial Report on Global Warming, New York Times, 23 June 2006; see also National Research Council Committee, Surface Temperature Reconstructions for the Last 2,000 Years (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), http://www.nap.edu/catalog/11676.html (accessed 1 October 2010). over the next few months to assess the satellites performance. The mission also demonstrated an innovative communications technology that used miniature spacecraft-radio transponders, coupled with antennas, for space-to-ground communications and tracking.(NASA, NASAs Micro-Satellites Complete Technology Validation Mission, news release 06-254, 29 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_06254_microsatellites.html (accessed 22 February 2010).)
Scientists using data from NASAs Swift satellite published research on a newly discovered type of gamma-ray burst (GRB), designated GRB 060614. GRBs, which result from the collapse of stars, are the most powerful explosions in the universe. NASA had launched Swift in November 2004 to study this phenomenon. The satellite had been the first to observe a curious new type of GRB, which exhibited properties of the two known types of GRBslong- or short-duration GRBs. Long GRBs often last two seconds or longer, whereas short GRBs typically last less than two seconds. The 102-second duration of the newly observed GRB resembled long GRBs. However, the explosion lacked the telltale supernova that follows long GRBs and had the luminosity and radiation characteristic of short GRBs. Scientists remained uncertain whether the newly discovered GRB was a variation of the two known GRB types or an entirely different category of GRB.(Bing Zhang, Astrophysics: A Burst of New Ideas, Nature 444, no. 7122 (21 December 2006): 10101011, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v444/n7122/full/4441010a.html (DOI 1189735951; accessed 6 July 2010); NASA, Swift: Mission Update, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/swift/ launch/index.html (accessed 6 July 2010).)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Minotaur rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 9:40 p.m. (EDT), carrying six Taiwanese-American weather microsatellites. The launch of the weather satellites was part of a US$100 million mission known in the United States as COSMIC (Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, and Climate) and as FORMOSAT 3 in Taiwan. Taiwans National Science Council and National Space Organization had provided primary funding for the project, with contributions from the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and its partners, including NASA. After an initial orbit approximately 300 miles (500 kilometers) above Earth, the satellites would achieve their final circular orbits 13 months later, orbiting between 435 and 500 miles (700 and 800 kilometers) above Earth. The principal instrument on each of the 155-pound (62-kilogram) satellites would be a GPS receiver, originally developed by NASAs JPL. Working together with other on-board instruments, GPS antennas would track the extent to which the GPS signals bend when they pass through (are occulted by) the Earths atmosphere. Measuring the degree to which the signals bend would enable scientists to evaluate atmospheric conditions, such as air density, temperature, moisture, and electron density. According to Jay S. Fein, Program Director in the NSFs Division of Atmospheric Sciences, the satellites would obtain new information that would have a tremendous impact on geosciences research and weather prediction, and would be an important contribution to global Earth observations.(Leonard David, COSMIC Constellation To Study Atmosphere, MSNBC.com, 14 April 2006; Tariq Malik, Minotaur Rocket Orbits COSMIC Constellation To Scan Earths Atmosphere, Space.com, 14 April 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060414_ cosmic_mino_ launch.html (accessed 24 June 2010); Justin Ray, Mission Status Center, Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2006.)
A team of scientists, led by Harold A. Weaver Jr. of Johns Hopkins University, S. Alan Stern of the Southwest Research Institute, and Richard P. Binzel of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, reported in Nature their discovery of two small satellites orbiting Pluto. The team had sighted the moons, which had diameters of an estimated 60 kilometers (37 miles) and 50 kilometers (31 miles), respectively, in May 2005, using the HST. Both small moons circle on the same orbital plane as Plutos large moon Charon. In addition, the durations of all three bodies orbital rotations are simple ratios of one another. These facts led scientists to conclude that the same collision event created all three moons. Furthermore, the evidence raised the possibility that the distant Kuiper Belt, which includes Pluto, could contain other multiple-body systems. The researchers also speculated that debris from impacts in the Pluto system could have formed rings or arcs around Pluto. Thus far, scientists have only documented ring systems around gas giant planets, such as Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.(Ker Than, Pluto Might Have Rings, Space.com 22 February 2006, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/ 060222_pluto_moons.html (accessed 8 September 2010); see also H.A. Weaver et al., Discovery of Two New Satellites of Pluto, Nature 439, no. 7079 (23 February 2006): 943945; S. A. Stern et al., A Giant Impact Origin for Plutos Small Moons and Satellite Multiplicity in the Kuiper Belt, Nature 439, no. 7079 (23 February 2006): 946948; and Richard P. Binzel, Planetary Science: Plutos Expanding Brood, Nature 439, no.7079 (23 February 2006): 924-925.)
Isabella Velicogna and John Wahr, scientists at the University of Colorado, Boulder, who had conducted the first-ever gravity survey of the entire Antarctic ice sheet, reported their findings in the journal Science. Using data from two of NASAs GRACE (Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment) satellites, Velicogna and Wahr had determined that the ice sheets mass had decreased significantly between April 2002 and August 2005by 152 cubic kilometers (36 cubic miles) of ice annually, plus or minus 80. The scientists had concluded that the Antarctic melting, an indicator of climate change, was causing the global sea level to rise 0.4 millimeters (0.16 inches) per year. The twin GRACE satellites, which orbit Earth more than a dozen times each day at an altitude of 310 miles (498.9 kilometers), measure variations in Earths mass and gravitational pull. Increases or decreases in the Antarctic ice sheets mass alter the distance between the satellites as they fly in formation.(Juliet Eilperin, Antarctic Ice Sheet Is Melting Rapidly, Washington Post, 3 March 2006; NASA, NASA Mission Detects Significant Antarctic Ice Mass Loss, news release 06-085, 2 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06085_arctic_ice.html (accessed 14 September 2009); see also Isabella Velicogna and John Wahr, Measurements of Time-Variable Gravity Show Mass Loss in Antarctica, Science 311, no. 5768 (24 March 2006): 17541756.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and Rocket System Corporation (RSC) launched the Multi-Functional Transport Satellite 2 (MTSAT-2) from the Tanegashima Space Center at 06:55 (UT) aboard an H2-A rocket. The Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency jointly owned the 1,250-kilogram (2,756-pound) geostationary weather satellite, which carried an imaging telescope with detectors for five wavelength channels: visible band, micron infrared (IR1), micron (IR2), micron water vapor (IR3), and micron near infrared. After coming to rest over 145o east longitude, the satellite would commence its mission to capture data and images that scientists could use to determine weather patterns, and to relay that information to the Japanese Meteorological Agency.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 628, 1 March 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx628.html (accessed 17 August 2010); JAXA, Launch Result of the Multi-functional Transport Satellite 2 (MTSAT-2) by the H-IIA Launch Vehicle No. 9 (H-IIA F9), press release, 18 February 2006, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2006/02/20060218_ h2a-f9_e.html (accessed 17 August 2010).)
The French-Russian company Starsem launched COROT on a Soyuz-2 rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 14:23 (UT). CNES had designed the satellite to conduct seismological analyses of stars, gathering data that would enable scientists to determine their age, composition, and internal structure. In addition, CNES had designed COROT to detect
ESA and the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) launched the Meteorological Operational Satellite A (MetOP-A), Europes first polar-orbiting weather satellite. MetOP-A, which represented a major advance in meteorological capabilities, launched on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 16:28 (UT). Engineers had designed MetOP-A to quickly provide data of unprecedented accuracy and resolution, covering weather and climate variables ranging from temperature to concentrations of ozone gas. The satellite was the first of three scheduled for launch over the next 14 years. Collectively, the three satellites would ultimately form the space-based portion of EUMETSATs Polar System (EPS). Polar-orbiting satellites were capable of highly detailed Earth observation, because they orbited at relatively low altitudesoften at altitudes of 800 kilometers (nearly 500 miles), as opposed to the 36,000-kilometer-altitude (approximately 22,400-mile-altitude) orbits of many geostationary satellites. The EPS was Europes contribution to a cooperative venture with NOAA, which had provided users worldwide with meteorological data from polar orbit for nearly four decades. In addition, NOAA and Frances CNES had provided five of MetOP-As 10 instruments.(ESA, MetOP at a Glance: Overview, 16 November 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaLP/ SEMN1FAATME_ LPmetop_0.html (accessed 2 April 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636, 1 November 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa. gov/spacewarn/spx636.html (accessed 2 April 2010).)
After months of delays due to various technical difficulties, the Geostationary Operational Environmental SatelliteN (GOES-N) launched successfully aboard a Boeing Delta-4 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:11 p.m. (EDT). GOES-N, which would be renamed GOES- 13 after completing its destination orbit, was the latest in a series of Earth-monitoring satellites that provided the kind of continuous monitoring necessary for intensive data analysis. GOES satellites circled the Earth in a geosynchronous orbitthey orbited the equatorial plane of the Earth at a speed equal to the Earths rotationallowing GOES satellites to hover continuously over one position on the Earths surface and to appear stationary. GOES satellites remained constantly vigilant for atmospheric triggers of severe weather conditions, such as tornadoes, flash floods, hailstorms, and hurricanes. GOES-N would carry enhanced imaging and sounding instruments, enabling meteorologists to pinpoint the location of severe weather within 1.5 kilometers (0.9 miles), as well as a solar imager designed to detect and precisely to locate solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) soon after their occurrence. After reaching its geosynchronous orbit of 22,300 miles (35,888 kilometers), GOES-N would enter on-orbit 65 storage mode, so that it could rapidly replace any existing GOES satellite, in case of failure.
The House Committee on Science held a hearing to address the results of the statutorily mandated Nunn-McCurdy review of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS). NOAA, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) jointly managed NPOESS, which would provide data and imagery to help weather forecasters, climatologists, and the military map and monitor changes in weather, climate, the oceans, and the environment. The Nunn-McCurdy amendment to the Defense Authorization Act of 1983 (10 U.S.C. 2433) provided that Congress must review any DOD-funded program that was more than 25 percent over budget, to determine whether and in what manner it should continue. In January 2006, the Secretary of the Air Force had notified Congress that the NPOESS program would exceed the 25 percent Nunn-McCurdy threshold. The three NPOESS managing agencies had reviewed the program and determined that it should continue. However, NPOESS must reduce the number of its satellites from six to four and eliminate five sensors, including three for climate research. The agencies would postpone the first NPOESS satellite launch until 2013 and discontinue work on the key weather sensor known as Conically Scanning Microwave Image/Sounder (CMIS). The United States would temporarily rely on Europe for the data that CMIS would have collected, including ocean wind speeds. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified regarding NASAs compliance with the mandates of the Nunn-McCurdy recertified NPOESS program, emphasizing that NASA would continue to provide cost-effective technologies for two key components of this programthe NPOESS Preparatory Project (NPP) and the continuity of long-term climate measurements.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NPOESS: Results of the Nunn-McCurdy Review of NOAAs Weather Satellite Program, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 June 2006, 36, 2225, http://www.gpo.gov/ fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG- 109hhrg27970&packageId=CHRG-109hhrg27970&fromBrowse=true (accessed 20 December 2010); NOAA, Center for Satellite Applications and Research (STAR), STAR Acronyms, http://www.star.nesdis.noaa.gov/star/ acronyms.php (accessed 5 October 2010).)
CNSA launched the Sino Satellite Communications Companys (SinoSats) satellite on a Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center at 16:20 (UT). The communications satellite, SinoSat-2, represented a major technological advance for the Chinese space program. The domestically developed satellite, capable of providing both analog and digital television broadcasts, was Chinas first satellite based on the Direct-From-Home-4 system, or DFH-4 bus. The DFU-4 bus enables individual households to receive television signals using their own satellite-dish antennas. SinoSat hoped that the satellite would improve the capacity and reliability of Chinese television broadcasting and help China serve the international spaceflight market. In addition, CNSA officials stated that the satellites technology could prompt the Chinese government to eliminate regulations prohibiting Chinese citizens from installing their own satellite-dish antennas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636; Xinhua News Agency, 5th Ld-Writethru-China Exclusive: China Launches High- Power Communications, Broadcast Satellite, 29 October 2006.)
JAXA announced that it had successfully launched its ASTRO-F infrared astronomical satellite after a one-day weather delay. The 952-kilogram (2,099-pound) satellite blasted off from Uchinoura Space Center on an M-5 booster at 21:28 (UT). ASTRO-F carried a 67-centimeter- aperture (26-inch-aperture) infrared telescope, a Far-Infrared Surveyor, and the Infrared Camera. Its mission was to survey all the galaxies for infrared luminance indicating newly forming planets, stars, and protogalaxies, and to collect data on the structure, mass, and composition of new stars. This information would help scientists understand the formation process of stars, planetary systems, and galaxies. Part of a joint mission of JAXA, ESA, and Korean researchers, ASTRO-F was built to survey the cosmos at higher resolutions and with higher sensitivity than the worlds first infrared satellite, the Infrared Astronomy Satellite, which had launched in 1983.(JAXA, Infrared Imaging Satellite AKARI (ASTRO-F), http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/astro_f/index_e.html (accessed 14 September 2010); Tariq Malik, Japan Launches New Observatory for Infrared Sky Survey, Space.com, 21 February 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060221_jaxa_astrof_lnch.html (accessed 14 September 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 628, 1 March 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx628.html (accessed 22 September 2010).)
The United States and the Russian Federation signed an Agreement on Technology Safeguards Associated with the Activities under the Sea Launch Project. The Sea Launch Project, a Boeing- led consortium, comprising companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway, was using Russian Zenit carrier rockets to provide commercial launch services for U.S. and foreign satellite payloads from a launch platform in the international waters of the Pacific Ocean. The program, which had begun in 1999, had completed 19 launches. The U.S. Department of State, acting as signatory, stated, Conclusion of this agreement highlights our ongoing bilateral partnership in this successful commercial endeavor and will facilitate Russian participation. It also increases the potential for enhanced Russian participation and cooperation more generally in the sphere of commercial use of outer space for peaceful purposes.(RIA Novosti, Russia, U.S. Sign Technology Agreement Under Satellite Project, 22 March 2006; U.S. Department of State, Launch TSA Signed on March 21, 2006, media note 289-2006, 21 March 2006, http://2001- 2009.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2006/63459.htm (accessed 20 April 2010).)
An Ariane-5ECA rocket launched the British Defense Ministrys 4.7-tonne (5.2-ton) Skynet-5A satellite and ISROs 3.1-tonne (3.4-ton) Insat-4B civil-communications satellite from Kourou, French Guiana. The Skynet 5A was part of a system designed to deliver secure, high-bandwidth communications for British armed forces, NATO, and other allied forces. Skynet had ultrahighfrequency and super-high-frequency communications instruments, a secure payload-control system, antijamming capabilities, and multiple spot beams. Insat 4B carried 12 Ku-band transponders to reach homes and businesses throughout India, as well as 12 C-band transponders to serve users living in an area stretching from the Middle East to Southeast Asia. Insat 4B was the second Insat-4 craft to reach orbit successfully. Insat 4A had successfully launched in 2005, but Insat 4Cs launch vehicle had exploded in July 2006, destroying the satellite.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641; Stephen Clark, British and Indian Satellites Fly to Space on Ariane 5, Spaceflight Now, 11 March 2007, http://spaceflightnow.com/ariane/v175/ (accessed 9 June 2010 ); Jonathan Amos, British Skynet Satellite Launched, BBC News, 12 March 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6434773.stm (accessed 9 June 2010).)
The Peoples Republic of China released the first image of the Moon that its Change-1 lunar probe had captured, marking the formal start of Chinas mission to document the lunar landscape. China unveiled the image at a ceremony at the Beijing Aerospace Control Center. Chinas Premier Wen Jiabao described the event as a major step in his peoples 1,000-year-old dream of exploring the Moon. Change 1 had become Chinas first circumlunar satellite on 5 November when it successfully entered the Moons orbit.(Associated Press, China Shows First Image from Lunar Probe, 26 November 2007; Xinhua News Agency, Chinas First Lunar Probe Enters Moons Orbit, 5 November 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Qall CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)were technology demonstrators, including twoCalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSatCAPE 1with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
Yuzhnoye, the Ukrainian rocket-construction bureau and a member of the Sea Launch consortium, released its findings on the failed 30 January 2007 launch of the Zenit-3SL rocket. Yuzhnoye stated that a stray metal fragment had entered a pump in the rockets engine, causing the Zenit-3SL to explode during its attempt to launch a Boeing-built commercial communications satellite for the Netherlands-based SES New Skies. Representatives of the Ukrainian and Russian developers of the Zenit-3SL rocket had comprised the commission that investigated the launch failure.(Associated Press, Company: Metal Fragment Doomed Rocket, 14 March 2007; RIA Novosti, Sea Launch Explosion Due To Engine Failure, 14 March 2007.)
ESA launched the sixth Ariane-5 rocket of 2007 from Kourou, French Guiana, setting a record for the agency. The Ariane 5 lifted into orbit the Horizons-2 telecommunications satellite, a joint U.S.-Japanese venture. The rocket also carried the RASCOM-QAF1 satellite, which would offer telephone and Internet service throughout Africa. Horizons 2, the second satellite for the U.S.- based Intelsat and the Japan-based JSAT, would replace Intelsats SBS-6 spacecraft, which had been in orbit for 17 years. With 20 Ku-band transponders, the 2,304-kilogram (5079.5-pound) Horizons 2 would provide telecommunications services for 1517 years to the continental United States, the Caribbean, and parts of Canada. After 10 years struggle to organize an ownership structure, Regional African Satellite Communications Organization (RASCOM) had secured US$370 million in funding from a consortium, comprising a Libyan investment fund, the Libyan General Post and Telecommunications Company, and three African development banks. The consortium intended for its satellite, the Rascom-QAF1, to provide a first step toward 188 establishing the space infrastructure necessary to link poor rural Africans with urban areas.
it with wire ties, leaving 6 inches (15 centimeters) of clearance, a distance adequate for undocking. Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin also photographed a Russian satellite navigation antenna, changed out a Russian materials experiment, photographed a German robotics experiment, and inspected and photographed an antenna and the docking targets for the European cargo craft, the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV). The ATV, designed with greater capacity than the Russian Progress craft, had not yet made its first trip to the ISS.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report: SS07-10, 22 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0710_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) launched two ocean-surveillance spacecraft from Cape Canaveral aboard an Atlas-5 Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), marking the rockets first NRO secret mission. The NRO had designed the two craft to track ships that might be concealing al-Qaeda operatives and to monitor Iranian and Chinese sea-based military operations. However, the rocket had stopped firing prematurely, causing the craft to launch into the wrong orbit. Although the satellites separated safely from the malfunctioning booster, they did not have enough rocket propellant to reach the correct orbit. Lockheed Martin had built the Atlas 5 using a Lockheed Martin Centaur upper stage, with a Pratt & Whitney RL10 rocket engine powered with liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. United Launch Alliance, which operated the Atlas program, managed the launch in conjunction with NRO and the U.S. Air Forces 45th Space Wing.(Craig Covault, NRO Spacecraft in Wrong Orbit, Aviation Week, 16 June 2007, http://www.aviationweek.com/ aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/mission06157.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
JAXA officials announced that, after project engineers had successfully put the probe through a series of maneuvers, Japans lunar satellite, SELENE, had reached orbit, marking the first time Japan had placed a satellite in orbit around the Moon. According to the mission plan, SELENE would place its main orbiter Kayuga in an orbit approximately 60 miles (96.6 kilometers) from the Moon and would then deploy two smaller satellites in polar orbits. The project constituted a key advance for Japan, which had launched its first satellite in 1972 but, since that time, had struggled to keep up with the Peoples Republic of China. Japan had launched SELENE on 14 September, following a four-year delay of the mission.(Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, Japans SELENE Probe Reaches Lunar Orbit, 5 October 2007.)
On the 50th anniversary of the launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik, publisher Harry N. Abrams released America in Space, a photographic record of the history of space exploration, documenting NASAs achievements in aeronautics, science and technology, and human spaceflight. Published in cooperation with NASA, the book contained 500 color and black-and- white photographs, including many previously unpublished photographs, selected from NASAs archives. Heralding the space age, the launch of Sputnik led to the creation of NASA one year later.(NASA, New Book Chronicles NASAs First 50 Years, news release 07-210, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07210_NASA_book.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Jeremy Hsu, NASA Book Commemorates 50 Years of Spaceflight, Space.com, 5 October 2007, http://www.space.com/entertainment/ 071004-nasabook-anniversary.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
The Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) successfully launched four spacecraft aboard its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C7 (PSLV-C7), from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre at 9:24 a.m. (IST). The PSLV-C7 carried the 680-kilogram (1,500-pound) Cartosat-2, an Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellite; ISROs 550-kilogram (1,213-pound) SRE-1 (Space Capsule Recovery Experiment-1); the Indonesian microsatellite Lapan-Tubsat; and the 6-kilogram (13-pound) PehuenSat-1, an Argentinean nanosatellite. Cartosat-2, designed to provide scene-specific spot imagery, joined six IRS satellites already in service. ISRO planned to keep SRE-1 in orbit for 11 days before testing its reentry technology. While in orbit, the craft would conduct microgravity experiments. Lapan-Tubsat, the first Indonesian-built satellite, was a technology-demonstrator craft carrying two color cameras. The University of Comahue of Argentina, the Amateur
NASA launched its Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) mission from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 6:01 p.m. (EST), marking the first time NASA had launched a five-satellite constellation aboard a single rocket. NASA had designed the mission to uncover the catalyst of geomagnetic substorms, the atmospheric events visible in the Northern Hemisphere as a sudden brightening of the aurora borealis. Scientists hoped that the missions findings would help protect humans and commercial satellites in space from the effects of particle radiation. NASA had planned the mission to last two years, during which time the five identical satellites would collect data, attempting to achieve what no previous single-satellite mission had been able to doto pinpoint when and where substorms begin.(NASA, NASAs THEMIS Mission Launches To Study Geomagnetic Substorms, news release 07-47, 17 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0747_THEMIS_Postlaunch.html (accessed 14 October 2007).)
NASAs Science Mission Directorate awarded a US$9.3 million contract to Dartmouth College of Hanover, New Hampshire, to conduct a project using more than 40 high-altitude balloons to capture data about Earths Van Allen Belts. The Balloon Array for Radiation-belt Relativistic Electron Losses (BARREL) would fly in 2013 or 2014 in conjunction with NASAs Radiation Belt Storm Probes satellites, scheduled to launch in 2011. Under the terms of the contract, the missions Principal Investigator Robyn M. Millan and her team would conduct test flights of the balloons and their instrumentation. In 2013 the team would launch 20 balloons from South African and British research stations in Antarctica, at a rate of one per day. Each balloon, separated by approximately 620 miles (998 kilometers) and carried by winds, would float at an altitude of approximately 21 miles (34 kilometers) for as long as two weeks, forming a ring encircling the South Pole. In the first experiment of its kind working in tandem with a satellite mission, the balloons would use sensors to measure the influx of radiation from the Van Allen Belts into Earths atmosphere. Millan and her team would repeat the procedure with 20 more balloons the following year.(NASA, NASA To Use Balloon Flotilla To Study Radiation That Affects Earth, news release 07-265, 5 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07265_Balloons_and_Van_Allen_ Belts.html (accessed 20 October 2007); Kristen Senz, Dartmouth Professor Gets $9.3 Million NASA Grant, Manchester Union Leader (NH), 14 December 2007.)
The Peoples Republic of China launched NIGCOMSAT-1a communications satellite that China had manufactured for Nigeriaaboard a Long March-3B rocket from Xichang Launch Center in Sichuan Province. The launch marked the first time that China had built and launched a satellite under a contract with another country. China had reportedly secured the US$311 million contract in 2004, in a bidding process that had included 21 companies, in addition to China. The 5.2-tonne (5.7-ton) craft carried four C-band, eighteen Ku-band, four Ka-band, and two L-band transponders, for providing voice, video, and data links to all of Africa, southern Europe, and parts of the Middle East. News reports described the launch as a symbol of Chinas broad network of economic relations with African nations, suggesting that the launch signaled Chinas wish to cooperate with developing countries in the peaceful use of outer space. Nigerian officials hailed the launch as a breakthrough that signaled the end of the nations exclusive reliance on oil. Hammed Rufai, Managing Director of the NIGCOMSAT-1 project for Nigeria, remarked that the satellite would help Nigeria develop knowledge-based industries.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643; Edward Cody, China Builds and Launches a Satellite for Nigeria, Washington Post, 14 May 2007.)
Orbital Express successfully captured the ASTRO servicing satellite, and its client spacecraft NextSat, after the two spacecraft had flown apart for nearly eight days. ASTROs primary sensor flight computer AC-2 had failed during a test on 11 May, causing the craft to lose its relative navigation. During the test, the pair of craft had undocked and separated as planned, moving apart to a distance of 10 meters (33 feet). After the failure of its AC-2 computer, ASTRO had behaved according to the protocol of its programmed fault-protection software, flying 120 meters (394 feet) away from NextSat to avoid inadvertently colliding with the satellite. However, thereafter, ASTRO had drifted approximately 6 kilometers (3.7 miles) away from NextSat, requiring ground observers intervention to help the two craft remate successfully. DARPA planned to conduct a technical review of ASTROs sensor- and navigation-performance lessons and to conduct an investigation into the cause of the AC-2s failure. The technical review would assist DARPA in planning the remaining set of Orbital Express demonstration activities, scheduled for the following weeks.(U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Orbital Express Spacecraft Successfully Rendezvous, Remate, news release, 21 May 2007, http://www.darpa.mil/news/2007/oe_remate.pdf (accessed 6 April 2010); Kelly Young, Estranged Satellite Pair Reunited at Last, New Scientist, 21 May 2007; Stephen Clark, Computer Problem Interrupts Satellite Servicing Demo, Spaceflight Now, 15 May 2007.)
The U.S. Air Force granted SpaceX a five-year license to launch satellites from Space Launch Complex 40 (SLC 40) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Commander of the U.S. Air Force Space Command Kevin P. Chilton remarked that such agreements encourage entrepreneurial space achievement, which could benefit DOD and the commercial space industry. Under the agreement, SpaceX would pay for all improvements, construction, and maintenance related to operations at the site. Before receiving the license, SpaceX had operated from a launch complex on Omelek Island, in the Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. Elon Musk of SpaceX highlighted the importance of access to the Cape Canaveral launch complex, stating that SLC 40 was the only launchpad capable of supporting activities involving SpaceXs Falcon 9 Heavy. The license allowed the government to retain the right to let other competitors share use of the launch site.(Associated Press, Air Force OKs License for SpaceX, 27 April 2007; Brian Berger, U.S. Air Force Licenses SpaceX To Launch from Cape Canaveral, Space.com, 26 April 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070426_spacex_ capecanaveral.html (accessed 9 June 2010).)
The Peoples Republic of China ended its silence regarding a reported test of antisatellite technology, confirming that, on 11 January, China had fired a guided missile into space to destroy one of its own weather satellites. U.S. monitors had detected the test shot, and observers in the United States had protested, based on concerns that U.S. military satellites might be vulnerable to attack from China. Chinas Foreign Ministry spokesperson Liu Jianchao stated that China had informed the United States and other governments about the classified test through diplomatic channels and had emphasized that the use of anti-satellite technology did not mean that China had abandoned its opposition to the militarization of space. The United States and Russia had tested antisatellite technology in the 1980s but had ceased those tests, partly because of concern that debris created during the tests could damage satellites in nearby orbits. Analysts stated that Chinas test had created several hundred thousand debris fragments in a region containing as many as 125 satellites.
A Zenit-3SL rocket carrying a commercial communications satellite exploded during launch from the Sea Launch consortiums floating platform Odyssey. The Netherlandsbased SES New Skies NSS-8 satellite would have provided audio, video, data, and Internet services to countries in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Indian subcontinent, and the Middle East. Sea Launch spokesperson Paula Korn stated that the consortium was forming a failure-review oversight board to investigate the cause of the accident. A Sea Launch helicopter dispatched to the launch platform would assess the damage.(Associated Press, Sea Launch Rocket with Satellite Explodes on Lift-off, 31 January 2007; Lon Rains, Sea Launch Rocket Explodes During Launch, Space.com, 30 January 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/ 070130_sealaunch_explosion.html (accessed 4 November 2009).)
Europes Ariane-5ECA rocket launched a two-satellite payload, weighing 9.4 tonnes (10.4 tons), from Europes launch center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:29 (GMT), setting a new benchmark for a commercial launch. The heavy-lift rocket carried Galaxy 17, an American geostationary communications satellite, and Astra 1L, a European geostationary communications satellite. Galaxy 1 would provide telephone and television services for South America, North America, and Europe; Astra 1L would provide direct-to-home video and voice links throughout Europe. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin attended the launch to observe the Ariane- 5ECA rocket, which would begin launching payloads to the ISS later in 2007.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643, 1 June 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx643.html (accessed 26 March 2010); BBC News, European Rocket Powers To Record, 4 May 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/ 6621297.stm (accessed 10 June 2010).)
NASA announced that images about the Japanese Hinode satellite, collected by NASA-funded telescopes, had provided new information about the Suns magnetic field and the origins of solar wind. Hinodes high-resolution x-ray telescope had revealed a record number of x-ray jetsup to 240in the corona at the Suns poles, contrary to previous research that had detected only a few such jets daily. Based on observation of these solar jets, a team led by solar physicist Jonathan W. Cirtain, of NASAs MSFC, concluded that a magnetic reconnection occurring in the low solar corona was forming Alfven waves and bursts of energized plasma in the x-ray jets. Alfven waves form when convective motions and sound waves push magnetic fields around, or otherwise allow magnetic fields to change shape or to reconnect. Previously, researchers had been unable to observe Alfven waves because of the limited resolution of available instruments. Yet, in their search to identify the forces responsible for the formation of solar winds, scientists had long considered Alfven waves the leading candidate. Alfven waves are capable of transferring energy from the Suns surface up through its atmosphere (corona) and into the solar wind. Cirtain explained that the teams observations had revealed a clear relationship between magnetic reconnection and the formation of Alfven waves in the x-ray jets, and that the large number of jets, coupled with the high speeds of the outflowing plasma, lends further credence to the idea that x-ray jets are a driving force in the creation of the fast solar wind. The team published its findings in the 7 December issue of the journal Science, a special issue focusing on Hinode.(NASA, Spacecraft Reveals New Insights About the Origin of Solar Wind, news release 07-264, 6 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07264_Hinode_Waves.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Jonathan W. Cirtain et al., Evidence for Alfven Waves in Solar X-ray Jets, Science 318, no. 5856 (7 December 2007): 15801582, http://www.sciencemag.org/content/318/5856/1580.abstract (DOI 10.1126/science.318.5856. 1571; accessed 1 December 2010).)
The Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee held a hearing to discuss planned budget cuts to weather and environmental satellite programs, reductions that could significantly affect scientists ability to study Earths climate. Antonio J. Busalacchi, Director of the Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center of the University of Maryland, spoke extensively about the causes of the delays and cost overruns in the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS), a joint project of DOD, NASA, and NOAA. The partner agencies, intending for NPOESS to replace NASAs QuikSCAT satellite, which had launched in 1999 with a three- to five-year life expectancy, had originally scheduled NPOESS satellites to begin launches to replace aging satellites in 2008. However, at the time of the hearing, the partners had postponed the launches, now scheduled to occur during 20132026. Busalacchi characterized the status of the program as one giant leap backward for mankind, and Commerce Committee Chair Clarence William Bill Nelson (D-FL) called the implementation of the NPOESS program a disaster. David A. Powner of the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) testified that, although the initial cost estimate for the program had been US$6.5 billion for six satellites, the projected cost had since reached US$12.5 billion, with two satellites and some instruments dropped from the program. The report also found that the agencies had not coordinated effectively and had not filled critical NPOESS jobs. Mary Ellen Kicza, Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services at NOAA, testified to the committee that the agencies had already addressed many of the problems that GAO had identified.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, U.S. Weather and Environmental Satellites: Ready for the 21st Century? 110th Cong., 1st sess., 11 July 2007; see also statements of Ellen Kicza, David A. Powner, and Antonio J. Busalacchi, http://commerce.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?p=Hearings (accessed 29 October 2010) ; Wes Allison, Politics Aging Satellite Wont Cripple Storm Trackers, St. Petersburg Times (FL), 12 July 2007; Jessica Gresko for the Associated Press, Senate Committee Hears Recommendations on Weather Satellites, 11 July 2007.)
NASA announced that, on 25 May 2007, its AIM satellite had captured the first occurrence that season of mysterious iridescent polar clouds. AIM had been the first satellite mission dedicated to the study of these unusual clouds, known as Polar Mesospheric Clouds (PMCs) when viewed from space and as noctilucent clouds (NLCs) when viewed from Earth. NLCs form in the Northern Hemisphere, beginning in mid-May and remaining through the end of August. They appear in the Southern Hemisphere between mid-November and March. AIMs mission was to observe two complete PMC seasons over both poles, documenting for the first time the complete, complex life cycle of PMCs.(NASA, NASA Satellite Captures First View of Night-Shining Clouds, news release 07-145, 28 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07145_AIM_First_Light.html (accessed 13 April 2010).)
NASA announced that it had tested the first nanotechnology-based electronic device to fly in spacethe Nano ChemSensor Unitdemonstrating that the device known as a nanosensor could monitor trace gases inside a spacecraft. NASA had launched the device into orbit on 9 March 2007 as a secondary payload experiment on board the U.S. Naval Academys MidSTAR- 1 satellite. Scientists had conducted the sensor test on 24 May, successfully showing that the nanosensors could survive in space conditions, as well as in the extreme vibrations and gravity changes that occur during launch.(NASA, NASA Nanotechnology Space Sensor Test Successful in Orbit, news release 07-140, 18 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07140_Nanotech_Sensor_Test.html (accessed 13 April 2010); United Press International, NASA Nanotechnology Tested in Orbit, 19 June 2007.)
NASA and NOAA launched an Aerosonde Mk3, an unmanned aerial system (UAS), into Category 1 Hurricane Noel for the Aerosonde Hurricane Boundary Layer Mission, marking the first time they had successfully flown such an aircraft into the inner core of a hurricane. Launching from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility (WFF), the UAS flew into the eye wall of the hurricane at altitudes as low as 300 feet (91 meters). Winds reached 80 miles per hour (129 kilometers per hour) in the core of the storm. Flying for 7.5 hours inside the storm, the craft allowed scientists to make detailed real-time observations of areas known to be too dangerous for human-piloted aircraft. Combining mission data with data from recent NASA and NOAA field missions that had used conventional aircraft and satellites, scientists planned to develop a valuable new set of observations for air-sea interaction and tropical cyclone research.(Daily Times, Wallops: Launch into Hurricane Friday Is Historic, 6 November 2007.)
Satellite Association of Argentina, and the Argentina Association for Space Technology had built PehuenSat-1 to provide a platform for Argentinean university students to perform amateur radio experiments.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 639, 31 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx639.html (accessed 4 November 2009); Chris Bergen, Indias PSLV Launches Successfully, NASASpaceflight.com, 9 January 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/01/indias-pslv-launches-successfully/ (accessed 4 March 2010); K. N. Arun for Associated Press, India Launches Rocket To Test Re-entry, 10 January 2007.)
NASA announced that one of its STEREO satellites had recorded images of an April 2007 collision between a comet and a solar hurricane, marking the first time that scientists had observed such an event. Enckes comet, traveling in the orbit of Mercury, had encountered a CME. NASA had designed STEREO to observe this type of solar event. As the CME swept by, the comets tail had brightened and then had disconnected, as the front of the ejection carried it away. Scientists had known that a comets plasma tail could disconnect from the comet, but the conditions necessary for this to occur had remained a mystery. Preliminary analysis of the images, which NASA researchers had combined into a movie, indicated that a phenomenon called magnetic reconnection had caused the tail to detach. In a magnetic reconnection event, the magnetic fields in a CME crunch together the oppositely directed magnetic fields around a comet, causing the comet fields to link together suddenly. This sudden reconnection releases a burst of energy that detaches the comets tail. Angelos Vourlidas of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, was lead author of an article about the event, published in the 10 October 2007 issue of Astrophysical Journal Letters. Remarking on the researchers sense of awe when they viewed the images, Vourlidas described their surprise at seeing the disconnection of the tail, calling the event the icing on the cake.(NASA, NASA Satellite Sees Solar Hurricane Detach Comet Tail, news release 07-214, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07214_Comet_Collision.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Andrea Thompson, Solar Storm Rips Tail Off Comet, Space.com, 1 October 2007, http://www.space.com/ scienceastronomy/071001_hurr_comet.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
An Atlas-5 rocket launched six satellites from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Two of the satellites were part of the Orbital Express Experiment and four would measure the chemical makeup of the atmosphere and the signal turbulence of satellites. The primary goal of Orbital Express, a joint effort of NASA, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), was to develop a system allowing spacecraft to act independently and smarter. Fred G. Kennedy of the U.S. Air Force, DARPA Program Manager for Orbital Express, explained that the Orbital Express missions goal was to enable satellites autonomously to refuel, repair, and upgradea feat that would radically change satellite design. In April 2005, NASA had launched two satellites that were supposed to rendezvous autonomously, but a collision of the two craft during the docking attempt had destroyed them. Because the satellites were preprogrammed, ground controllers had been unable to transmit commands to the satellites computers. To avoid such an event in the future, DARPA had designed the Orbital Express satellites to accept guidance from ground controllers.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641, 1 April 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx641.html (accessed 25 January 2010); Todd Halvorson, Atlas 5 Launches Satellites, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2007; Shelby G. Spires, 2 Satellites To Test Auto Docking Technology, Huntsville Times (AL), 9 March 2007.)
ESA and Russia successfully launched Foton M-3 aboard a Russian Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 11:00 (UT). The 6.4-tonne (6,400-kilogram or 7-ton) satellite carried a payload of approximately 40 European experiments, including a 35-kilogram (77-pound) student-built module called the Young Engineers Satellite 2 (YES2), which the Foton craft would deploy to orbit Earth for 12 days. When the orbiting period had ended, the YES2 mission would use an experimental tether to return the picosatellite and reentry vehicle Fotino to Earth on 25 September. ESA and Russia had planned the tether-technology demonstration to test and produce data related to space mail, a concept developed to enable the return of material from space without the use of conventional chemical propulsion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647; European Space Agency (ESA), Young Engineers Satellite 2; Mission Facts, 5 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/YES/SEMLRV8OY2F_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010); ESA, Focus On; Foton-M3 Mission To Launch European Experiments, 11 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ SEMN5ZMPQ5F_FeatureWeek_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010).)
The Peoples Republic of China launched its lunar orbiter Change 1 aboard a Long March-3A rocket at 10:05 (UT) from Xichang Satellite Launch Center. China named the 5,070-pound (2,230-kilogram) craft for a Chinese goddess who, according to myth, had flown to the Moon. Change 1 carried several scientific instruments, including a stereo camera and spectrometer imager, laser altimeter, gamma-ray and x-ray spectrometer, microwave radiometer, high-energy particle detector, and solar-wind detectors. The Chinese Academy of Sciences and CNSA planned to use the instruments to identify 14 atomic elements, helping scientists determine the mineral content of the lunar surface. The goal of the mission was to analyze the chemical and mineral composition of the lunar surface.
NASA announced that it had awarded a US$695 million contract to Boeing Satellite Systems of El Segundo, California, to design, develop, and fabricate two new Tracking and Data Relay SatellitesTDRS-K and TDRS-L. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would also integrate, test, ship, provide launch support, conduct in-orbit checkout operations, and provide sustaining engineering support for the satellites. In addition, Boeing would design, assemble, test, install, and verify modifications necessary to making the ground terminals at NASAs White Sands Complex in New Mexico fully compatible with the new TDRS spacecraft design. The period of performance for the contract, which had a value of up to US$1.22 billion, could extend through April 2025 if NASA exercised its options. These included two additional spacecraft, TDRS-M and TDRS-N. The contract would extend the lifetime of the TDRS system, the primary source of voice, data, and telemetry for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs, and would provide those services for NASAs Constellation Program.(NASA, NASA Awards Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Contract, news release C07-064, 20 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_C07064_TDRSS_Awards.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Clinton Parks, Boeing Satellite Systems Wins $695 Million TDRS Contract, Space.com, 21 December 2007.)
underwater telephone. The Atlantis had an on-board telephone connected to a satellite telephone, which could contact anyone on shore. Atlantis had telephoned NASAs JSC in Houston, Texas, where a high-powered dish transmitter had contacted the ISS directly. Oceanographers and astrobiologists were equally enthusiastic about the telephone call because much of the information oceanographers learn researching the sea floor applies to space exploration. Astrobiologist Richard Shand of Northern Arizona University described the feat of communicating with people who are not currently on Earths surface, using three different mediawater, air, and vacuumas an astonishing accomplishment. Apollo astronauts, who had called Houston from a distance of 384,400 kilometers (238,855 miles), retained the record for a long-distance call. The call from the Alvin submersible to the ISS was a 253-kilometer (157-mile) long-distance call.(Christina Reed, Houston, We Have a Phone Call, Science Now, 26 January 2007.)
Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), a private company based in El Segundo, California, launched its Falcon-1 rocket from Omelek Island in the Kwajawlein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. The 70-foot-long (21.3-meter-long), two-stage rocket, powered by liquid oxygen and kerosene, successfully reached space, accomplishing stage separation and second-stage ignition before reentering the atmosphere. Although the rocket failed to reach its desired orbit of 425 miles (684 kilometers), SpaceXs founder Elon Musk, also the cofounder of PayPal, considered the launch a success because the rocket had successfully achieved many of the riskiest milestones of launching and entering space. The companys first attempt at launching a Falcon-1 rocket in 2006 had failed when leaking fuel caught fire just after liftoff. SpaceX had designed the most recent missionDemo 2to gather flight data for the companys main customer, DARPA, which was seeking more economical means of reaching space. The typical commercial launch service cost US$30 million, but Musk had pledged to launch satellites for US$7 million.(John Antczak for Associated Press, SpaceX Launches New Rocket Into Space, 21 March 2007; John Schwartz, Private Rocket Lost Shortly After Launch, New York Times, 21 March 2007.)
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) released a study conducted over two years, examining the United States Earth-observing satellite missions. The study, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond, was the first 10-year plan to recommend a path forward that would restore U.S. leadership in Earth science and prevent the collapse of the U.S. system of Earth- science satellites. The report recommended that, to accomplish this goal and to rebuild the aging network of environmental spacecraft, the U.S. government should fund 17 Earth-observing-satellite missions between 2010 and 2020. To fund these missions, NASA would need to resume spending US$2 billion per year on Earth science, and the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) would need to maintain funding levels at US$1 billion each year. According to the report, NASAs budget for Earth science had decreased 30 percent since 2000, while NOAA had experienced major cost overruns and schedule delays in its primary mission to study weather and climate. Without reinvestment, the number of NASAs satellites monitoring the Earths climate could decrease by 2017 from 25 to 7, leaving the United States without scientific information to analyze severe storms and to determine changes in the Earths climate.(Brian Berger, Report Urges Reinvestment in U.S. Earth Science Satellites, Space.com, 16 January 2007, http://www.space.com/aol/businessmonday_070122.html (accessed 4 March 2010); Marc Kaufman, Cutbacks Impede Climate Studies, Washington Post, 16 January 2007; National Research Council, Space Studies Board and Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperatives for the Next Decade and Beyond (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007), http://www.nap.edu/catalog. php?record_id=11820#toc (accessed 5 November 2009).)
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolevs name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmoss announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russias space scientists, reminding them, the launch of the Earths first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age. The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.(Agence France-Presse, Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary, 5 October 2007.)
NASA released a study finding that, in 2005, the Arctic had replaced very little of the thick sea ice that it loses and replenishes annually. The findings complemented an earlier study showing a 14 percent decrease in perennial ice between 2004 and 2005. That study had provided the first reliable estimates of the annual variation of perennial ice replenishment at the end of summer. Ron Kwok of NASAs JPL had used data, including data that NASAs QuikSCAT satellite had collected, to study six annual cycles of Arctic perennial ice coverage. The results of the study indicated that only 4 percent of the thin, seasonal ice that had formed during the winter of 2005 had survived the summer, leaving perennial ice coverage in January 2006 14 percent smaller than in 2005. The 2005 replenishment was the smallest seen in any study to date. Kwok had also studied the 20052006 temperature records, comparing them with records dating back to 1958. The temperature records demonstrated a gradual warming trend during the first 30 years after 1958, with a rapid acceleration after the mid-1980s. Kwok remarked that the record doesnt show any hint of recovery from these trends, adding that, if the correlations between replenishment area and numbers of freezing and melting temperature days hold long term, its expected the perennial ice coverage will continue to decline. Geophysical Research Letters published the study, Near Zero Replenishment of the Arctic Multiyear Sea Ice Cover at the End of 2005 Summer, in its 2 March 2007 issue.(NASA, NASA Finds Arctic Replenished Very Little Thick Sea Ice in 2005, news release 07-77, 3 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07077_Arctic_Sea_Ice.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Ron Kwok, Near Zero Replenishment of the Arctic Multiyear Sear Ice Cover at the End of 2005 Summer, Geophysical Research Letters 34 (2 March 2007): L05501L05506, http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2007/2006GL028737. shtml (accessed 24 March 2010).)
The ISRO SRE-1 space capsule reentered Earths atmosphere and splashed down in the Bay of Bengal at 9:47 a.m. (IST), successfully completing Indias first test of reusable vehicles and satellites. The SRE-1 had launched on 10 January. The Spacecraft Control Centre of ISROs Telemetry, Tracking, and Command Centre (ISTRAC) in Bangalore, India, guided the reentry of the craft, which splashed down at approximately 40 kilometers per hour (25 miles per hour). A U.S. Coast Guard ship recovered the craft and brought it to a container port, amid tight security. From that port, ISRO sent the SRE-1 to the launching station at the Sriharikota Space Centre, to determine how well the craft had carried out its microgravity experiments while in orbit.(Indo-Asian News Service, India Brings Satellite Back to Earth, 23 January 2007.)
DARPA decommissioned its experimental Orbital Express satellites, officially ending the demonstration of on-orbit satellite servicing and robotics. The two craft comprising Orbital ExpressASTRO and NextSathad launched together in March 2007, to demonstrate ASTROs ability to approach NextSat with limited interaction from the ground, to grapple the craft with a robotic arm, and to transfer fuel and hardware to NextSat. The decommissioning of the satellites followed the completion of one last maneuver. ASTRO had found NextSat and homed in on the craft from long range, assisted by the U.S. Space Surveillance Network. Beginning on 16 July, ASTRO had traveled approximately 250 miles (402 kilometers) away from NextSat, so that its sensor suite lost track of NextSat. ASTRO then required input from the ground-based network to help it locate the target satellite. DARPA had originally scheduled the decommissioning to occur on 5 July but had extended the mission two weeks to allow the research team to attempt the long-range rendezvous maneuver. Orbital Express had met all of DARPAs criteria for mission success, including demonstrating its capability to track and to rendezvous with long-range targets.
NASA launched its Aeronomy of Ice in Mesosphere (AIM) satellite aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket dropped from a Stargazer-L-1011 aircraft. The Stargazer launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 21:26 (UT). NASA had designed AIM to study noctilucent clouds (NLCs) in the polar mesosphere. Observers can only see NLCs at night. Shortly before the mission, these clouds had appeared more often and had grown brighter. Observers had first seen NLCs in the 1880s, soon after the massive volcanic eruption on the Indonesian island of Krakatoa. Space- based satellites had periodically observed the clouds since the 1980s. AIM was the first spacecraft devoted to the study of NLCs. Scientists hoped to answer basic questions about why the clouds form and whether human-caused global warming was responsible for the recent changes. AIM carried three instruments: the Solar Occultation for Ice Experiment (SOFIE) would remotely sense the gases that condense to NLCs; the Cosmic Dust Experiment (CDE) would serve as an in situ sampler of the cosmic dust over the NLCs; and the Cloud Imaging and Particle Size (CIPS) experiment, a panoramic ultraviolet (UV) imager of the NLCs operating in the 265-nanometer-wavelength band, would provide the morphology of the clouds in both hemispheres.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642; NASA, NASAs AIM Mission Soars to the Edge of Space, news release 07-92, 25 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07092_AIM_launch.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Associated Press, NASA Launches Satellite To Study Clouds, 26 April 2007.)
A team of researchers comprising members from NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, the NSF, and the British Antarctic Survey unveiled a new map of Antarcticathe Landsat Image Mosaic of Antarcticathat scientists expected would revolutionize the study of the continents frozen landscape. The researchers pieced together more than 1,000 images, primarily selected from the Landsat observations of 19992001. The result was a realistic, nearly cloudless satellite view of Antarctica at a resolution 10 times greater than that of any previous image captured by Landsat 7. Robert A. Bindschadler, Chief Scientist of the Hydrospheric and Biospheric Sciences Laboratory at NASAs GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, explained that the map did not provide a mere snapshot of the continent, but rather a time-lapse historical record of how Antarctica had changed. The map would also enable scientists to observe changes unfold. Scientists anticipated that, among its uses, the map would help with planning scientific expeditions, because its higher resolution would enable researchers to interpret changes in land elevation in hard-to-access
DARPAs Orbital Express mission successfully executed a maneuver to demonstrate a satellite- servicing technique. Orbital Express consisted of a robotic servicer called ASTRO and a fuel depot and client satellite called NextSat. The mission aimed to demonstrate in-orbit refueling and servicing. The test marked the first time the two craft had maneuvered separately, flying apart at a distance of approximately 10 meters (33 feet). After the two craft had flown apart for 1 hour, ASTRO directed on-board guidance and navigation instruments to close in and to dock with NextSat, completing the missions objectives without input from ground controllers. The test was the third of nine increasingly complex procedures DARPA had planned for the mission.(Stephen Clark, Orbital Express Duo Split Apart, Rejoin Autonomously, Spaceflight Now, 7 May 2007.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) successfully launched a spy satellite aboard an H- 2A rocket from Japans southern island, Tanegashima, at 1:41 p.m. (JST). The spy satellite, the fourth of a four-craft constellation, enabled Japan to monitor any point on Earth once each day. Japan had previously relied on the United States for intelligence, but, following North Koreas 1998 launch of a ballistic missile over Japan, the Japanese government had decided to develop an independent intelligence-gathering capacity and had launched the four spy satellites. The H-2A launch vehicle also carried into orbit an experimental optical satellite, which would carry out tests for future espionage operations.(New York Times, Japan Launches Its 4th Spy Satellite, 25 February 2007; Agence France-Presse, Japan Launches Spy Satellite, 26 February 2007.)
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the Peoples Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russias Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars, 28 March 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket launched a German satellite called TerraSAR-X from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 (UT). The 3,000-pound (1,361-kilogram) TerraSAR-X was a night-vision radar system designed to create the most precise maps and imagery that a civilian space-radar system had produced to date. The crafts mission was to map Earth and its oceans at a rate of 1 million square kilometers per day (almost 400,000 square miles per day), to capture scientific data such as sea-ice coverage, vegetation and crop estimates, and to acquire military reconnaissance information at a 1.0-meter (3.3-foot) resolution.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 644, 1 July 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx644.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Stephen Clark, German Radar Imaging Satellite Launched into Space, Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2007.)
A SpaceX Falcon 1 rocket failed, at approximately 2 minutes and 20 seconds after its launch at 03:34 (UT) from the U.S. Armys Reagan Missile Test Site on Omelek Island in the Kwajalein Atoll. SpaceX executives explained that unanticipated residual thrust from the Merlin engine had caused the first stage of the rocket to collide with the second stage, as the second stage began to fire. The rockets two stages and its payload were destroyed in the Pacific Ocean. The Falcon 1s cargo included a Department of Defense Trailblazer demonstration satellite; NASAs NanoSail- D, a solar propulsion experiment; and NASAs small automated laboratory PRESat. Additionally, the rocket carried the ashes of 208 people who had paid the company Celestis to launch their remains into space. The ashes of astronaut L. Gordon Cooper Jr. were on board. SpaceX officials stated that they would be able to prevent a similar launch failure from happening in the future by adding 1.5 seconds to the Falcon 1s separation sequence.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 658, 1 September 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx658.html (accessed 8 July 2011); John Schwartz, Launch of Private Rocket Fails; Three Satellites Were Onboard, New York Times, 4 August 2008; Tariq Malik, SpaceX Traces Third Rocket Failure to Timing Error, Space.com, 7 August 2008, http://www.space.com/5707-spacex-traces-rocket-failure-timing-error.html (accessed 21 July 2011).)
Boeing Company announced that it had filed a protest with GAO over a contract that NASA and NOAA had awarded to Lockheed Martin Space Systems on 2 December 2008. The contract for NOAAs Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES-R) Program had covered the design, development, and delivery of two satellites, as well as pre-launch, launch, and post- launch support for the satellites. The base contract carried a total value of US$1.09 billion, with two options, each providing for one additional satellite. NASA and NOAA would use the data from the satellites Earth-viewing, solar-viewing, and space-viewing instruments for weather forecasting and for environmental, solar, and space science. Boeing had been the contractor for the previous series of GOES-R satellites.(NASA, NASA Selects NOAA Goes-R Series Spacecraft Contractor, news release C08-067, 2 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_C08067_GOES.html (accessed 22 August 2011); James Gunsalus, Boeing Protests $1.09 Billion Satellite Award Won by Lockheed, Bloomberg News, 16 December 2008.)
Israels state-owned Israel Space Industries (ISI) successfully launched a military reconnaissance satellite aboard an Indian Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle from the Sriharikota test site in India at 03:45 (UT). The 300-kilogram (661-pound) satellite TechSAT, or Polaris, carried a Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) developed by ISIs subsidiary Elta Systems. The SAR had the capability of producing 1-meter (3-foot) resolution images at all times of day and in all weather conditions. News media reported that Israels Ministry of Defense, which had already assigned to the satellite a strategic-intelligence-gathering mission, would be the principal user of this technologythe first of its kind for Israel. The launch, repeatedly delayed because of weather and technical problems, marked the first satellite collaboration between Israel and India.(Barbara Opall-Rome, India Launches Israeli Radar Satellite, Space.com, 25 February 2008, http://www.space. com/news/080122-sn-israel-india.html (accessed 14 December 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 651.)
The National Aeronautic Association awarded its prestigious Robert J. Collier trophy to a team of researchers that included staff from NASAs ARC and NASAs LaRC. The team, named Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B), had developed a system for air traffic control using GPS satellite technology. The system was able to provide air traffic controllers and pilots with highly accurate air traffic data in real-time updated displays. It also gave pilots weather, terrain, and flight-information services. The National Aeronautic Association had been awarding the Collier Trophy since 1911, to researchers with significant achievements in American aeronautics or astronautics.
The Ocean Surface Topography Mission/Jason-2 satellite launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Delta-2 rocket at 07:46 (UT). The 510-kilogram (1,124.36-pound) craft was a joint mission of the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT); the French space agency (Centre National dEtudes SpatialesCNES); the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA); and NASA. EUMETSATs aim was to continue the data-collection mission that NASA and CNES had begun in 1992 with their ocean topography experiment, the TOPEX/Poseidon mission, and had continued with the 2001 launch of Jason 1. Jason 2 had five instrumentsimproved versions of those aboard Jason 1 that could chart the topography of the oceans surface, the speed and direction of the oceans current, and the amount of solar energy the ocean stores. Scientists hoped to use these measurements to track global climate change, to hone their predictions of hurricane intensity, and to improve their understanding of currents, eddies, and tides. The project partners had scheduled Jason 2 to fly in tandem with Jason 1 for approximately six months, while engineers calibrated Jason 2s instruments. Afterwards, the two spacecraft would travel in separate orbits, doubling the global satellite coverage.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 656, 1 July 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx656.html (accessed 24 April 2011); NASA, NASA Launches Ocean Satellite To Keep a Weather, Climate Eye Open, news release 08-154, 20 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08154_OSTM-Jason-2_Launch.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
For the first time since its 27 April 2008 launch, ESAs satellite GIOVE-B transmitted navigation signals. GIOVE-B, a test craft for the Galileo global navigation system, successfully transmitted the common GPS-Galileo signal in a specific optimized waveform known as multiplexed binary offset carrier (MBOC), thus demonstrating that the GPS and Galileo systems could operate compatibly. Compared to GPS, Galileo would provide deeper penetration for indoor navigation and a greater level of accuracy in environments where multipath and interference occur. ESA officials would analyze the quality of the signal to ensure that it conformed to the systems design specification, that it did not interfere with services on adjacent frequency bands, and that the environment did not affect the signal.(ESA, GIOVE-B Transmitting Its First Signals, press release no. 26-2008, 7 May 2008, http://www.esa.int/ esaCP/Pr_26_2008_p_EN.html (accessed 29 March 2011).)
A Russian Proton-M rocket launched an American AMC-14 communications satellite at 02:18 (MST), from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, but failed to bring it into correct orbit. The Breeze-M booster on the rocket failed 10 minutes after launch, leaving the satellite 8,000 kilometers (4,971 miles) below geostationary orbit. SES Americom owned the satellite, and Lockheed Martin had built it. The failed satellite had featured a new telecommunications technology that allowed changes in coverage while the satellite was in orbit. The satellites design would have enabled it to achieve a higher altitude using its own engine, although this would use up the satellites fuel supply and significantly shorten its lifespan.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 653, 1 April 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx653.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Agence France-Presse, Russian Rocket Fails To Take US Satellite into Planned Orbit, 14 March 2008.)
ESA launched its Galileo In-Orbit Validation Element (GIOVE-B), the second of its Galileo global navigation system satellites, at 22:16 (UT). The 500-kilogram (1,102.31-pound) satellite lifted off aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. GIOVE-B, like its predecessor GIOVE-A, was a test craft for a fleet which would eventually total 30 satellites. Once completed, ESA officials intended for the Galileo program to be interoperable with the American GPS and the Russian Global Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS). Because navigation systems rely on precise timing, GIOVE-B carried two redundant rubidium atomic clocks, which would serve as back up to the Passive Hydrogen Maser (PHM). The PHM was the most accurate clock that had ever been placed in orbit, with a stability of better than 1 nanosecond per day. GIOVE-B also carried a radiation-monitoring payload and a laser retroreflector for high-accuracy laser ranging. Astrium GmbH had built the satellite, with the assistance of Thales Alenia Space.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654, 1 May 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx654.html (accessed 17 February 2011); ESA, ESAs Most Advanced Navigation Satellite Launched Tonight, press release no. 25-2008, 27 April 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM9GD2QGFF_index_0.html (accessed 17 February 2011); BBC News, Europe Launches Sat-Nav Tester, 26 April 2008.)
Virgin Galactic unveiled a unique new aircraft, the mothership for its commercial spacecraft, a very large composite plane named WhiteKnightTwo. Virgin Galactic would use WhiteKnightTwo to lift Virgin Galactics spacecraft, SpaceShipTwo, to approximately 48,000 feet (14,630.40 meters) above Earth. From that distance, the spacecraft could carry tourists to an altitude of 65 miles (104.61 kilometers). Virgin Galactic stated that WhiteKnightTwo also had other possible uses. Virgin Galactic could use the mothership to transport passengers from one destination on Earth to another, travelling at near orbital speeds. Furthermore, since the craft could provide short bursts of microgravity conditions, people would be able to use it to train for space travel. In addition, Virgin Galactic could use WhiteKnightTwo to launch satellites and uncrewed aerial vehicles and to carry large payloads.(Leonard David, Virgin Galactic Unveils Space Liner Mothership, Space.com, 28 July 2008, http://www.space. com/5665-virgin-galactic-unveils-space-liner-mothership.html (accessed 26 May 2011).)
Engineers completed thermal vacuum testing of the Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) at the Northrop Grumman facility in Redondo Beach, California. LCROSS was a NASA mission to search for water ice in a permanently shadowed crater in the Moons polar region. The satellite successfully completed the tests, which simulated the temperature variations in space, from highs of 230F (110C) to lows of -40F (-40C). After completing all final checkout tests, Northrop Grumman planned to deliver LCROSS to NASAs KSC for integration on the Atlas V, as a secondary payload to Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO). The LCROSS mission was part of the Lunar Precursor Robotic Program at NASAs MSFC.(NASA, Moon-Bound NASA Spacecraft Passes Major Preflight Tests, news release 08-156, 24 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08156_LCROSS.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
NASAs ARC signed a memorandum for the record, expressing its intention to cooperate with the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), the top research and education facility in South Korea. KAIST had launched South Koreas first satellite, Uribyeol 1, in 1992. The memorandum initiated a dialogue between the two institutions regarding potential collaboration on topics such lunar science, planetary exploration, and the research and development (R&D) of navigation systems, rovers, satellite communications, and small satellites.(NASA, NASA Ames Explores Possible Collaboration with South Korea, news release 08_07AR, 28 January 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/news/releases/2008/08_07AR.html (accessed 17 December 2010).)
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam launched its first communications satellite aboard an Ariane-5 ECA rocket at 22:17 (UT) from Kourou spaceport in French Guiana. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the 2,600-kilogram (5,732-pound) VINASAT-1 satellite for Vietnams Post and Telecommunications Group. The Vietnamese intended for VINASAT 1 to come to rest at 132E longitude, above the border between Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. From that position, the satellite would deliver communications to remote Vietnamese communities. Previously, Vietnam had leased satellite capacity from other countries, but with the launch of VINASAT 1, some Vietnamese officials hoped that they would be able to sell their own satellites extra capacity to their neighbors. The Ariane-5 ECA rocket also carried into orbit the Brazilian satellite Star One C2.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654; BBC News, Dedicated Satellite for Vietnam, 19 April 2008.)
A team of scientists led by Judith L. Racusin of Penn State University reported in the journal Nature their discovery that GRB 080319B had appeared extraordinarily bright because its jet had pointed almost directly at Earth. First sighted by NASAs Swift satellite on 19 March 2008, GRB 080319B had been 7.5 billion light-years away from Earth, in the constellation Bootes. After Swift had sighted it, scientists around the globe had begun observing the GRB as it brightened to a magnitude of 5.3 on the astronomical brightness scale. For approximately 40 seconds, GRB 080319B had been visible to the naked human eye. Racusins team showed that the GRBs jet had been composed of a narrow core, 0.4 wide, moving at almost the speed of light. A slightly slower jet, approximately 20 times wider than the core, had surrounded it. The team theorized that, if other GRB jets also have bright cores, astronomers might not often see them, because GRB jets rarely point in Earths direction, and their cores are very narrow.(NASA, Naked-Eye Gamma-Ray Burst Was Aimed Squarely at Earth, news release 08-223, 10 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08-223_Swift_Gamma_Ray_burst.html (accessed 26 July)
Researchers led by Vassilis Angelopoulos of the University of CaliforniaLos Angeles (UCLA), announced in the journal Science that their team had demonstrated that magnetic reconnection in Earths magnetotail produces substorms that cause the aurora borealis to brighten and to move. Magnetic reconnection is a common phenomenon in which stretched magnetic lines suddenly snap into a new shape. Angelopouloss team made the discovery using data from a 26 February 2008 substorm. NASAs Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms mission (THERMIS) had collected the data. THERMIS tracked the beginnings of substorms, using five satellites and 20 ground observatories to make synchronized observations every four days. Scientists were interested in studying the origins of substorms because they often occur in conjunction with strong space storms, which can interfere with human activities, such as radio communication and GPS signals.(NASA, NASA Satellites Discover What Powers Northern Lights, news release 08-185, 24 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08185_THEMIS.html (accessed 21 July 2011); see also Vassilis Angelopoulos et al., Tail Reconnection Triggering Substorm Onset, Science 321, no. 5891 (15 August 2008): 931935.)
The Peoples Republic of Chinas Shenzhou 7 successfully returned to Earth, landing in Mongolia at 09:38 (UT), in Chinas third crewed mission to space. Shenzhou 7 had launched from Jiquan in Gansu Province on 25 September 2008 at 13:10 (UT), on a Long March2F rocket, with astronauts Zhai Zhigang, Liu Boming, and Jing Haipeng on board. On 27 September 2008, Zhai had performed Chinas first spacewalk, leaving the spacecraft for 20 minutes to collect a test sample of solid lubricant that engineers had attached to the outside of the craft. The spacewalk also tested Zhais US$4.4 million Chinese-made spacesuit. After the spacewalk, the astronauts had released an 88-pound (39.92-kilogram) satellite, which would take photographs and transmit them back to Earth. The mission marked China as the third nation, along with the United States and Russia, capable of independently launching crewed spaceflights and conducting spacewalks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 659, 1 October 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx659.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Clara Moskowitz, Chinas Third Manned Spaceflight Returns Safely to Earth, Space.com, 28 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5904-china-manned-spaceflight-returns-safely-earth.html (accessed 27 July 2011); Chistopher Bodeen, Chinese Cheer as Astronauts Makes [sic] First Spacewalk, Associated Press, 28 September 2008.)
Thuraya Satellite Telecommunications, based in Abu Dhabi, successfully launched its Thuraya-3 satellite aboard Sea Launchs Zenit-3SL rocket, after a November 2007 delay caused by rough seas surrounding the launch site. The launch occurred at 11:49 (UT) from Sea Launchs platform in the Pacific Ocean. Boeing Satellite Systems had built the 11,381-pound (5,162-kilogram) satellite. Thurayas owner planned for the satellite to come to rest at 98.5 east longitude, allowing the company to expand mobile-communication coverage into East Asia. The launch was the first for the California-based international consortium Sea Launch since a January 2007 disaster had disabled its launch vehicle.(Associated Press, Satellite Launched from Ocean Platform, 16 January 2008; Peter B. de Selding, Sea Launch Rocket Successfully Returns to Flight, Space.com, 15 January 2008, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/ 080115-sealaunch-thuraya3-liftoff.html (accessed 14 December 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 651, 1 February 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx651.html (accessed 6 December 2010).)
ESAs first ATV, known as Jules Verne, undocked from the ISS at 23:29 (CEST). The ATV, which had launched on 9 March 2008, had carried 6 tonnes (6.6 tons or 13,227.74 pounds) of supplies to the ISS, including clothing, food, oxygen, propellants, water, and other dry cargo. The US$1.9 billion craft had remained docked at the ISS for six months, serving as an extra room. While there, the ATV had boosted the ISSs orbit four times to counter residual atmospheric drag. Additionally, on 27 August 2008, the ATV had performed an avoidance maneuver to take the ISS out of the path of debris from an old satellite. Before Jules Vernes departure, ISS crew members had loaded it with 2.5 tonnes (2,500 kilograms or 2.76 tons) of trash. ESA had scheduled the ATV to enter a controlled destructive reentry of Earths atmosphere on 29 September 2008.(ESA, ESAs ATV Successfully Undocks from International Space Station, news release 36-2008, 5 September 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_36_2008_p_EN.html (accessed 26 July 2011); ESA, Successful Re-entry Marks Bright Future for ATV, news release 41-2008, 29 September 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_41_2008_ p_EN.html (accessed 26 July 2011); Tariq Malik, European Cargo Ship Departs Space Station, Space.com, 6 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5810-european-cargo-ship-departs-space-station.html (accessed 29 July 2011).)
NASAs Swift satellite spotted the most distant GRB that scientists had ever seen. Swifts Burst Alert Telescope first sighted the exploding star at 1:47 a.m. (EDT); less than 2 minutes later, Swifts X-ray Telescope began to observe the GRB. A team of astronomers from around the globe examined light from the fading GRB in seven wavelengths, to determine its distance from Earth. The explosions shift toward the less energetic red end of the electromagnetic spectrum a phenomenon known as a redshiftindicated its remoteness. Named GRB 080913, the explosion had occurred 12.8 billion light-years away from Earth, in the constellation Eridanus. Occurring when the universe was less than 825 million years old, GRB 080913 was 70 million light-years farther away from Earth than the most distant previously known GRB.(NASA, NASAs Swift Catches Farthest-Ever Gamma-Ray Burst, news release 08-239, 19 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08239_Swift_GRB_discovery.html (26 July 2011).)
Chandrayaan 1, Indias first lunar satellite, launched at 00:52 (UT), aboard a PSLV-C11 rocket from Sriharikota, India. The 1.4-tonne (1,400-kilogram or 3,086.47-pound) spacecraft was on a two-year mission to map the lunar surface. It carried 11 scientific instruments: five instruments from India, three from ESA, two from NASA, and one from Bulgaria. NASAs instruments were the Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) and Mini Synthetic Aperture Radar (Mini-SAR). M3 was an imaging spectrometer that would create the first map of the Moons entire surface at high spatial and spectral resolution. Because the map would show the mineral content of the lunar surface, scientists could use it to understand the geological origin and development of the Moon and the terrestrial planets. Additionally, lunar astronauts could use the map to locate water or other resources. Mini-SAR, an imaging radar, would map the permanently shadowed polar regions, helping scientists learn about possible locations of water ice and the nature of objects that hit the Moon. NASAs ground tracking station at the Johns Hopkins University APL would provide space-communications support to Chandrayaan 1.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, NASA Returns to the Moon with Instruments on Indian Spacecraft, news release 08-263, 20 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-263_NASA_on_Chandrayaan-1.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
The Islamic Republic of Iran announced that it had launched a research rocket to celebrate the opening of its new space center in Semnan Province. The quasi-official Fars News Agency reported that Iran had launched the research rocket Kavoshgar 1 in advance of the anticipated launch of Irans first domestically manufactured satellite. Although Iran did not announce the altitude that the rocket had reached, media reports stated that Iran had fired Kavoshgar 1 into space. Scientists generally consider that space begins at an altitude of approximately 60 miles (97 kilometers).(Nazila Fathi, Iran Launches Rocket To Commemorate New Space Center, New York Times, 5 February 2008. 16 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 652, 1 March 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx652.html (accessed 28 December 2008); Tariq Malik, New Cargo Ship Launches Toward Space Station, Space.com, 5 February 2008, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/080205-expedition16-progress28-launch.html (accessed 30 December 2010).)
The X Prize Foundation and Google announced the names of the first 10 teams to qualify to compete in the Google Lunar X Prize competition, which would award US$20 million to the first team to send a rover to the Moon. The winning team must build a rover that would land on the Moon, transmit a data signal back to Earth, travel at least 500 meters (1,640 feet), and then transmit another data signal. The X Prize Foundation would also give US$5 million to the second team to accomplish this goal, as well as offering additional prizes for other lunar achievements, such as the detection of lunar ice. The teams qualifying for the competition were Aeronautics and Cosmonautics Romanian Association (ARCA) of Romania; Astrobotic Technology of the United States; Chandah of the United States; FREDNET, a multinational team; LunaTrex of the Unites States; Micro-Space of the United States; Odyssey Moon of the Isle of Man; Quantum3 of the 22 United States; Southern California Selene Group of the United States; and Team Italia of Italy. The U.S. Navy cruiser Lake Erie fired a missile interceptor that struck down a disabled American spy satellite over the Pacific Ocean. The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) managed the 5,000-pound (2,268-kilgram) satellite, which was orbiting 130 miles (209 kilometers) above Earths surface, at over 17,000 miles per hour (27,359 kilometers per hour), when it was hit at 22:30 (EST). The satellite had been inoperative since shortly after its launch in December 2006. Officials had been concerned that its fuel tank, filled with 1,000 pounds (454 kilograms) of toxic hydrazine, could pose a risk to humans if the satellite fell in a populated area. A heat-seeking missile interceptor, retooled to track the frozen satellite, had accomplished the strike. Military officials had timed the strike to occur after Space Shuttle Atlantiss 20 February 2008 return to Earth, but before 1 March 2008, when the satellites fall into the upper atmosphere would disrupt its orbit, making it more difficult to hit. Officials stated that they believed that the impact had been strong enough to incinerate the fuel tank, although they would not know for 24 hours whether that had actually occurred.(Thom Shanker, Missile Strikes a Spy Satellite Falling From Its Orbit, New York Times, 21 February 2008. 24 NASA, NASA Selects New Deputy Associate Administrator of Strategic Partnerships and Space Program Manager, news release 08-065, 22 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/ HQ_08065_ New_Shuttle_Manage.html (accessed 28 December 2010).)
NASA announced the appointment of Michael R. Luther as NASAs Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in the Science Mission. Luther had begun his career with NASA in 1981 at NASAs LaRC. In 1987 he had moved to NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, where he had served as Program Manager of the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and as Earth Science Flight Program Director. Luther had received NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal in 2005. As Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs, Luther would supervise the administration, including formulation and development, of the 36 missions of NASAs SMD. Additionally, he would manage the implementation of 54 operation missions. NASAs SMD was responsible for conducting research and for operating scientific programs to explore the solar system and universe, to observe the Earth, and to study space weather.(NASA, NASA Earth Scientist To Head Programs Office in Science Directorate, news release 08-096, 10 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/apr/HQ_08096_Luther_Named_SMD_DAA.html (accessed 17 February 2001).)
A team of researchers, led by Roger J. Phillips of the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, announced in the online version of the journal Science that NASAs Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) had gathered evidence indicating that Marss lithosphere is colder and thicker than scientists had previously thought. Using the Shallow Radar (SHARAD) on the MRO, the researchers had produced the most precise pictures to date of the Martian crust and upper mantle below the polar ice cap. The ice cap on Mars is 1.2 miles (1.93 kilometers) deep and 310,000 square miles (802,896.31 square kilometers) wide. On Earth, the force of a similar weight would cause the lithosphere to sag, but the Martian lithosphere remains level and even. The crusts rigidity implies that the planets interior is colder than scientists had previously thought, indicating that any aquifers of liquid water that may exist on Mars would lie deeper below the surface, closer to the planets warm core. The radar pictures also showed that the crust is composed of layers of icy dust, interspersed with layers of almost pure ice. The researchers believed that vacillations in Marss orbit had caused the planets climate to change, resulting in these layers. ASI, the Italian space agency, had produced the SHARAD. NASAs JPL managed MRO for NASAs SMD.(NASA, NASA Satellite Finds Interior of Mars Is Colder, news release 08-128, 15 May 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08128_MRO_Mars_Temp.html (accessed 16 March 2011); Charles Q. Choi, Brrr! Mars Colder Than Expected, Space.com, 16 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5347-brrr-mars-colder- expected.html (accessed 16 March 2011); see also Roger J. Phillips, Mars North Polar Deposits: Stratigraphy, Age, and Geodynamical, Science 320, no. 5880 (30 May 2008): 11821185.)
Ernst Stuhlinger, one of the original members of Werner von Brauns rocket team, died at his home in Huntsville, Alabama, at the age of 94. The U.S. government had brought the team to the United States after World War II. Stuhlinger, Associate Director of Science on von Brauns team, was an expert in spacecraft guidance and navigation instruments. Stuhlinger had also made important contributions in the field of propulsion. He had developed an innovative second-stage firing device for Explorer 1 in his garage, becoming renowned for having pressed the button that triggered that device at exactly the right moment during the satellites 1958 launch. Before his retirement in 1975, Stuhlinger had served as Director of Science at NASAs MSFC. He was author of the 1964 book, Ion Propulsion for Space Flight and co-author of the 1993 biography Werner von Braun: Crusader for Space.(John Noble Wilford, Ernst Stuhlinger, Rocket Scientist Crucial in Space Race, Is Dead at 94, New York Times, 28 May 2008; Martin Weil, Ernst Stuhlinger, 94; Space Program Pioneer, Washington Post, 27 May 2008.)
NASA announced the selection of Colorado-based United Launch Alliance to launch two payloads for NASAs SMD and two for NASAs Space Operations Mission Directorate, under a NASA Launch Services contract. The US$600 million award stipulated that the four payloads the Radiation Belt Storm Probes (RBSP) mission, the Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) mission, and the Tracking and Data Relay Satellites K and L (TDRS-K and TDRS-L) missions would launch aboard Atlas-V expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) from Launch Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA planned to launch the RBSP mission in 2011, as part of its Living with a Star Program. The RBSP mission would use two nearly identical spacecraft, which would study Earths radiation belts for two years, helping scientists understand how the Suns changing energy flow affects the radiation belts. Planned for 2014, the MMS mission, part of the SMD Heliophysics Division Solar Terrestrial Probes Program, would launch four identical satellites together in a stacked formation. Traveling around Earth in an elliptical orbit, the MMS mission satellites would study the fundamental plasma-physics processes of magnetic reconnection that occur when energy emanating from the Suns solar wind interacts with Earths magnetic field. NASA planned to launch TDRS-K and TDRS-L in 2012 and 2013, to replenish the NASA communications relay network that provides voice, data, video, and telemetry links between the ground and spacecraft below geosynchronous orbit. The ISS and NASAs HST use the NASA communications relay network.(NASA, NASA Awards Launch Services Contract for Four Missions, news release C09-011, 16 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_C09-011_Launch_Services.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, NASA Contracts Science Missions on ULAs Atlas V Rockets, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 March 2009. 40 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 665; Peter B. De Selding, Russian Rocket Lofts ESA Gravity Mapping Satellite, Spacenews.com, 17 March 2009, http://www.spacenews.com/civil/russian-rocket-lofts-esa-gravity-mapping.html (accessed 10 May 2011).)
NASA announced that the MIB led by Arthur F. Rick Obenschain had completed its report about the cause of the unsuccessful 24 February 2009 launch of the OCO and released a summary of its findings and recommendations. The MIB did not make the complete text of the official report public because it contained information protected by U.S. International Traffic in Arms Regulations and company-sensitive proprietary information. The boards report verified that the Taurus launch vehicles fairinga clamshell structure that encapsulated the satellite as it traveled through the atmospherehad failed to separate upon command, preventing the craft from reaching its planned orbit. The craft had crashed into the ocean near Antarctica minutes after launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The board had identified four possible causes of the fairing failurea failure of the frangible-joint subsystem, a failure in the electrical subsystem, a failure in the pneumatic system, or a cord caught on a frangible-joint side- rail nut plate. The board had made recommendations to prevent future problems associated with those four hardware components.(NASA, NASA Releases Orbiting Carbon Observatory Accident Summary, news release 09-163, 17 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-163_OCO.html (accessed 10 August 2011); NASA, Overview of the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) Mishap Investigation Results for Public Release, http://www.nasa.gov/ pdf/369037main_OCOexecutivesummary_71609.pdf (accessed 16 August 2011); Alicia Chang for Associated Press, Hardware Problem Blamed on NASA Satellite Crash, 17 July 2009.)
NASA launched the latest Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) weather satellite, GOES O, from Space Launch Complex 37 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, at 6:51 p.m. (EDT), aboard a Delta-4 rocket. The crafts schedule would place GOES O in its final orbit on 7 July 2009, at which time NASA would rename it GOES 14. Twenty-four hours after launch, Boeing Space and Intelligence Systems would hand engineering control over to NASA; five months later, NASA would transfer operational control of GOES 14 to NOAA. NOAA would perform check-out operations of the craft, store it in orbit, and make it available for activation when one of two operational GOES satellites degraded or exhausted its fuel. GOES O was the second of three of the newest generation of GOES satellites launched. In addition to providing continuous weather monitoring for 60 percent of the planet, these GOES satellites monitored solar flares and tracked climate change.(NASA, NASA and NOAAs GOES-O Satellite Successfully Launched, news release 09-148, 27 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09148_GOES_O_Launch.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Marcia Dunn, Sophisticated Weather Satellite Rockets into Orbit, Associated Press, 29 June 2009; Todd Halvorson, Rocket Launches Weather Satellite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 June 2009.)
NASA and Cisco announced a partnership, under the terms of a Space Act Agreement, to develop an online, collaborative global-monitoring platform called Planetary Skin. Planetary Skin would capture and analyze data from satellite-, airborne-, sea-, and land-based sensors. Governments, businesses, and the general public would have access to the data, enabling them to measure, report, and verify environmental data in near real time and thereby assisting them in detecting and adapting to global climate change. Cisco and NASA planned to start Planetary Skin with a series of pilot projects, such as Rainforest Skin. Cisco and NASA planned to develop the prototype of Rainforest Skin during the following year. Focusing on deforestation, Rainforest Skin would explore methods of integrating a comprehensive sensor network and determining how to capture, analyze, and present information about changes in rainforests carbon levels in a transparent and usable way. S. Peter Worden, Director of NASAs ARC, explained that NASA had collected a lot of data, which was awaiting conversion. He remarked further that the partnership sought to combine NASAs data and Ciscos expertise in data handling to explain what was currently happening in the rainforests of the world.(NASA, NASA, Cisco Partnering for Climate Change Monitoring Platform, news release 09-20AR, 3 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/news/releases/2009/09-20AR.html (accessed 10 May 2011); Michael Burnham for Greenwire, NASA-Cisco Climate Project To Flash Planetary Skin, New York Times, 4 March 2009. 32 NASA, NASA Announces Mishap Board Members for OCO Investigation, news release 09-047, 3 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-047_OCO_MIB.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Astronauts John D. Danny Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Astronauts Take Missions 3rd and Final Spacewalk, 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission, 5 September 2009.)
NASA launched its Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) aboard a four-stage Taurus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 1:55 am (PST). However, approximately 3 minutes later7 seconds after the ignition of the third stage, the payload fairingthe nose cone protecting the satellite as it rises through the atmospherefailed to separate, dooming the craft. The satellite fell back to Earth, landing in the ocean near Antarctica. Had the launch succeeded, the Observatory would have joined Japans GoSat, in precisely measuring carbon-dioxide levels in the air. GoSat had reached orbit on 23 January. (NASA, NASAs Launch of Carbon-Seeking Satellite Is Unsuccessful, news release 09-039, 24 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-039_OCO_failure.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Kenneth Chang, NASA Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, New York Times, 25 February 2009.)
ESA successfully launched its Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Explorer (GOCE), the first of seven planned ESA Earth Explorer satellites, aboard a Rockot/Breeze-KM launch vehicle from Plesetsk Cosmodrome at 14:21 (UT). ESA had designed GOCE to measure Earths gravitational field, so that ESA could use the data to create very high-resolution maps that would provide the baseline for measurements of ocean circulation and sea-level change. The 1,100-kilogram (2,425-pound) spacecraft was 5 meters long (16.4 feet long) by 1 meter wide (3.3 feet wide). GOCE had fixed solar arrays, designed to produce 1.3 kilowatts of power. To enable the craft to acquire the high-resolution measurements, ESA had designed GOCE to travel in a near-polar orbit at an altitude of only 263 kilometers (163.4 miles), rather than at the altitude of 600 to 900 kilometers (372.8 to 559.2 miles) typical for Earth-observation satellites. Mission managers remarked that, to their knowledge, nonmilitary satellites had never before operated in this orbit, an altitude that has significant atmospheric drag effects. To counteract the atmospheric drag, which could slow the spacecraft and potentially cause a premature end to the mission, GOCE had a unique arrowhead-like design that improved its aerodynamics. Additionally, ESA had designed the craft with a xenon-ion propulsion engine that would provide gentle thrust against the effects of the drag.
NASA announced that, using NASAs Aqua satellite, researchers had conducted the first global analysis of the health and productivity of ocean plants. Ocean scientists had used Aquas Moderate Resolution Imagine Spectroradiometer (MODIS) to measure remotely the amount of fluorescent redlight emitted by phytoplankton. This research marked the first time that scientists had observed redlight fluorescence over the open ocean on a global scale. The measurements enabled the researchers to assess how efficiently the microscopic plants had been conducting photosynthesis. The data could also enable researchers to study the effect of global environmental changes on phytoplankton. Scientists consider phytoplankton to be the center of the ocean food web, accounting for half of all photosynthetic activity on Earth and playing a critical role in the balance of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Michael J. Behrenfeld, a biologist at Oregon State University, explained that the amount of fluorescent light emitted is not constant but, rather, changes with the health of the plant life in the ocean. Scott C. Doney, a marine chemist from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, added that fluorescence provides insight into how well phytoplankton are functioning within the ecosystem. The new measurement revealed that large areas of the Indian Ocean contain phytoplankton that are experiencing stress from iron deficiency. Scientists observed that phytoplankton fluorescence increases as the amount of iron decreases. Therefore, large portions of the ocean light up seasonally, as phytoplankton respond to the lack of iron in their diet.(NASA, NASA Satellite Detects Red Glow To Map Global Ocean Plant Health, news release 09-124, 28 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-124_Ocean_health.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. Danny Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiments purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASAs LaRC.(Diane Tennant, NASA Opens Suitcase from Space, Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening, LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASAs JPL announced that NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) had reached an agreement concerning priorities for outer-planet missions. NASA and ESA had merged separate concepts to create two missionsthe Europa Jupiter System Mission and the Titan Saturn System Mission. NASA and ESA had decided to implement the Europa mission first, since it was the more technically feasible of the two missions. For the Europa mission, NASA and ESA would each provide one of two robotic orbiters. The probes would conduct studies of unprecedented detail of Jupiter and its moons Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. Launching in 2020 on separate vehicles, the probes would reach the Jupiter system in 2026, gathering data for at least three years. NASAs probe would spend at least a year investigating Europa for signs of life and producing a global map, to prepare for a future mission that would land on Europa. Simultaneously, ESAs probe would investigate the interior and the surface of Ganymede, to help understand the formation and evolution of the Jovian system. For the Titan Saturn System Mission, NASA would provide an orbiter, and ESA would provide a lander and a research balloon. The Titan mission, which required significant study and technological development to overcome several technical challenges, was not as far along in the planning stage. The agreement to pursue the missions was the culmination of years of debate, involving scientists, space professionals, and space enthusiasts, who had long found icy satellites like Europa intriguing. Scientists believed that satellites of this typecommon in the outer solar systemhave a potentially habitable environment.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA and ESA Prioritize Outer Planet Missions, JPL news release 18 February 2009, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=2035 (accessed 7 March 2011); John Johnson Jr., Its All Systems Go for Europa, Los Angeles Times, 19 February 2009.)
NASA announced that NASA and the National Snow and Ice Data Center had captured new data indicating that the decade-long trend of diminishing sea-ice cover had continued. In addition, new evidence from satellite observations showed that the ice cap was thinning, as well. Scientists using satellite data to track Arctic sea-ice cover stated that, during the winter of 20082009, they had noted the fifth lowest maximum ice extent recorded since the beginning of satellite monitoring in 1979. All six of the lowest maximum ice events had occurred since 2004. Studying ICESat data, NASA researchers had discovered that, in addition to the diminishing ice extent, ice thickness had been declining. The new, thinner ice is more vulnerable to summer melt than the older, thicker ice it replaces. Researchers explained that more than 90 percent of the sea ice in the Arctic was only one or two years old at the beginning of the spring of 2009an indication that the Arctic sea ice was thinner and more vulnerable than at any time in the past three decades.(NASA, Satellites Show Arctic Literally on Thin Ice, news release 09-079, 6 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-079_Sea_ice_thins.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, Arctic Sea Ice Thinnest Ever Going Into Spring, 7 April 2009.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched Ibuki, the worlds first greenhouse gasmonitoring satellite, from Tanegashima, aboard an H2A rocket. In addition to Ibuki, the rocket carried seven small satellites, which JAXA, university research centers, and private industry had developed. Ibuki, also known as the Greenhouse Gases Observing Satellite (GOSAT), would help scientists calculate the density of carbon dioxide and methane at the surface of the Earth, collecting data from 56,000 locations around the world, including locations in developing countries. Two sensors on board GOSAT would track solar, infrared rays that the Earths surface or atmosphere reflects and would monitor clouds and aerosols. The seven smaller satellites were Prism, an expandable refracting telescope designed to observe Earth as a technology demonstrator; Small Demonstration Satellite 1 (SDS 1) designed to carry out on-orbit verification of a space-wire demonstration module, a cutting-edge microprocessor, and a thin- film solar cell; Kagayaki, designed to measure orbital debris and observe auroral electrical currents; the Space Oriented Higashi-Osaka Leading Association (SOHLA 1), an exploratory satellite that would observe lightning; Sprite-Sat, a cube satellite that would observe sprites and gamma-rays generated during thunderstorms; and KKS 1, a cube satellite designed to demonstrate a micropropulsion system and three-axis attitude-control functions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663, 1 February 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx663.html (accessed 3 February 2011); Agence France-Presse, Japan Launches Satellite To Track Greenhouse Gases, 23 January 2009.)
NASA launched its National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellite, NOAA 19, or NOAA-N Prime, aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 2:22 a.m. (PST). The successful launch occurred following two scrubs resulting from technical problems. The Lockheed Martinbuilt NOAA-N Prime was the latest and final spacecraft in the Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) satellite series. Lockheed Martin had been designing and building for NASA and NOAA since the first Television and Infrared Observational Satellite (TIROS) weather satellite, which had launched in April 1960. Replacing NOAA 18, NOAA-N Prime would become the primary afternoon spacecraft, a designation based upon the time a spacecrafts orbit crosses the equator. NOAA-N Prime was carrying the same primary instruments that NOAA 18 had on board, with the addition of an Advanced Data Collection System (ADCS) and an improved Search and Rescue Processor. Frances national space agency, Centre National dEtudes Spatiales (CNES) had provided the ADCS, a system designed to measure environmental factors such as atmospheric temperature and pressure, as well as the velocity and direction of ocean and wind currents. CNES had also provided the Search and Rescue Processor, designed to detect distress calls from emergency beacons on board aircraft and boats, as well as to locate people carrying devices in remote areas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664; NASA Spaceflight, ULA Delta II Launches on Third Attempt with NASAs NOAA- N Prime, 6 February 2009.)
NASA successfully launched its PharmaSat nanosatellite at 7:55 p.m. (EDT) from its Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) aboard a four-stage U.S. Air Force Minotaur-1 rocket. The rocket also carried the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratorys TacSat-3 satellite, which was the primary payload, and other NASA CubeSat Technology Demonstration experimentsAerocube 3, CP 6, and Hawksat 1three 4-inch, cubed satellites developed by universities and industry to measure electron collection, radiation testing, and guidance and control systems. PharmaSats mission was to investigate the effects of antifungal agents on the growth of yeast in microgravity, to help scientists better understand how microbes might become resistant to drugs used to treat sick astronauts on long-duration flights. PharmaSat separated from the rocket approximately 20 minutes after launch and entered low Earth orbit at an altitude of 285 miles (458.7 kilometers). Following the checkout period, ground controllers planned to command PharmaSat to initiate its biological experiment, scheduled to last 96 hours. The satellite would transmit radio signals to Ground Control stations at two California locations and would send mission data to the NASA Mission Management Team at ARC. The satellite could continue to transmit this data for as long as six months.(NASA, NASA Flight Facility Successfully Launches Nanosatellite, news release 09-114, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-114_PharmaSat_Launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667; Matthew Jones, Rocket May Launch a Promising Future for Wallops Island, Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 20 May 2009.)
NASA successfully launched its Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) aboard an Atlas-V rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 5:32 p.m. (EDT). Also on board, with a companion mission, was LRO, which safely separated from LCROSS 45 minutes after launch. The mission planned for the 1,290-pound (585-kilogram) LCROSS and the 5,216-pound (2,366-kilogram) Centaur upper stage was to perform approximately three long, looping polar orbits around the Earth and the Moon, before colliding separately with the Moon on 9 October 2009. NASA had tentatively targeted an impact site at the Moons south pole near the Cabeus region, but refused to identify the exact target until 30 days before impact, when its scientists would have had time to study the information collected by LRO, other spacecraft orbiting the Moon, and observatories on Earth.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches Lunar Impactor, news release 09-143, 18 June 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-143_LCROSS_Launch_Success.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and JAXA President Keiji Tachikawa had signed an agreement defining the terms of the two space agencies cooperation on the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) mission. NASA intended the GPM mission to build on the success of the NASA-JAXA TRMM. GPM would begin to measure global precipitation, a key factor in climate. NASA described GPM as a cornerstone of the multinational Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Precipitation Constellation. The GPM missions spaceborne core observatory would provide the reference standard, unifying the measurements of a constellation of multinational research and operational satellites carrying microwave sensors. Using a Dual-Frequency Precipitation Radar (DPR), operating at Ku- and Ka-band frequencies, and a multichannel Global Precipitation Measurement Microwave Imager (GMI), operating at from 10 to 183 GHz, the GPM mission would provide uniformly calibrated precipitation measurements globally, every 2 to 4 hours, contributing to scientific research and societal applications. Additionally, for the first time, the observatorys sensor measurements would make detailed observations of precipitation-particle-size distribution. The agreement made NASA responsible for the GPM core-observatory spacecraft bus, the GMI that it would carry, and a second GMI. A Low-Inclination Observatory provided by a partner agency would carry the second GMI. JAXA would supply the DPR for the core observatory, an H-2A rocket for the core observatorys launch, and data from a conical-scanning microwave imager that would deploy on the upcoming Global Change Observation Mission satellite.(NASA, NASA and Jaxa Sign Agreement for Future Earth Science Cooperation, news release 09-177, 30 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_177_NASA_JAXA_Agreement.html (accessed 10 August 2011).)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers using data collected by NASAs Swift satellite had found the most distant GRB to date13.1 billion light-years from Earth. Designated GRB090423, the explosion originated from a star that had died when the universe was 630 million years old, or less than 5 percent of its present age. Swift had detected a 10- second-long GRB on 23 April and had quickly pivoted, to observe the burst location with its ultraviolet/optical and x-ray telescopes. Swift had observed a fading x-ray afterglow, but nothing in visible light. Derek B. Fox of Pennsylvania State University explained that the burst had most likely arisen from the explosion of a massive star, and that the scientists were not only seeing the demise of a star, but alsoperhapsthe birth of a black hole in one of the universes earliest stellar generations. NASA had designed Swift to capture very distant bursts like GRB090423. Neil Gehrels of NASAs GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Lead Scientist on NASAs Swift team, remarked that the bursts incredible distance from Earth had exceeded the teams greatest expectations. According to Joshua S. Bloom of the University of California at Berkeley, who had observed the afterglow using the Gemini South telescope in Chili, the event marked a watershed moment in the field of astronomy. The immense distance of the burst from Earth signified that the dead star was the earliest object yet discovered from an era called reionization, which had occurred in the first billion years after the Big Bang. Bloom added that the observation of GRB090423 marked the beginning of the study of the universe as it was before most of the structure that scientists know about today came into being.(NASA, New Gamma-Ray Burst Smashes Cosmic Distance Record, news release 09-088, 28 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-088_Swift_Gamma-ray_Burst.html (added 17 May 2011); Rachel Courtland, Most Distant Object in the Universe Spotted, New Scientist, 28 April 2009.)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the systems artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Divisions Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASAs Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
NASA announced that its LCROSS Mission had successfully created dual impacts on the Moons surface, in search of water ice. NASA had launched the LCROSS spacecraft on 18 June 2009 as a companion mission to LRO. The LCROSS craft had traveled 5.6 million miles (9.01 million kilometers) over 113 days. To prepare for the mission finale, the LCROSS satellite had separated from its Centaur upper-stage rocket approximately 54,000 miles (86,905 kilometers) above the Moon on 8 October at 6:50 p.m. (PDT). The Centaur had traveled toward the lunar surface at a speed of 1.5 miles (2.41 kilometers) per second, crashing into the Cabeus crater, a permanently shadowed region near the Moons south pole, shortly after 4:31 a.m. (PDT). Instruments aboard LCROSS had observed the impact for approximately 4 minutes, while traveling through the dust created by Centaurs crash, before impacting the crater itself at 4:36 a.m. (PDT). NASA reported that other observatories, as well as the amateur astronomy community, had captured images and video of both impacts, commenting that NASA intended to share its data with the LCROSS science team. Jennifer L. Heldmann, ARC coordinator of the LCROSS observation campaign, explained that one of the missions goals was to encourage people to view the LCROSS impacts in as many ways as possible. She anticipated that the LCROSS campaign would provide an enormous amount of corroborated information, fascinating to many observers.
NASAs GSFC announced the findings of a study that had investigated diminishing groundwater levels in India. Using data provided by the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), the research team, led by NASA hydrologist Matthew Rodell of GSFC, had found that, despite no shortage of rainfall, Indians were consuming groundwater in northern India faster than it could be replenishedprimarily using rain to irrigate agricultural crops. The twin GRACE satellites, which NASA and the German Aerospace Center had launched in 2002, orbited
ESAs Ariane-5 rocket launched from Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:09 (UT), carrying a telecommunications satellite for JapanJCSAT 12and a broadcasting satellite for Australia Optus D3. Lockheed Martin had built the 8,900-pound (4,037-kilogram) JCSAT 12, equipping it with 30 active Ku-band and 12 C-band transponders, to provide communications services to Hawaii, Japan, and the Asia-Pacific region for 15 years. Orbital Sciences had built the Optus D3, a 5,400-pound (2,449-kilogram) craft that would use 24 Ku-band transponders to relay communications and direct-to-home television services across Australia and New Zealand. Orbital Sciences had designed the Optus D3 with a 15-year life span, like Lockheed Martins JCSAT 12.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 670, 1 September 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx670.html (accessed 8 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, Ariane 5 Places Japan, Australia Satellites in Orbit, 22 August 2009; Xinhua News Agency, Ariane Rocket Launches Satellites for Japan, Australia, 23 August 2009.)
The Russian Coronas Photon solar observatory launched at 13:30 (UT) from Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Tsyklon-3 rocket. Russia had dedicated the satellite to research in the fields of solar physics, solar-terrestrial connection physics, and astrophysics. Specifically, its mission was to study the connection between the Sun and Earth, using a suite of instruments designed to measure energetic particles produced by solar flares, the solar atmosphere, and solar activity in relation to magnetic storms around Earth. The Research Institute for Electromechanics in Moscow had manufactured the 4,200-pound (1,905-kilogram, or 1.9-tonne) satellite, and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute had led the science team. The Photon observatory was the third satellite in the Coronos series; two previous craft had launched in 1994 and 2001 to study the Sun and had successfully concluded their missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663; Stephen Clark, Solar Physics Spacecraft Launched by Russia, Spaceflight Now, 2 February 2009.)
South Korea launched its first rocket, the Korea Space Launch Vehicle 1 (KSLV 1), or Naro 1, from Oenaro Island at 4:00 a.m. (EDT), becoming the tenth nation to launch a locally developed scientific satellite in its own territory. South Korean space officials had delayed the launch twice since 30 July because of technical problems. The rocket carried into orbit a 219-pound (99- kilogram) payload, the STSAT 2, which carried a microwave radiometer to measure radiation energy in Earths atmosphere and a laser-reflector system to allow ground stations to track its orbit. Naro 1 was the result of a partnership dating to 2002 between the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) and the Moscow-based Khrunichev, the Russian aerospace firm responsible for the Proton booster rocket. Khrunichev had provided the hardware for Naro 1s first stage. North Korea criticized the international response to South Koreas launch plans; an international outcry had met the Democratic Peoples Republic of Koreas (North Koreas) failed launch in April 2009, and the United States had claimed that North Koreas launch was a disguised missile test. U.S. Department of State spokesperson Ian C. Kelly had responded to North Koreas complaints, explaining that South Korea had developed its program in an open and transparent manner, in keeping with the international agreements that South Korea had signed, unlike North Korea, which had not abided by its international agreements.(Jin-man Lee for Associated Press, South Korea Launches First Rocket into Space, 25 August 2009; Stephen Clark, South Korea Makes History with Satellite Launch, Spaceflight Now, 25 August 2009.)
The Aerospace Industries Association (AIA) published a report titled The Role of Space in Addressing Americas National Priorities, which concluded that the United States could no longer afford to treat its national security, civil, and commercial space capabilities separately. Therefore, AIA recommended that President Barack H. Obamas administration develop a mechanism to look at our space capabilities as a single enterprise consistent with national goals and objectives. The report suggested that, in developing its space initiatives, the United States confronts many issues that are not so clearly defined as the goals of its space programs returning to the Moon or sending humans to Mars. Instead, the United States faces a host of complex challenges, such as protecting its satellites from hostile actions; easing export-control laws to facilitate the competitiveness of U.S. companies in the global marketplace for space hardware; and maintaining an experienced space industry workforce. To address these and related issues, the AIA report recommended that the Obama administration establish a national coordinating body to develop and execute a national space strategy and provide the funding necessary to continue critical multiyear space programs.(Aerospace Industries Association, AIA Report Recommends Space Policies for New Administration, news release 12 January 2009, http://www.aia-aerospace.org/newsroom/aia_news/aia_report_recommends_space_ policies_for_new_administration/ (accessed 7 February 2011); Andy Pasztor, U.S. Faces New Space Race, Wall Street Journal, 13 January 2009.)
ISRO launched seven satellites, placing all seven in orbit within a period of 20 minutes, to mark ISROs first successful mission following the abrupt end of the Chandrayaan-1 project. The seven satellites, including ISROs Oceansat 2, launched from Sriharikota at 6:21 (UT), aboard Indias Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) C14, a 44.4-meter (145.67-foot) four-stage launch vehicle. The 960-kilogram (2,116-pound) Oceansat 2 carried three instruments. One of these was the Ocean Color Monitor (OCM), an eight-band multispectral camera, designed to capture data in the visible and near-infrared spectrum. The OCM would observe algae, fish populations, sediment distribution, and water pollution. Another instrument was the Ku-band Scatterometer, designed to operate at 13.52 gigahertz, covering a swath of 1,400 kilometers (870 miles). It would measure near-surface wind vectors over the ocean, for use in forecasting weather. The third instrument was the Italian-designed Radio Occultation Sounder for the Atmosphere (ROSA), which would observe distortions in GPS signals passing through the upper atmosphere. ROSA would build temperature and humidity profiles, determining the electron density in the ionosphere. The rocket also carried six nano satellites: two German Rubin satellites; Beesat, of the Technical University Berlin; UWE 2, of the University of Wurzburg in Germany; ITU pSAT, of Istanbul Technical University in Turkey; and SwissCube 1, of the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne in Switzerland.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 671; Associated Press, ISRO Launched 7 Satellites in 20 Minutes, 23 September 2009. 54)
After receiving clearance to return home, astronauts aboard the orbiting Space Shuttle Endeavour successfully deployed two sets of small satellites. Endeavour had undocked from the ISS on 28 July in preparation for the return flight of STS-127. Endeavours crew first deployed a pair of small satellites from the Shuttles payload baythe student-built DRAGONSAT (Dual RF Astrodynamic GPS Orbital Navigator Satellite), part of a study to demonstrate autonomous rendezvous and docking technologies, as well as GPS systems. The crew later jettisoned the two 19-inch (48-centimeter) spheres that comprised the Naval Research Laboratorys ANDE-2 (Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment-2) mission. Although identical in size, each sphere had a different mass. Researchers planned to observe differences in the spheres orbits, as part of a study of the density of Earths atmosphere.(Tariq Malik, Shuttle Astronauts Deploy Satellites Ahead of Landing, Space.com, 30 July 2009, http://www. space.com/7078-shuttle-astronauts-deploy-satellites-landing.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
A Russian satellite launched in 1993, and that engineers believed to be nonfunctioning, crashed into an Iridium commercial satellite that had been in orbit since 1997. The collision marked the first instance of high-speed impact between two intact spacecraft. At the time of the event, Iridium had a system of 65 active satellites relaying calls from portable telephones approximately twice the size of regular mobile phones. Iridium was serving approximately 300,000 subscribers, including one of its largest cellular subscribers, the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD). The loss of the satellite caused brief, occasional outages in service. Iridium planned to replace the lost satellite within 30 days with one of eight in-orbit spares. Communications satellites, which typically orbit at high altitudes and travel separately, rarely collide. However, Iridium satellites traveled fast, at a low orbit. The Iridium collision, which occurred approximately 500 miles (805 kilometers) from Earth, created a huge debris field. Nicholas L. Johnson of NASAs Johnson Space Center (JSC) explained that the risk of the ISS encountering debris was low, because the space station is 215 miles (346 kilometers) from Earth.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, Big Satellites Collide 500 Miles Over Siberia, 12 February 2009; Traci Watson, Two Satellites Collide 500 Miles Over Siberia, USA Today, 12 February 2009.)
Orbital Sciences Corporation announced that NASAs GSFC had selected Orbital Sciences to design, manufacture, integrate, and test a new low-Earth-orbit space-science satellite for GSFCs GEMS mission. The purpose of the GEMS mission was to help answer fundamental questions about the universe. The mission aimed to find energy released near black holes, locate the origin of x-ray emissions from pulsars, and identify the magnetic field structure in high-energy nebulae. Under the US$40 million contract, which GSFC had awarded through NASAs SMEX Program, Orbital Sciences would provide the spacecraft bus and conduct mission operations. Orbitals proven spacecraft bus, LEOStar 2TM, would provide the design for the GEMS bus. GEMS would be the eighth satellite modeled after LEOStar 2 and the fifth SMEX satellite to use that platform. Previous space-based x-ray observatories had been insensitive to polarization but, for the GEMS mission, Orbital planned to design the first observatory able to measure x-ray polarization systematically. This capability would enable scientists to use the GEMS observatory to study scattering, magnetic fields, and strong gravitational fields. The GEMS team planned to make the mission data accessible to the astrophysics community and to the public via NASAs High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center Web site.(Orbital Sciences Corporation, Orbital Selected by NASA To Build New Space Science Satellite To Study X-ray Polarization, news release, 8 July 2009, http://www.orbital.com/NewsInfo/release.asp?prid=700 (accessed 16 August 2011).)
On the thirtieth anniversary of the Islamic Revolution, Iran launched its first domestically built satellite aboard a Safir-2 rocket. Iranian scientists had designed the research and telecommunications spacecraft, named Omid, or Hope, to orbit Earth 15 times each 24-hour period. Omids mission was to determine orbital measurements.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664, 1 March 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx664.html, 28 February 2011; Agence France-Presse, Iran Puts First Home-Built Satellite into Orbit, 3 February 2009.)
Astronomer Arthur D. Code died in Madison, Wisconsin, at the age of 85. A designer of space observatories, Code had worked with a team of scientists from NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory in 1968, to send into orbit a bat-shaped satellitethe Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO 2). Although the original OAO craft had failed in its 1966 mission, OAO 2 had succeeded, yielding information about the composition of stars, comets, and galactic gases. Intended to last a year, the OAO-2 mission had remained operational until 1973. OAO 2 had sent back data indicating that young stars in the constellations Scorpius and Orion are far hotter than previously thought and, therefore, are likely aging more quickly than astronomers had previously believed. OAO-2 successor craft included OAO 3 and NASAs HST. Following the OAO-2 mission, Code had taught at the University of Wisconsin, where he had refined his designs and had analyzed data retrieved from subsequent satellites. In 1990 he and a team of students had sent an ultraviolet-detecting telescope to orbit aboard Space Shuttle Columbia; the team had used the device to study polarized ultraviolet light. Code had served as president of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and had been a member of the NAS. NASA had awarded him its Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.(Jeremy Pearce, Arthur Code, Astronomer and Professor, Dies at 85, New York Times, 23 March 2009.)
The Peoples Republic of China successfully launched Beidou 2, or Compass G2, into a geostationary orbit aboard a Long March3C rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest Chinas Sichuan Province at 16:16 (UT). Beidou, which means compass, was the second satellite in a navigation system that China was building as an alternative to the United States GPS. China had launched the first Beidou craft in 2007. Xinhua reported that China planned to launch 30 more satellites before 2015, to complete the system. China had designed the system to provide continuous, real-time passive three-dimensional geospatial positioning and speed measurement, with the first phase covering only Chinese territory. Eventually the system would cover the entire globe.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 666, 1 May 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx666.html (accessed 33 May 2011); Associated Press, China Launches 2d Satellite in GPS System, 15 April 2009; Rui C. Barbosa, China Open 2009 Schedule with BeiDou-2 (COMPASS-G2) Launch, NASA Spaceflight, 15 April 2009.)
