Space Shuttle Columbia launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:22 a.m. (EST). Weather, mechanical issues, and other concerns had prompted NASA to postpone Columbia’s launch several times, from its original launch date of 19 November 2001. Officially designated STS-109, the mission’s objective was to service the HST, the fourth such mission (designated Mission SM3B) for the HST. The payload consisted of various technology updates for the HST, including a new camera and solar arrays. In addition, Columbia carried seven crew members: Mission Commander Scott D. Altman and astronauts Duane G. Carey, Nancy J. Currie, John M. Grunsfeld, Richard M. Linnehan, Michael J. Massimino, and James H. Newman.(NASA, “STS-109,” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-109/mission-sts-109.html (accessed 10 August 2008); William Harwood, “Cooling Glitch Mars Shuttle’s Hubble Trip,” Washington Post, 2 March 2002. 197 Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; ESA, “Envisat Overview,” http://www.esa.int/esaEO/SEMWYN2VQUD_index_0_m.html (accessed 10 August 2008).)
President George W. Bush released details of NASA’s new Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP) in an amendment to his budget request for FY 2003. The ISTP included a number of changes in NASA’s spaceflight programs that, together, would encompass a comprehensive effort to coordinate NASA’s investments in the ISS, the Space Shuttle program, and the replacement vehicle for the Shuttle. The new plan would provide more resources for completing the assembly of the ISS, as well as an increase in the number of annual Shuttle flights to the ISS. Shuttle flights to the ISS would increase from four to five flights annually, enabling transport of more researchers and more science-based payloads. Moreover, the ISTP would restructure the Space Launch Initiative (SLI), making the program’s immediate objective the development of the Orbital Space Plane (OSP), rather than development of a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. The OSP, which would be smaller than the Shuttle, would function as both the crew transport vehicle and the emergency escape vehicle for the ISS, and NASA would use the Shuttles for heavy cargo delivery. NASA stressed that, although the ISTP would change NASA’s five-year budget plan, the program’s costs would remain within the original FY 2003 budget.(NASA, “NASA’s Integrated Space Transportation Plan Released,” news release 02-220, 13 November 2002; Warren E. Leary, “NASA To Delay Decision on Shuttle Replacement,” New York Times, 14 November 2002.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:27 a.m. (EST). While in orbit, the Shuttle’s crew had performed four spacewalks to connect the S0 Truss to the ISS and to prepare the MTa track-mounted platformfor use. The crew had used the robotic arms of both Atlantis and the ISS to install the truss. STS-110 was the first mission in which the crew had used the ISS’s robotic arm to maneuver crew members around the station as they performed spacewalks. In addition, it was the first mission in which the crew’s base for all of its spacewalks was the ISS’s Quest Airlock. The Shuttle’s crew had also engaged in joint operations with the ISS’s Expedition 4 crew. The total duration of STS-110 was 10 days, 19 hours, and 42 minutes.(NASA, “STS-110 Extravehicular Activities,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-110/eva/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); NASA, “STS-110: A Framework for Station Expansion,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-110/ (accessed 12 August 2002).)
NASA awarded a US$1.14 billion contract to the Boeing Company’s Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power division for maintenance and support of the Space Shuttle’s main engine during the ensuing five years. Under the terms of the contract, Rocketdyne was to provide flight and test engineering; engine refurbishment; and manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of three additional Space Shuttle main engines. The contract also required Rocketdyne to provide engineering support for NASA’s main engine facilities at NASA’s KSC and SSC. From 1972 until the company signed the contract, Rocketdyne had assembled 106 main engines for NASA’s Shuttles.(NASA, “NASA Awards $1.14 Billion Space Shuttle Main Engine Contract to Boeing Rocketdyne,” news release c02-h, 3 May 2002.)
NASA announced that it would delay the selection of designs for the RLV that would replace the Space Shuttle under the US$4.8 billion SLI program. NASA had planned to select a pool of proposed designs in November 2002, eventually limiting the pool to two designs before 2006. However, a NASA official said that NASA had slowed the selection process while awaiting the results of studies on various unresolved issues with the SLI program. The results of those studies could affect the program’s objectives, as well as the design of the RLV that NASA planned.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Taps Brakes on Shuttle Replacement,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 October 2002.)
NASA released two reports of an audit conducted by the independent firm Pricewaterhouse- Coopers, noting several problems with NASA’s system of financial management and record keeping. In one report, PricewaterhouseCoopers stated that NASA had not provided auditors with timely and sufficient documentary evidence of its financial transactions. Thus, auditors could not determine the accuracy and completeness of NASA’s reported financial obligations, expenses, and equipment, including those related to the ISS and Space Shuttle programs. The audit did not state that waste or fraud characterized NASA’s financial management; rather, the report concluded that NASA’s incomplete financial records obviated any definitive assessment of its finances. In the second report, the auditors enumerated several problems with NASA’s internal controls over financial reporting, but also stated that they would not provide an opinion on the merit of those internal controls.(Karen Masterson and Mark Carreau, “NASA Bookkeeping in Disarray,” Houston Chronicle, 1 March 2002; PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Report of Independent Accountants” (report, Washington, DC, 22 February 2002), http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oig/hq/igfy01fsaudit.pdf (accessed 5 August 2008); PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Report of Independent Accountants on Internal Control” (report, Washington, DC, 22 February 2002), http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oig/hq/lrreport022602.pdf (accessed 5 August 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-110 lifted off at 4:44 p.m. (EST) from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The object of STS-110/ISS Assembly Flight 8A was to attach to the ISS a 43-foot-long (13-meter-long) truss structure called the Starboard Zero (S Zero or S0). The mission’s payload included several science payloads, the S0 Truss, and the Mobile Transporter (MT). NASA had designed the MT to move the completed truss and to act as a work platform for a mechanical arm, which the crew would install in the future. The crew included Mission Commander Michael J. Bloomfield and astronauts Stephen N. Frick, Lee M. E. Morin, Ellen Ochoa, Jerry L. Ross, Steven L. Smith, and Rex J. Walheim.(NASA, “Framework for Expanding Station Research: STS-110,” press kit, 20 March 2001, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-110/spk-110.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008); William Harwood, “Shuttle on Haul to Space Station,” Washington Post, 9 April 2002.)
Scientists from NASA’s JPL announced the release of high-resolution topographic data of the continental United States acquired during the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) on Space Shuttle Endeavour in February 2000. Project scientists planned to process the digital- elevation-model (DEM) data, sampled at an interval of one measurement every 30 meters (98 feet), into the most detailed three-dimensional topographic maps ever made of Earth. The SRTM data would eventually include 1 trillion measurements, representing nearly 80 percent of Earth’s landmass between 60° north and 56° south of the equator, a mapped area in which nearly 95 percent of the world’s population resides. SRTM project scientists anticipated that the maps produced from the mission would provide the most valuable and universally beneficial data produced by any scientific mission. Scientists would be able to use the data in applications ranging from flood control to transportation and urban planning.(NASA, “Pictures from the Real Edge: NASA Posts U.S. Topography Data,” news release 02-15, 22 January 2002.)
