NASA announced that it had settled negotiations with United Space Alliance, increasing the value of its two-year extension of the spaceflight operations contract (SFOC) by US$59.91 million. The finalized SFOC extension supporting the Space Shuttle Program brought the total value of the two-year contract to US$2.90 billion. The extended contract would run through 30 September 2004.(NASA, “NASA Finalizes Contract with United Space Alliance,” news release C03-001, 31 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/contract/2003/c03-001.txt (accessed 15 July 2008).)
The NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT) presented to the CAIB the results of its ongoing analysis of the Columbia disaster. Ten members of the CAIB were either present or listening via telephone, and 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel participated in the private briefing. The CAIB indicated that the Space Shuttle Program required more work in four areas―aerothermal analysis, foam-impact testing, testing of flown RCC panels, and metallurgical analysis from debris. According to the CAIB, NAIT had “provided an overview of the latest data-recorder information, and the CAIB issued its guidance based on that data and board investigators’ continuing analysis of the latest orbiter debris.”(William Harwood, “NASA, CAIB Investigators Compare Notes on Disaster,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003. 424 Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Next Shuttle Crew Named as Columbia Probe Proceeds,” 25 April 2003.)
The CAIB held its final public hearing, moving its focus beyond the cause of the disaster to a probe of the overall state of NASA’s management. Witnesses identified several key weaknesses in NASA’s management of its personnel, which could have affected safety issues in the Space Shuttle Program. Allen Li of GAO, which had issued a report in 2001 about NASA workforce issues, noted that NASA had faced substantial challenges in attracting and retaining a highly skilled workforce. Therefore, key areas of NASA’s programs had an insufficient number of qualified workers, and the remainder of the staff showed signs of overwork and fatigue. In response to the 2001 report, NASA had developed new systems for monitoring such issues, and Li said that NASA had made noteworthy progress. However, NASA was still requesting congressional approval of personnel reforms that would help ameliorate the situation, reforms that would give NASA the authority to streamline the hiring process and the ability to offer larger recruitment and retention bonuses. Marcia S. Smith of the Congressional Research Service provided the CAIB with a history of NASA’s budget situation but remarked that the CAIB would have difficulty tying budgetary changes directly to safety issues and Shuttle operations. Russell D. Turner, the former CEO of the prime contractor for Shuttle operations, United Space Alliance, defended the work of the firms involved in the Space Shuttle Program.(Tom Shoop, “NASA Needs Management Overhaul, Shuttle Investigators Told,” Government Executive, 13 June 2003.)
Alex Roland, a history professor at Duke University and former NASA historian, and Brian E. Chase, Executive Director of the National Space Society and a former congressional aide, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space concerning problems in NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. Roland stated that the Shuttle was not sustainable as a safe, reliable, and economical launch vehicle and recommended its phaseout. Roland faulted NASA for ignoring the findings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission), which had paved the way for the Shuttle to return to flight after the Challenger disaster in 1986. The Rogers Commission had recommended that NASA begin developing a next-generation launch vehicle immediately. However, 16 years later, NASA continued to rely on the Space Shuttle and had no replacement in sight. Chase recommended the short-term maintenance of the remaining Shuttles and endorsed the George W. Bush administration’s plan to develop an Orbital Space Plane (OSP) ready to transport crews to the ISS by 2010. He also recommended that NASA use commercial heavy-lift launch vehicles for hauling cargo to the space station.(Jefferson Morris, “Former NASA Historian Urges Phaseout of Shuttle,” Aerospace Daily, 4 April 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Experts Disagree on Future of Shuttle,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 April 2003.)
NASA released to the public recovered photographs and video that Columbia’s crew had taken during its mission in January. The CAIB had determined that the material was not relevant to their investigation into the Shuttle’s demise. The imagery included nearly 10 hours of recovered video and 92 photographs. The Shuttle had carried 337 videotapes, of which 28 had recoverable footage, and 137 rolls of film, of which only 21 contained recoverable photographs. Search-and- recovery crews had located more than 84,000 pieces of debris.(NASA, “New Space Shuttle Columbia Images Released,” news release 03-212, 24 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03212_columbia_images.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA released documents showing that the Columbia accident was not the first time that superheated gas had invaded an orbiter’s wing when it reentered Earth’s atmosphere. The documents showed that in 2000 Atlantis had entered orbit with a 0.25-inch (0.64-centimeter) breach in its wing’s leading edge, allowing plasma to enter the wing during the orbiter’s reentry. The incident had caused only minor damage. Improper insulation installation during Atlantis’s overhaul in 1997 had caused the gap to form. Instead of filling up the gap, the insulation had been “folded up and pushed away,” leaving an exposed cavity.(John Schwartz and Matthew L. Wald, “Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Gas Enter Wing on Return,” New York Times, 9 July 2003.)
Investigators of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident stated that the recently recovered Orbital Experiment Support System, which stored data about temperature, aerodynamic pressure, vibration, and other variables, appeared to contain information up to a fraction of a second before the orbiter broke apart over Texas. Technicians had located a time tag on the tape indicating that it had stored data until 9:00:18 a.m. (EST) on 1 February.
