Congress appropriated funds to the U.S. Weather Bureau for implementation of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. To phase in as early as technology warrants and to continue expanding the operational capability through the early Nimbus launchings by NASA, the system planned to be fully operational by 1966 as Nimbus system became operational. The system would include data acquisition stations in northern latitudes, communications for transmitting the data, and a National Meteorological Center to receive, process, analyze, and disseminate the derived information over domestic and international weather circuits.
White House statement of President Eisenhower issued, stating that “the early establishment of a communication satellite system which can be used on a commercial basis is a national objective.”
Navy Transit III-B with Lofti piggyback satellite placed into orbit by Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle, but satellites did not separate.
NASA Argo D-4 launched from Wallops Station carried United States-Canadian topside sounding satellite payload to 560-mile altitude.
Orientation of Tiros II made it impossible to obtain Northern Hemisphere pictures and malfunctions made remote picture taking undesirable, so that use of satellite’s cameras was suspended until orbit precession again made Northern Hemisphere pictures possible.
Navy announced that Injun and Greb satellites placed in orbit with Transit IV-A had not separated and were thus not functioning at full efficiency. During June: National Academy of Sciences established the Geophysics Research Board (GRB) in 1960 in response to a request from the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). By June 1961, it had four active panels to consider specific international programs: World Magnetic Survey (WMS); International Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY); International Exchange of Scientific Data; and Solid Earth Problems.
Project Ice Way was established near Thule by the Geophysics Research Directorate of the Cambridge Research Laboratories to test the feasibility of landing heavy aircraft on ice runways. The tests, completed in June 1961, demonstrated the strength and other engineering qualities of the ice runways constructed of natural sea water or reinforced with strands of Fiber-glas. Early January: Because of the danger of a power drain in connection with remote (tape recorder) operation, the wide-angle camera of Tiros II was turned on only for direct readout, while satellite passed over Fort Monmouth and Point Arguello.
A.T. & T. stated that it hoped to orbit experimental communications satellite by May 1962, and would share use or ownership of a satellite system with other common carriers.
Solar flare studied by Explorer XII and Injun I, readings within a few hours indicated energetic protons with velocities of near 10,000 kilometers per second, while 2 days after the solar flare both satellites saw a sudden increase in the intensity of low-energy protons (c. 10 mev) concurrently with a magnetic storm on Earth and bright aurora at low altitude. It was concluded that low-energy protons traveled slowly from the Sun with the magnetic stormcloud.
FCC-NASA memorandum of understanding for delineating and coordinating civil communication space activities signed. It stated that “earliest practicable realization of a commercially operable communication satellite system is a national objective.”
In reviewing NASA’s communications satellite programs, Administrator Webb pointed out that it had been speculated that the satellite system “may have progressed enough by 1964 that we shall be able to watch the Tokyo Olympic Games on television at home.”
NASA ■''selected. RCA to construct the Relay experimental communications satellite to test the feasibility of transoceanic telephone, telegraph, and television communications using an active repeater satellite.
With successful launch of Explorer XII on August 15, NASA Delta launch vehicles had successfully launched five satellites out of six attempts, the only failure being the first attempt. Delta’s high reliability record began with Echo I on August 12, 1960, and includes Tiros II and III, and Explorers X and XII. Built by prime contractor Douglas Aircraft, the NASA Delta launch vehicle consists of a Thor first stage (Rocketdyne MB-3 liquid engine), Aerojet-General second stage (AJ-10-118, an improved Vanguard second stage), and an ABL third stage (X-248 spin-stabilized version of Vanguard third stage).
..... Soviet and bloc delegates from Czechoslovakia and Poland, who had previously accepted invitations, did not attend the NASA-Weather Bureau International Meteorological Satellite Workshop held in Washington; telegram from Andre Zolotukhin received by Dr. Reichelderfer stated that “our representatives unable to participate,” but requested “dispatch of relevant papers if possible.”
Launching of NASA ionosphere beacon satellite (S-45 II) at i Atlantic Missile Range unsuccessful when Juno II power supply failed and prevented ignition of second stage.
First launching of three active satellites in one shot, and the first launching of a satellite with nuclear power, when a Thor-Able-Star launched Transit IV-A (equipped with an atomic radioisotope-powered battery of the Snap series), and two accompanying satellites, Injun and Greb III, from Atlantic Missile Range. Transit IV is forerunner of a navigation satellite system, while Injun gathers data on the radiation belts, and Greb III gathers data on X-ray radiation from the Sun.
An Atlas intended for 9,000-mile flight into the Indian Ocean plunged into the Atlantic only 200 miles from Cape Canaveral. Mid-March: Up to this time, approximately 78 percent of the wide-angle photographs relayed from Tiros II (weather satellite) were considered usable for current weather analysis.
NASA announced that the first station in a network of data-gathering stations for use with second-generation satellites had been completed near Fairbanks, Alaska. Site for the second of the $5 million installations, each with a high-gain antenna 85 feet in diameter, was announced to be Rosman, N.C., 40 miles southwest of Asheville.
Recovery of capsule of Discoverer XXXI was called off as capsule and satellite (launched Sept. 17, 1961) failed to separate and both remained in orbit.
USAF announced that amateur radio communications satellite, assembled by Project Oscar Association, would be flown piggyback in future Discoverer vehicle.
White House released its reply to letter of August 27 signed by 35 Members of Congress which expressed concern over the private ownership of an operational communications satellite system. The White House memorandum stated that “any decisions as to control should preserve as much flexibility as possible,” and reemphasized the administration policies including “maximum competition” in any system of private ownership.
Explorer XI, a gamma-ray satellite, was successfully launched into orbit by NASA Juno II from Cape Canaveral.
DOD announced that the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) had selected Space Technology Laboratory (STL) to develop satellite system under Project Vela for detection of clandestine nuclear weapons in outer space.
NASA announced that it had ordered 14 additional Delta launch vehicles (Douglas Thor first stage, Aerojet-General AJ10-U8 second stage, and Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory third stage) for Relay, Syncom, Telstar, and Tiros satellites. Five of the first six of the twelve Deltas successfully launched Echo I, Tiros II and III, and Explorers X and XII.
France announced plans to launch its first satellite by the end of 1964.
NASA and United Kingdom agreed to establish joint program to test communications satellites to be launched by NASA in 1962 and 1963 in Projects Relay and Rebound.
NASA and France agreed to establish joint program to test communications satellites to be launched by NASA in 1962 and 1963 in Projects Relay and Rebound.
West German Post Office indicated that it would construct near Munich a ground station capable of handling up to 600 phone calls simultaneously for operations in late 1963 or early 1964 with Telstar and Relay type satellites.
Unnamed USAF satellite launched from Point Arguello, Calif. The announcement said it was powered by an Atlas-Agena B combination and that the satellite was “carrying a number of classified test components.”
NASA awarded contract to General Electric for an investigation of means of storing solar heat energy in satellites.
NASA and United Kingdom’s Space Sciences Committee agreed on experiments to be included in the second United Kingdom satellite (launched by NASA’s Scout), the experiments being galactic noise, atmospheric ozone, and micrometeoroids.
Nine-nation Western European Conference in London announced decision to launch a satellite in mid-1965, using a British Blue Streak first stage, a French Veronique second stage, and a West German third stage, from the Woomera range in Australia.
James E. Webb nominated as Administrator of NASA by President Kennedy. January 30-February 2: Conference of 12 European nations held at Strasbourg to discuss a British and French proposal for a European satellite launcher development program.
In a letter to the President, 35 Members of Congress urged that a decision on the Nation’s satellite communication system be delayed to determine “whether such a system should be publicly or privately owned and under what circumstances.”
Senate Small Business Committee concluded critical hearings on the FCC’s handling of the communications satellite project.
Three-week meeting of the executive council of the U.N. World Meteorological Organization in Geneva concluded, at which 18 national representatives (including A. A. Zolotoukhin of the U.S.S.R.) discussed general basis for international use of weather satellites. Dr. Francis W. Reich elderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, was a U.S. representative. During May: Army Chemical Corps Biological Laboratories completed preliminary tests of microorganisms in a simulated space vacuum at the National Research Corp.
Echo I completed its 3,697th orbit after 9 months. When this first passive communications “balloon satellite” was launched on August 12, 1960, it was not expected to have a long life span.
Over 100 foreign weather services were invited jointly by NASA and the U.S. Weather Bureau to participate in the Tiros III experiment for a 9-week period beginning today. The program provides cooperating services with an opportunity to conduct special meteorological observations synchronized with passes of the satellite.
Ranger I test satellite of unmanned lunar spacecraft, launched from Atlantic Missile Range by Atlas D-Agena B into low parking orbit, but did not attain its programed eccentric orbit.
NASA negotiated $400,000 contract with G. T. Schjeldahl Co. to design, develop, fabricate, and test rigidized inflatable spheres for Project Echo, the passive communications satellite program.
At 280th session of disarmament conference at Geneva, Arthur H. Dean presented U.S. proposal that a system of space satellites for patrolling a ban on nuclear testing be fully operational 6 years after ratification of such a ban. Such a space patrol could “open up a new frontier of knowledge for the benefit of mankind.”
The United States presented an outline for a program for cooperation and control in outer space to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in New York. This was the first committee meeting held since its membership was expanded from 18 to 24 nations by the General Assembly 2 years ago, the 7 Communist members refusing to attend until today. U.N. Delegate Charles W. Yost urged consideration of the U.S. proposals before the life of this Committee expired at the end of the year. The U.S. proposals were: acknowledge that international law and U.N. Charter extend to outer space; establish central registry for all space launchings and satellites; and share all information from weather satellites.
In Scout launching of micrometeorite counter satellite (S-55) from Wallops Station, third stage did not ignite, and the vehicle was destroyed.
USAF Samos II, a 4,100-pound test satellite containing photographic equipment, placed in orbit by Atlas-Agena A from Point Arguello, Calif.
Midas III (missile defense alarm system) launched into polar orbit from Pacific Missile Range, with record 1,850-mile-high orbit and was heaviest U.S. satellite launched to date. Second-stage Agena B was restarted at apogee of first orbit.
NASA entered letter contract with RCA for four additional Tiros weather satellites to extend the program.
Navy Transit IV-B and Traac (Transit Research Attitude Control) satellites launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star at Atlantic Missile Range.
NASA and Weather Bureau invited over 100 of the world’s weather services to participate in the Tiros III satellite experiment by conducting special ground-based observations synchronized with passes of the satellite.
French Foreign Ministry announced that West German Government had agreed in principle to participate in 12-nation program to construct launch satellites.
Project West Ford received approval in National Aeronautics and Space Council policy statement released at the National Academy of Sciences by Presidential Scientific Adviser Jerome B. Wiesner. Conceived at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory, project proposed placement of 350-million copper threads (0.7-inch long and 0.001-inch diameter) into a 5-mile wide and 24-mile long belt around the Earth from a satellite, which would serve as reflector antennas for extremely short wave lengths (8,000 megacycles), perhaps expanding usable frequency channels.
Industry proposal to FCC for organizing a commercial communications satellite system critically reviewed in hearings of the Monopoly Subcommittee of the Senate Small Business Committee.
NASA distributed to the world scientific community, through COSPAR, a detailed description of the next planned Beacon satellite experiment.
NASA Tiros III weather satellite successfully launched into near-circular orbit by Thor-Delta from Cape Canaveral.
Its instruments recording a magnetic impulse, Explorer X became the first satellite to measure the shock wave generated by a solar flare.
NASA announced negotiation of a contract with Hughes Aircraft for construction of three experimental synchronous communications satellites.
The Ad Hoc Carrier Committee established by the FCC to make an industry proposal on the development and operation of commercial communications satellites recommended a nonprofit corporation be formed, to be owned by companies engaged in international communications, with the U.S. Government having one more representative on the board of directors than any one company. Western Union filed a minority statement proposing a public stock company arrangement to prevent dominance of the corporation by any one company.
NASA announced indefinite suspension of the programing of the wide-angle camera in Tiros II, the experimental weather observation satellite launched on November 23, 1960.
Scientists from the United Kingdom and NASA announced agreement on the scientific instrumentation of a second United Kingdom satellite to be launched by NASA with a Scout vehicle..
Explorer XIII, popularly referred to as the “beer can satellite” because of its micrometeorite counting structure, completed its 15th orbit.
