nasa announced plans to launch two Project Echo ballons during October. To be filled with helium while on the ground near White Sands Missile Range, N.M., one ballon would be Echo I-type measuring 100 ft. m diameter and the other would be Advanced Echo type measuring 135-ft. in diameter. They would reach respective altitudes of approximately 128,000 ft. and 115.000	ft. in short flights over the range. Purpose of launches was to determine skin smoothness for the Advanced Echo balloon satellite, to be orbited in 1963.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, told House Military Operations subcommittee that the Midas early warning satellite would “take longer to develop than initially forecast.” He said that usaf and dod had been overly optimistic about the reliability that could be expected from components and about technical features of the system.
U.S.S.R. had declined the offer of U.S. networks to use telstar satellite for relaying live telecasts of orbiting Soviet cosmonauts, said Russell Tomabene, Chairman of the U.S. joint network committee coordinating transatlantic telstar programs.
Five-day filibuster in Senate against Administration-supported communications satellite bill was shelved under compromise agreement between bill’s supporters and opponents. Bill was referred to Foreign Relations Committee, which was ordered to report it back to the Senate not later than August 10.
Successful ground tests of Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) subsystem reported by nasa. To be flight-tested on a Tiros satellite next year, apt would eventually enable weather stations to obtain local cloud-cover pictures directly from orbiting weather satellites, thus making possible a world-wide weather satellite service.
dod announced plans to support nasa Syncom communications satellite operations in early 1963. U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency (satcom), Ft. Monmouth, N.J., would send signals to activate and test the first U.S. synchronous-orbit satellite.
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, told Joint Computer Conference in Philadelphia: “. . . It is no exaggeration to say that we could never have succeeded in orbiting and tracking even the simplest satellite without the availability of computers. . . . And it is certainly true that one of the major pacing elements in our rate of progress toward achieving the national goals in space will be the development of progressively more advanced computers and computer techniques to help cope with the even greater tasks ahead. “. . . [Data processing] systems of the future, as we see them, will involve compatible combinations of computer and ancillary devices, some of which will be spaceborne, some stationed on celestial bodies other than the earth, and some of course wlli still be here on earth. “Such computer systems wlli be required to perform navigational and attitude control tasks; edit and store scientific and engineering data; make calculations of a conventional nature; time sequences of operations; feed displays; and trigger alarms. “A task for the future is to extend . . . [the computer’s pre-launch checkout] function to spacecraft for launching from orbit, for landing on celestial bodies, and for take-off from remote planets for return to earth. . . . What we are looking for are systems which are fully automatic and fast. ... “It is apparent that in general a rather complete distribution range of computing burden wlli exist. In some missions, such as close-to-earth satellite, earthbased computing equipment wlli perform most of the processing required. Other missions, such as one bound for Pluto, will require the autonomous activity of a highly redundant, self-adaptive, self-checking computer complex aboard the spacecraft. “A vital need, therefore, is determination of the optimum nature, disposition and use of computing equipment. ... “Eventually ... we may have large numbers of vehicles simultaneously operating in space. ... In such a situation we wlli need sophisticated and very comprehensive Flight Control Centers, with compatible computer systems aboard the spacecraft, to handle information on flight status, command control, navigation, and program sequences. ...”
House of Representatives passed the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 by a vote of 354 to 9, one creating machinery to operate the U.S. portion of a worldwide communications satellite system. Act (H.R. 11040) declared that it is the policy of the U.S. “to establish as soon as practicable a commercial communications satellite system ... in conjunction and cooperation with other countries ... to be responsible to public needs and national objectives, serve the communications needs of the United States and other countries, and contribute to world peace and understanding.” Act created a private corporation, one half of whose stock would be public owned, the remainder by communications companies. Three directors are to be appointed by the President, six elected by public stockholders and six by industry stockholders.
First attempted live radio broadcast between U.S. and Europe via telstar satellite was unsuccessful because of failing radio connections between Boston broadcasting station and Andover, Maine, relay station. Boston station received, but could not understand, Swedish message; Sweden station did not receive message from Boston, telstar performed perfectly, however.
Launching of dod geodetic satellite Anna was postponed indefinitely for undisclosed reasons.
Transatlantic use of telstar communications satellite was discontinued for about seven weeks. During this period, telstar’s orbit brought it too briefly on line of sight with North America and Europe for useful transmission, at&t said the situation would recur every six months. Domestic transmissions would be suspended only from Nov. 26 to Dec. 2, during which time ground equipment would be “tuned up.”
France carried out six successful missile tests in the Sahara during the previous week. Two of the launchings were of Agate missiles, with which France has planned to develop a missile striking force and eventually to launch a satellite.
cosmos iv, Soviet satellite launched on April 26, was successfully landed in a predetermined area, according to Tass announcement. All equipment for research into the upper atmosphere and space worked well during the 1,250,000-mile flight, Tass said.
Scientists at Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ. sent operating commands to anna satellite, and three minutes later anna responded by flashing its lights five times to show the message had been received. Satellite’s blinking beacons were designed to aid scientists make precise measurements of the earth and to determine its gravitational field.
Nimbus meteorological satellite underwent rigorous test program at GE’s Missile and Space Vehicle Center at Valley Forge, Pa.
Signals from ariel satellite had been received during past week by tracking stations, ariel had stopped transmitting after U.S. high-altitude nuclear test because of radiation damage to the satellite’s solar cells. Although resumed transmission was not continuous, it did demonstrate Ariel’s regained capability to return scientific data from space. Transmission apparently occurred whenever the satellite stayed in sunlight long enough for its damaged solar cells to absorb sufficient solar energy to power its electronic equipment.
Weather Bureau announced weather data gathered by Tiros satellite was relayed to France via telstar satellite.
At nasa press conference, scientists described preliminary scientific results obtained by explorer xii: based on study of 10 per cent of the data, it now appears that instead of the two radiation belts (previously called the inner and outer Van Allen belts) there is one magnetosphere extending roughly from 400 miles above the earth to 30,000 to 40,000 miles out. In this magnetosphere there is only a handful of matter but a very wide range of charged particles trapped by the earth’s magnetic field. Density of electrons is now considered to be 108/cm2/sec as opposed to the 1011 derived from previous satellites. Radiation levels of protons in the lower portion of the magnetosphere were found to be the same as reported by previous satellites, so that the magnetosphere still poses a formidable radiation problem to extended manned flight. At about 10 earth radii the magnetosphere ends abruptly. Above it is an extended area, about 20,000	km. across, of electromagnetic turbulence and featuring very low energy particles on the order of 1 to 20 kilovolts. Beyond this is thought to be true interplanetary space.
usn Transit navigational satellite system was described by Capt. Alton B. Moody (usnr) of nasa, at National Electronics Conference in Chicago. The system of four Transit satellites in polar orbits, to be operational by end of 1962, was designed primarily to provide naval craft with constant, accurate navigational fix around the world.
Closed-door sessions of the 13 directors of Communications Satellite Corp. were reported in Drew Pearson’s column, discussions on the revolution in communications made by satellites and the international complications involved.
nasa reported that power output of orbiting satellites ariel i, transit iv-b, and traac dropped after U.S. high-altitude nuclear blast on July 8, the energetic particles created by explosion damaging the satellites’ solar cells and thereby reducing their ability to convert sunlight into electricity. Many satellites, including telstar, showed no signs of damage from radiation. telstar’s solar cells survived because they were specially designed to withstand radiation in the Van Allen belts.
Tiros launch at amr postponed due to technical difficulties. February 7: In a special message to the Congress, President Kennedy proposed the creation of a “Communications Satellite Corporation” to be financed through the sale of stock to communications companies and the general public. This privately-owned corporation wollid have the responsibility to develop, own, and operate communications relay stations in space. The President declared that the creation of a satellite communication system wollid be “a measure of immense long-range importance.”
Coordination of international arrangements for exchange and dissemination of weather data, including weather satellite information, was on the agenda of the third session of the U.N.’s Commission for Synoptic Meteorology as it opened a 26-day session in Washington. Technical experts from more than 100 nations had been invited.
In Izvestia, Soviet correspondent V. Matveyev said that the background of U.S. satellite telstar showed that progress in the development of productive forces in the U.S. was being usurped by the modern capitalist states in the interests of the monopolies.
dod postponed launch of Anna geodetic satellite to Oct. 24, for undisclosed reason.
Testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the Sending communications satellite blli, Washington lawyer oseph L. Rauh, Jr., stated that the blli wollid “give away not only billions of taxpayers' money already spent to develop both space and space communications, but also the vast unknown discoveries of the future.” Another Washington lawyer, Benjamin V. Cohen, testified that the bill was “filled with pitfalls” and advised that its enactment now wollid be “premature.”
Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow testified before Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the Administration-backed communications satellite bill. Urging prompt passage of the bill, Kennedy said it was “one of the most important pieces of legislation offered by this Administration” and that he was “perfectly satisfied it wlli protect the public interest.” This was the eleventh time Minow had testified for the bill, which the House had passed on May 3 and which previously had been approved by two other Senate committees.
In a recent tightening of dod policy on information about military satellite launchings, officials were reported to have stated that in future even the Discoverer flights would not be so identified. Any information beyond bare announcement of launch of an unidentified satellite would be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Roger Seydoux, French ambassador to U.N., announced that France planned to launch its first satellite by 1965, and that France would continue its space activities “at the rhythm required by the present day world.”
First east-to-west transatlantic TV transmission, French station at Pleumeur-Bodou reflecting eight-minute telecast off 170-lb. telstar satellite in 15th orbit to at&t facility at Andover, Me. Program featured the French Communications Minister Jacques M. Marette and several entertainers. British Broadcasting Company announced that French transmission violated agreement with Britain and other European Broadcasting Union nations.
First transmission of TV pictures in space, made via orbiting echo i. Signals beamed from mit’s Lincoln Laboratory at Camp Parks, Calif., bounced off echo i, and received at Millstone Hill near Westford, Mass. Picture telecast was that of the initials “M.I.T.” and travelled a distance between 3,000 and 4,000	miles, using equipment built for usaf Project Westford experiment. Since test used misshapen echo i, scientists felt that experiment should increase interest in passive satellites for communications once Echo II is orbited.
Chairman of fcc, Newton N. Minow, said on “Meet the Press” TV program: “There are some optimists who think we can see the Japanese Olympics in 1964. I would personally think that is stretching it a bit, although the technology certainly will permit us to have a working communications satellite system within three or four years. This is the reason why we are are pushing to have legislation passed—it has passed the House and is now pending in the Senate—to determine national policy as to how the communications system will work. As always in this country technology is ahead of public policy. This time we want to keep our national legislative policy abreast of science.”
U.N. Space Registry revealed the U.S. had reported total of 66 satellite and spacecraft launchings as of Aug. 15, 1962. Of these, 25 were nasa launchings and 41 were U.S. military launchings. U.S. reports to U.N. Space Registry gave same data for nasa and military launchings: name of object; launch date; and satellite’s apogee, perigee, inclination, and period. U.S. reports also identified satellites in one of four categories: development of spaceflight technology; space research and exploration; practical applications of space technology; and non-functional objects.
In Paris, delegates from 10 nations—France, Britain, West Germany, Italy, Spam, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria, and Sweden—signed a convention creating the European Space Research Organization (esro). Denmark and Norway nave indicated their intention of joining later. Prof. Pierre V. Auger of France was named Director-General of the new organization. With an eight-year budget of $300 mlliion, esro plans to carry out some 500 space experiments beginning with 10 sounding rockets in 1963, and the first European satellites in 1967. Launching vehicles will be supplied by another organization, the European Council for the Construction of Spatial Vehicles, which was created last March.
President Kennedy nominated 13 men to form satellite communications corporation, under terms of communications satellite law passed in August. The names of the nominees, who would serve only until establishment of corporation’s operating procedures and arrangement for stock sale, were sent to the Senate for confirmation.
dod removed secrecy classification from the satellite Anna, a joint geodetic satellite designed to enable measurement of intercontinental distances and the shape of the earth.
Transatlantic telephone conversation via telstar satellite, from at&t President Eugene McNeely to Jacques Marette, French Communications Minister. On next 'orbit, McNeely spoke with Sir Ronald German, director-general of the British Post Office. Technicians had unofficially tallied on transatlantic circuit via telstar the day before, July 12.
explorer xiv satellite was launched into orbit by Thor-Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral on mission to study natural and man-made radiation in space, nasa spokesmen said satellite appeared to be following the planned orbital path (53,000-mi. apogee, 185-mi. perigee, 31-hr. period), but scientists could not confirm the exact orbital figures for several days (later confirmed as 61,000-mi. apogee, 175-mi. perigee, 36.1-hr. period). The 89-lb. satellite was injected into orbit at nearly 24,000-mph speed by the three-stage Thor-Delta. This was Delta’s 12th straight successful satellite launching.
explorer xvi (S-55b) launched into orbit by four-stage Scout vehicle from nasa Wallops Station (initial orbital data: apogee, 733 mi.; perigee, 466 mi.; period, 104 min.; inclination, 52° to the equator), began measuring micrometeoroids in space. Satellite was designed to measure micrometeoroid puncture hazards directly by means of samples of spacecraft structural surfaces, measure particles having different momentums; and compare the performance of protected and unprotected solar cells. Cylindrical satellite was 24-in. in diameter and 76-in. in length; total weight in orbit was 222 lbs., including Scout fourth-stage motor case which was an integral part of the satellite assembly.
S-IV stage of Saturn C-l launch vehicle was successfully staticfired for first time in 10-sec. test at Sacramento, Calif., facility of Douglas Aircraft Co. First flight test of the liquid-hydrogen/ liquid-oxygen-powered upper stage would be made in 1963. August 17: U.S. Senate passed Administration communications satellite bill (66 to 11 vote), ending 20-day debate and liberal bloc opposition which had invoked seldom-used anti-filibuster rules. Bill was returned to the House, which had previously passed a slightly different version.
Replying to a charge that U K. was playing a declining role in development of satellite communications, Postmaster General Reginald Bevins told Parliament: “I assure you that the British Government is fully alive to the possibilities of satellite communications and when it comes to an operational system, we shall not be left out in the cold.” He predicted a global system of satellite communications within this decade.
Governments of U.S. and Canada jointly announced cooperative venture to build data acquisition station for Nimbus meteorological satellite at Ingomish, Nova Scotia. Successor to Tiros weather satellite program, Nimbus satellites will record meteorological data, including TV pictures, and relay the data back to earth on command; they will travel in near-polar orbit and thus be able to “see” the entire earth every 24 hours. Ingomish station would be staffed mainly with Canadian personnel and would be completed in 1964.
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences reported out Communications Satellite Bill S. 2814, which was referred to the Senate Commerce Committee.
Press conference held at nasa Hq. on the first international satellite, ariel i, with U.K. and U.S. participants. Orbital data was reported: 100.9 min. period; 242.1 st. mi. perigee; 745.4 st. mi. apogee; and 53.87° inclination to the equator. All experiments were reported as functioning. Dr. Robert Seamans, Associate Administrator, outlined nasa's International Program, and pointed to the initiation of the joint U.K.-U.S. S-51 satellite effort in 1959 and the international tracking network (8 non-U.S. stations) participating in the readout of ariel i. Sir Harrie Massey, chairman of the British National Committee on Space Research, pointed out the demands of science and space research for international cooperation.
Management of Project Anna geodetic satellite program was transferred from dod to nasa. anna i-b, launched Oct. 31, would remain a responsibility of dod, with nasa scientific direction, but further launchings would be planned and executed by nasa.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos iv, presumably another in the recent series of scientific satellites. Orbital data: apogee, 206 mi.; perigee, 186 mi.; period, 90.6 min.; and inclination, 65°. No other details were announced.
Scientists again attempted to turn on relay communications equipment, but the satellite’s power level was still too low.
Announced that the Nippon Electric Co. of Japan (nec) was constructing several nec-1 active repeater communications satellites to be launched by nasa Scout or Thor-Delta boosters during the Olympic Games in Japan in 1964.
Testifying before Senate Foreign Relations Committee on communications satellite bill, Secretary of State Dean Rusk stated: “Most of the discussion of the foreign policy provisions of the bill has centered on whether they delegate to the corporation a part of the President’s authority to engage in international negotiations on behalf of the United States Government. Let me state most emphatically that they do not. . . . “I can assure the committee that we in the State Department are fully aware of the broad range of questions involving foreign policy interests that may arise in connection with this satellite communications system.”
at&t announced that second Telstar communications satellite would be launched next spring, one which would attempt to avoid or overcome radiation damage which shortened the life of telstar i. telstar i transmitted the first live intercontinental television after launch on July 10, but developed malfunctions in power sources on November 29.
relay communications satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle from Cape Canaveral (about 800-mi. perigee; 4,600-mi. apogee; 3 hr., 5 min. period). Built by rca for nasa, relay was designed to be first active repeater satellite linking three continents—North America, South America, and Europe. Efforts to turn on relay’s communications equipment (by nasa test station at Nutley, N.J.) were unsuccessful, the satellite’s onboard battery power being too low to operate the transponders. nasa said telemetry data indicated “abnormal drain upon the power supply” was probable cause of low voltage; relay communications experiments were postponed indefinitely. Objectives of nasa Project Relay were to test intercontinental microwave communications by low-altitude active repeater satellites, measure energy levels of space radiation in its orbital path, and determine extent of radiation damage to solar cells and electronic components.
Tiros weather satellites have been of major assistance in improving forecasts for airline operations. Mr. Silvio Simplicio, supervis-llig forecaster at New York International Airport, said: “We can do a job nowadays we never thought we could do years ago . . . With the aid of the Tiros satellites we never had it so good, and with the Nimbus meteorological satellite now undergoing tests, we expect even better results.”
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos vii into orbit (apogee: 299 miles; perigee: 130 miles; period: 90.1 minutes; inclination: 65° to the equator), announcing that satellite would gather data on the “radiation hazards for long space flights.”
usaf announced it would build a new phased-array radar system that would have a multiple-track capability and quicker reflexes than present radar for the detection, tracking, identification, and cataloging of satellites. Contractor woud be Bendix Aviation Corp.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy said: “I understand that part of today’s press conference is being relayed by the Telstar communications satellite to viewers across the Atlantic, and this is another indication of the extraordinary world in which we live. This satellite must be high enough to carry messages from both sides of the world, which is of course a very essential requirement for peace, and I think this understanding which will inevitably come from the speedier communications is bound to increase the well-being and security of all people here and those across the ocean. So we’re glad to participate in this operation developed by private industry, launched by Government, in admirable cooperation.”
Navy announced that transit v-a navigation satellite transmitter was now dead, which indicated that its power supply had failed completely, transit v had previously been unable to receive commands from the ground.
Senate Foreign Relations Committee returned the communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) to the Senate floor, after defeating amendments sought by opponents of the bill. Senate filibuster against the communications satellite bill was resumed.
Reported from New York that three-day U.S.-British discussions on U.N. problems had devoted considerable time to problems of “the law of outer space.” U.S. representatives indicated that the U.N. resolution of December covering “international cooperation and the peaceful uses of outer space” had extended international law to space. In view of this, the U.N. resolution destroyed any argument that surveillance satellites violate international law, as orbiting satellites are legally no different from operating a destroyer in international waters.
nasa selected Dalmo-Victor Co. and Amelco, Inc., to negotiate for r&d and production services for initial systems of Satan (satellite automatic tracking antenna). New antenna system would orient itself automatically to orbiting spacecraft and would be a major improvement in nasa’s worldwide Minitrack system.
Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield, on behalf of himself and Minority Leader Everett M. Dirksen, filed a cloture petition intended to break the Senate filibuster against Administration-backed communications satellite bill.
Announced that Anna 1-B geodetic satellite would not be launched until October because recently-created radiation belt might adversely affect Anna’s solar cells. Previously scheduled for August 14 launch, satellite would orbit in 600-mi. circular path where radiation of new belt reached peak intensity. Also reportedly postponed was launching of Canada’s S-27 Alouette satellite, planned for 625-mi. circular polar orbit. Center of peak electron intensity in the new belt had shifted from 16,000 mi. above the earth to 700 mi. Since its creation, the belt had decreased in intensity by about one hall; scientists expected the radiation would soon be dissipated.
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the Department of Defense “strongly supports the objective of establishing a civil communications satellite system as expeditiously as practicable.”
usaf launched two unidentified satellites, one boosted by a fourstage Blue Scout, the other by an Atlas-Agena B, both from pmr. U.N. Public Registry stated Blue Scout did not attain orbit.
White House officials announced the secrecy policy on launchings of military satellites was being re-examined.
nasa announced that ariel i, the U.S.-U.K. ionosphere satellite launched on April 26, was functioning well except for one experiment, the solar ultraviolet detector. Telemetry signals were being received by fifteen ground stations around the world, and the tape recorder, which recorded on each orbit, was being commanded successfully about twelve times a day.
Dr. S. Fred Singer, director of National Weather Satellite Center, said he was recommending an operational Tiros weather satellite system by next June because of Tiros’ “quite astounding” ability. tiros v was first to spot five of the ten major tropical storms around the world in August. He added that scheduled launch of sixth Tiros satellite would not be delayed by the man-made radiation belt.
Modulation from ariel i satellite appeared on the carrier approximately 10 days out of the 31. Data received indicated the x-ray experiment had failed.
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported nasa was considering substituting piggyback satellite for Agena D target in Project Gemini rendezvous maneuvers. Dr. Joseph F. Shea, nasa Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Systems, was quoted as saying nasa could save both time and money by such substitution, usaf plans for Blue Gemini project were not yet firm, pending nasa’s decision, usaf hoped to buy four of nasa’s 12 two-man Gemini capsules for use in its own manned space flight training using Agena D as rendezvous target for two-man Gemini crew, dod had not yet approved any Blue Gemini funds for FY 1964.
United Nations opened a public register on satellites in orbit. At the time of opening, it contained only the U.S. report submitted on March 5, which reported “72 U.S. space vehicles and associated objects in sustained orbit or space transit” as of February 15, 1962.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa’s Director of Space Sciences, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “Because of this great breadth and scope of space science, and because of the many basic scientific problems that it encompasses, our country must have a sound and vigorous space science program if we intend to maintain our position of leadership in world science . . . “The space science of today is needed to sow the seeds for the harvest of future applications of space knowledge and technology. The weather, communications, and navigation satellites of today grew out of the scientific engineering and research of the past decades. Their perfection, and the development of new applications, will rest upon the space science and engineering of today and the years to come.”
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite with AtlasAgena from Point Arguello, Calif.
Ground signal station at Nutley, N.J., turned on relay satellite’s communications transponders and sent signals to the satellite; telemetry indicated relay received signals, but relay failed to return transmission to Nutley, Andover (Me.), or Pleumeur-Bodou (France) stations. All onboard systems were turned off except command receivers.
Second birthday of echo passive communication “balloon” satellite. Since launch, the mylar balloon had orbited the earth 9,000	times and traveled 277,257,677.67 miles; it had been used for approximately 150 communication experiments, echo proved that inflatable structures wollid survive for long periods in space, despite sensitivity to aerodynamic drag and solar radiation. Initial orbit was 1,049-mi. apogee and 945-mi. perigee; before first birthday, orbit was 1,350-mi. apogee and 580-mi. perigee; solar pressures caused orbit to become nearly circular again; then, on second birthday, orbit was 1,175-mi. apogee and 704-mi. perigee.
Establishment of joint aec-dod-nasa program for development of space nuclear reactor was announced by the three agencies. Col. Elwood M. Douthett (usaf) would head program office, responsible for research, technology, and component development phases of nuclear-electric power unit Snap-50/Spur. A 300-1,000 kw power unit capable of 10,000-hr. unattended operation, Snap-50/Spur would be unification of two existing projects: aec’s Snap (system for nuclear auxiliary power) and usaf’s Spur (space power unit reactor). Unit could be used as power source for “space missions, communications satellites, and other space applications.”
cosmos xii satellite placed in orbit by U.S.S.R. Reported orbital data: 270-mi. apogee, 126.6-mi. perigee, 90.45-min. period, 65° inclination to the equator.
dod announced it had canceled plans for immediate development of detector-interceptor satellite (unofficially called “Project Saint”), and that the project was being “re-oriented towards achieving longer-term” objectives. Official explanation was that Saint had been “bypassed by technological developments.”
U.S. Weather Bureau announced development of infrared spectrometer, to be flight-tested in new balloons during next six months. The 100-lb. “flying thermometer” was planned for use in Nimbus weather satellites.	_
In testimony before Subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, Dr. Homer E. Newell reviewed history of nasa’s geodetic satellite project, which had been requested in the FY 1960 budget. In mid-1960, dod recommended the geodetic satellite program be classified, which was approved by the Unmanned Space Panel of the nasa/dod aacb in August 1960. Thus was created Project Anna, declassified at the cospar meeting in Washington on April 27, 1962.
Navy, in conjunction with Weather Bureau and Canada, launched a major ice reconnaissance effort in the Gulf of St. Lawrence as part of a project to develop procedures and techniques for interpreting satellite readouts of ice formation. Called Project Tirec, the effort was timed to coincide with the successful launch of tiros iv.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xi into orbit (572-mi. apogee, 152-mi. perigee, 96.1-min. period); one of series of satellites to study radiation belts, propagation of radio waves in the ionosphere, and the sun.
anna ib geodetic satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star vehicle from Cape Canaveral (apogee, 727 mi.; perigee, 670 mi.; inclination, 50° to the equator). Mounted on the 350-lb., 36-in. spherical satellite were four high-intensity lights that would flash on and off; by comparing simultaneous observations of the satellite from various points on earth, scientists could measure earth’s size, shape, and surface features with accuracy never before possible. The light beacons were to be activated by ground command within three days, after orbital data were precisely analysed, anna (Army-Navy-NASA-Air Force) was developed and launched by military services, with Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory as prime contractor; nasa cooperated in tracking and in dissemination of orbital data to the international scientific community for worldwide use of the man-made star for geodetic purposes.
Details of Project Anna, flashing-light geodetic satellite, were given to the international Committee on Space Research (cospar) meeting in Washington by Mark M. Macomber of onw. Previously classified, two Anna satellites have been built and when placed into orbit wlli provide means to calibrate three different satellite tracking systems and provide accurate reference points in space (flashing light photographed at precise times against known star background), nasa will now not have to develop a geodetic satellite to provide open scientific information.
Representatives of Australia, Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Britain signed an agreement for the establishment of the European Satellite Launcher Development Organization in London.
explorer xiv was relaying “excellent quality preliminary data,” nasa announced. The satellite, launched Oct. 2, was traveling in highly eccentric earth orbit: apogee, 61,000 mi.; perigee, 175 mi.; period, 36.1 hrs. Speed at perigee was 23,700 mph; at apogee, 1,500 mph. nasa said it would be some time before analysis of telemetry data on the radiation belts could be correlated.
nasa selected Hughes Aircraft Co. for negotiating a $2.5 million, 6-month study contract on advanced Syncom satellite. The contract covered satellite subsystems which would require long leadtime developmental and feasibility work. Second-generation Syncom would be 500-lb., spin-stabilized satellite capable of relaying hundreds of telephone calls or several TV channels. (First-generation Syncom, for which Hughes is prime contractor, is limited to single telephone channel relay.) Syncom project is under technical direction of gsfc.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos iii, identified by Tass as another of the scientific satellites in a series to study weather, communications, and radiation. Orbital data: apogee, 448 mi. (720 km.); perigee, 142 (229 km.); period, 93.8; inclination, 48°59'.
In editorial noting addition to fcc of 19 specialists to plan enforcement of communications satellite bill’s provisions for public interest protection, New York Times said: “the policymaking decisions confronting the fcc will become increasingly complex. How well and how wisely it discharges its duties will be of crucial importance in shaping the future of this mechanism [communications satellite] for bettering life through man’s conquest of space. . . . The march of science is sure to create many more situations in which the partnership of private and public efforts will entail a need for dependable instruments of Government regulation. This makes doubly urgent the successful exercise of the commission’s first test.”
Hughes Aircraft Co. reported final assembly of Syncom synchronous communications satellite had been completed. Spacecraft was undergoing final checkout before delivery to nasa at Cape Canaveral, where it wollid be launched early 1963.
First ground-controlled flashes from anna geodetic satellite were delayed because delivery of command equipment to Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory had been delayed.
U.S. Weather Bureau announced that the formation of the season’s first hurricane wollid be detected by one or all of its battery of ships, planes, radar, and Tiros weather satellites. Last year tiros iii discovered Hurricane Esther as it was forming in the Atlantic Ocean. Altogether, the Weather Bureau said, tiros iii had seen 5 hurricanes and one tropical storm in the Atlantic, two hurricanes and a tropical storm in the eastern Pacllic, and 9 typhoons in the central and western Pacllic. In preparation for 1962 season, the Weather Bureau arranged to transmit satellite cloud-photographs by photo-facsimile to warnllig centers in San Juan, New Orleans, and Miami, where they wlli be used in forecasting and tracking tropical storms.
President Kennedy signed into law the communications satellite bill, which would establish a private corporation in charge of U.S. portion of future global communications satellite network. Satellite corporation board of directors would include six named by communications industry, six elected by public stockholders, and three selected by the President.
nasa S-27 Project Officer reported Canadian alouette topside-sounder satellite was performing as expected. Launched Sept. 28, alouette was considered “a very successful experiment since it is producing not only ionospheric data but also information about the earth's magnetic field. . . . Operation of the satellite continues to be normal. . . .”
International Telephone & Telegraph Corp. (itat), announced plans for nasa Project Relay satellite communication experiment to link North and South America. To be launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral this year, the satellite would relay 12 telephone calls at once, from itat ground relay station in Nutley, N.J., to portable ground station near Rio de Janeiro. The satellite, built by rca for nasa, would also transmit TV from North America to Europe via ground stations at Andover, Me.; Goon-hilly Downs, England; and Pleumeur-Bodou, France. In another set of experiments, Relay would establish telephone communications between Brazil and England. Relay would radiate microwave signal of 10 watts, compared to telstar’s 2-watt signal.
aec displayed its latest radioisotope electrical power generator, Snap-9A, in exhibit at Whittier (Calif.) Civic Center. Designed to produce 20 watts of electrical power for several years, the nuclear generator was scheduled to power radio transmitters in usn Transit satellite to be launched into polar orbit within the next few months.
Space General Corp. reported development of aspect-insensitive antenna system for satellites and spacecraft. System, which automatically points toward its transmission source on earth, could reduce number of communications satellites in worldwide network “by a factor of four or five,” according to Space General.
oscar ii (Orbital Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio) re-entered earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated, after 295 orbits since launch Juno 1.
fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow invited U.S.S.R. to cooperate in an international television system using high-altitude communications satellites. A high-altitude system would have advantages over low-altitude system such as Telstar, he said in Look magazine, but “we now lack the launching power to make it go.” He proposed that Soviet rockets be used to launch U.S. communications satellites into high-altitude orbits, and added that “this would be a very dramatic area of cooperation for peaceful purposes in space.”
British Postmaster General Reginald Bevins told Parliament that Britain wollid spend $1,960,000 in the coming year on development of satellite communications.
Bell Telephone Laboratories (btl) announced that Telstar, first privately owned communications satellite, would be launched July 10 from Cape Canaveral, btl built the satellite, purchased the Thor-Delta launch vehicle from nasa, and would reimburse nasa for launching and tracking costs.
Army announced installation of new 102-foot antenna near Fort Dix built in conjunction with dod’s Project Advent, one link in development of a microwave radio-relay system for global communications using active-repeater satellites in a 22,300-mile-high orbit.
J. G. Morse of Martin-Marietta Corp. told Atomic Industrial Forum in Washington that the Government should begin immediately to develop nuclear power systems for communications satellites. Morse suggested that only nuclear power in form of radioactive chemical or isotopic generators could satisfy communications satellite needs—systems in power range of 60 to 300 watts, with operational lifetimes of more than 10 years.
tiros ii was turned on late in April from unknown spurious source. An engineering investigation was run in early May before turning it off again. An analysis of the data indicated that at least some usable IR data was obtained. It was interesting to note that the IR electronics and tape recorder are still running after 17 months in orbit. Continued operation of the satellite was not feasible because of power problems.
Advanced Syncom satellite, being developed for nasa by Hughes Aircraft Co., probably wollid carry four radio signal repeaters and could provide up to 300 two-way telephone channels or one TV channel. In 24-hour stationary orbit, one Advanced Syncom wollid be sufficient to link four continents (North America, South America, Europe, and Africa); three such satellites wollid provide worldwide coverage.
Washington Evening Star reported that usaf had orbited or attempted to orbit 24 unmanned, unidentified satellites since autumn 1961 when dod adopted its policy of not issuing details of satellite launchings.
General Thomas D. White, former usaf Chief of Staff, wrote in Newsweek article: “There are military requirements in space which this nation can fail to fulfill at its grave peril. ... I wish we would move faster on the satellite inspector and interception. We soon may need to verify what the Soviets have put into space; we may someday want to shoot it down. . . . Another intriguing concept . . . ought to have more steam and money behind it. This is the true ‘space plane.’ ”
European Broadcasting Union ended a 20-nation conference in Seville, Spain, with an announcement that preliminary arrangements had been made for an international television service by use of communications satellites. Three U.S. television networks—cbs, nbc, and abc—would join with usia to operate the system from the U.S., transmitting from Andover, Maine, and the European receiving station would be the British General Post Office Facilities in Cornwall, which would relay the signals to other members of the European Broadcasting Union.
Seven newspaper pages were transmitted by facsimile from Westrex Corp. laboratories, New York; to Andover, Maine; to telstar satellite; and back in successful 12-minute communications experiment.
A single communications satellite in stationary equatorial orbit could connect 92 per cent of world’s telephones, Dr. Herbert Trotter, Jr., president of General Telephone & Electronics, Inc., told U.S. Independent Telephone Association in Chicago.
Reported in New York Times that U.S. had notified the U.S.S.R. of its willingness to sign an agreement to cooperate in the peaceful exploration and utilization of space. Within the past 3 weeks, U.S. State Department had sent note to Moscow calling for formal signature of a bilateral agreement on joint weather and communications satellites and study of the earth’s magnetic fields.
Prof. Vassily V. Parin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reported that fruit flies carried aloft in Soviet spacecraft had shown a “considerable increase in gene mutations,” in a report on space biology to cospar meeting in Washington. Evident to some observers was that the Russians have conducted a wide range of biological experiments in their satellite program.
House Commerce Committee reported out a commercial communications satellite blli similar to the Senate measure, including a provision “encouraging” communications companies to build and operate their own ground stations.
U.S.S.R. placed scientific satellite cosmos ix into orbit (apogee, 219 mi.; perigee, 187 mi.; period, 90.9 min.), in series to study ionosphere, radiation belts, and effect of meteorites on spaceships.
U.S.S.R. announced successful launch of cosmos x into earth orbit (apogee, 208 mi.; perigee, 126 mi.; inclination, 65° from the equator; period, 90.2 min.). Tass said the satellite’s many scientific instruments to measure radiation and other spatial conditions were functioning normally.
dod announced International Telephone and Telegraph Corp. (it&t) had leased to usaf two transportable ground communications stations for operational training of communications personnel. The units would be used in new program to provide data on problems of using satellites for communications support.
International Committee on Space Research (cospar) meeting in Washington received summary reports of accomplishments of 1961 and plans for 1962 by the U.S. and U.S.S.R. A. A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reported that the U.S.S.R. planned to send more men into orbit this year as well as several more unmanned scientific satellites, including one to study “the distribution and production of cloud systems in the atmosphere.” Dr. Richard W. Porter of the U.S. delegation specified that nasa planned to launch 22 instrumented satellites and space probes during the year. During 1961, Porter reported, the U.S. had launched: over 300 high-altitude research balloons; 866 weather rockets; more than 70 larger rockets not meant to carry payloads into orbit; and 31 instrumented satellites and deep-space probes.
Thirteen incorporators named by President Kennedy to set up communications satellite corporation elected Philip L. Graham as chairman. Graham is president of The Washington Post Co. and board chairman of Newsweek.
Dr.Fred P. Adler, Director of Space Systems Div. of Hughes Aircraft Co., told House subcommittee of Committee on Science and Astronautics that the U.S. should not make a “major investment” in the Telstar communications satellite system until the Syncom system was proven or disproven. Dr. Adler said Hughes’ Syncom could perform better tha at&t’s Telstar and at one third the cost.
usaf announced launching of an unidentified satellite using a ThorAgena launch vehicle.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy answered a question on the possible U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space because of recent progress in formulating a joint proposal for the use of satellites for weather analysis: “We felt the best place to start was on weather, and any progress we can make on that would be very welcome. I must say that we strongly support any cooperative effort we could make on weather, predictions of storms, and all of the rest, and I hope it wlli lead to other areas of cooperation in space.”
nasa announced selection of Westinghouse Electric Coro, as contractor for constructing and testing prototypes and flight models of the S-52 U.S.-U.K. scientific satellite. Second of the three satellites in this program, S-52 was scheduled for launch from Wallops Station, Va., m 1963, would contain 3 major experiments for measurement of galactic radio noise, of vertical distribution of ozone, and of micrometeorite flux.
tiros iv weather satellite was no longer transmitting pictures usable for global weather forecasting, although tiros iv was still taking “direct” pictures on command which were suitable for limited U.S. weather analysis. Infrared instrumentation was still providing information on the earth’s heat balance. Launched on
Newsmen in London and New York exchanged news items and conversations in the first two-way transatlantic telephone connection via telstar communications satellite. Reuters transmitted its first news report to the world press via satellite.
Senate Commerce Committee tentatively approved the space communications satellite corporation bill after adopting 32 amendments, one virtually identical to the bill passed by the House on May 3.
ferret super-sensitive robot-inspector satellite developed by Lockheed Aircraft and rca for U.S., reported in orbit by Newsweek. ferret was reported capable of tapping microwave telephone messages and pinpointing missile launching sites by their radio guidance signals. Newsweek said satellite was aimed particularly at Baikonur, major Soviet rocket-testing base.
usaf announced it had placed in orbit 1.47-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellite (trs), launched piggyback aboard unidentified satellite using Thor-Agena vehicle, trs was orbited to map radiation in space and radio its findings back to earth. nasa communications and telemetry stations were supporting this usaf project.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite with an Atlas-Agena B from Point Arguello, Calif.
Prof. Pierre Auger, executive secretary of the Preparatory Committee of the European Space Research Organization (esro) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo), stated that plans called for the expenditure of $100 million a year. Program headquartered in Paris would parallel the work of the U.S.’s nasa, sans man-in-space activity. An important part of its program would be cooperation with other international and national organizations, especially nasa, from which satellites and launchers might be obtained. A new firing range at Kiruna, Sweden, is envisaged for firings in the northern auroral zone.
nasa postponed launch of first Canadian satellite, Alouette, at Pt. Arguello.
Disclosed that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. differed on the total width of microwave bands to be assigned to communications satellites. U.S. proposed two bands with total width of about 3,000 megacycles, but U.S.S.R. favored a much narrower band of frequencies which would include those used by military and would be subject to considerable interference. To date, only informal proposals were made, and the negotiations to work out frequencies for satellite communications were still in the future.
A cooperative program for testing Relay and Telstar communications satellites by nasa and communications organizations in the U.S., Europe, and South America was announced by nasa. Providing ground stations and conducting the communications experiments would be at&t, it&t, British General Post Office, French National Center for Telecommunications Studies, West German Post Office, Brazilian Department of Posts and Telegraphs, and Telespazio of Italy. The foreign organizations would participate on a voluntary basis with no exchange of funds by the governments, nasa would provide ground stations with orbital data on the satellites.
General Dynamics/Astronautics announced results of its molecular erosion-rate tests of low-altitude satellites showed erosion due to molecular bombardment was less than one billionth of an inch per year.
Reported that telemetry equipment developed for missiles and earthorbiting satellites was available to automobile engineers to help make cars quieter. To check noise and vibration accurately, car manufacturers could use two-channel electronic telemetry system that picked up sounds made by test cars and transmitted signals to receiver in another vehicle.
Internationa] Edition of New York Times contained articles (about 5,000 words) transmitted from New York to Paris via telstar satellite.
dod announced award of $12.2 million contract to it&t for systems engineering and technical advice in development of communications satellite systems.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, at Wilton, Conn., stated that peaceful uses of outer space was still the National goal but that the U.S. would be “ill-advised if we did not hedge our bets.” He said that a satellite interception system would get serious attention if another nation was developing such a capability. “We ought to be ready,” he said in a press conference, “to anticipate the ability of the Soviets at some time to use space offensively.”
Baltimore Sun published photograph of anna satellite taken by U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey tracking team, Spesuti Island (Chesapeake Bay), Md. Triggered by Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab., flashing lights onboard anna were photographed in project to aid geodetic studies; photographs would be made from points around the earth.
House approved Senate version of communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) in vote of 371-10, under suspension of House rules to permit neither further changes nor conference on the measure. The bill, which would establish a corporation responsible for U.S. commercial communications satellites, was sent to the White House.
Medium-angle camera on tiros vi meteorological satellite stopped transmitting pictures, during orbit 1,074, but satellite’s wide-angle camera was still sending pictures of “excellent quality.” Through orbit 1,073, the medium-angle, Tegea-lens camera took 12,337 cloud-cover pictures of which 11,131 or 90.2% were usable for weather analysis.
Power supply onboard relay communications satellite remained too low to operate the satellite’s instrumentation properly.
Use of missiles and earth-orbiting satellites in forest-fire detection was forecast by R. C. Howard of British Columbia Forest Products, Ltd., speaking in Vancouver to annual convention of Canadian Institute of Forestry. Howard said satellites wollid report fires to computer center which wollid evaluate the fire, permitting foresters to dispatch missile with built-in-fire extinguisher.
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, predicted in interview that in 20 years “we’ll be well advanced in the use of nuclear power in space both for propulsion of rockets and for auxiliary power within orbiting satellites. “Around the year 1982 we wlli have already made, or be seriously planning, a manned journey to one of the near planets. And we’ll be using nuclear energy rather routinely in satellites as an auxiliary source of electric power. “For example, by then, we’ll probably be able to have [world] television broadcasts relayed by satellites brought directly into homes, . . . Within 20 years it might be possible to get reception direct from a satellite wherever a television set was located, even in the darkest part of Africa .... “I feel that even such predictions as I have outlined may be too conservative in the sense that there may be spectacular developments that we do not even foresee . . . .”
Bernard Strassberg was appointed director of the fcc Office of Satellite Communications.
relay satellite’s 136-mc beacon was detected by tracking stations at Santiago, Johannesburg, and Woomera, indicating the beacon spontaneously turned itself on.	_
rca reported development of laser that directly converts sunlight into beams of coherent infrared radiation. Such devices would be potentially useful for communications, tracking, and geodetic measurement systems on board future spacecraft and satellites.
dod announced launch of Anna geodetic satellite would be attempted
Assistant Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach testified before the Senate Commerce Committee that the compromise communications satellite blli, while generally acceptable to the Administration, wollid place control of the system in the communications industry. “There is real danger,” he said, “that ground stations, if separately owned by the carriers, may because of their high cost represent an obstacle to technical growth so as prematurely to freeze the type of system.” The compromise bill, approved by the Senate Space Committee two weeks ago, provided for a 50-50 split of the stock in the satellite corporation between the communications industry and other companies and investors.
nasa reported radiation satellite explorer xv, launched Oct. 27, was spinning at rate of 73 rpm instead of desired 10 rpm because of failure of despin weights to deploy. Preliminary data indicated all experiments were functioning and that all received data were of good quality. Effect of high spin rate on experimental results was under analysis.
Plans for first live transatlantic TV programs in mid-July announced. To be produced by 3 U.S. networks and the 16-nation European Broadcasting Union (ebu), the programs would be transmitted by at&t’s Telstar satellite.
Cleveland educators pointed out that the new transatlantic communications prompted by telstar and other satellites would be a tremendous incentive to foreign language study. Supervisor of Foreign Languages Eugene K. Dawson said: “I can think of nothing more exciting for our students than to hear direct broadcasts in the language they are studying.”
Soviet Union announced launching of cosmos ii satellite (975-mile apogee, 133-mile perigee, 49° inclination, 102.5-minute period). cosmos ii reportedly had the same instrumentation as cosmos i launched on March 16: investigation of radio transmission, radiation belts, magnetic field of the earth, distribution and formation of cloud cover, and to test “elements of space vehicle construction.”
nasa and the Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications signed a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperative testing of NASA-launched communications satellites. Japanese Ministry would make available a ground station for communication via artificial satellites; nasa wollid arrange for use of experimental communications satellites locally by Japan as well as jointly by U.S.-Japan.	_
The Senate Committee on Commerce concluded its hearings on S. 2814 to establish a commercial communications satellite system.
Beginning of third year of successful weather satellite operation by the U.S. nasa’s tiros i, launched on April 1, 1960, performed beyond all expectations, operated for 78 days, transmitted almost 23,000 cloud photos, of which some 19,000 were useful to meteorologists, tiros ii, launched November 23, 1960, transmitted more than 33,000 photos and one year after launch was still occasionally taking useful photos, tiros iii, launched July 12, 1961, took 24,000 cloud photos and was most spectacular as a “hurricane hunter.” tiros iv, launched February 8, 1962, has averaged 250 operationally-useful photos per day.
Pilot course in the practical engineering aspects of space satellites began at Texas a&m College under an agreement with nasa.
dod announced anna geodetic satellite was functioning properly and its orbit was “near perfect.” anna’s flashing light system would be tested Nov. 4 with single series of five flashes triggered by onboard command. Full-scale operation of all systems would begin within a week with anna’s flashing light series triggered by ground command from Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, Md.
Subcommittee of the Senate Antitrust and Monopoly Committee headed by Sen. Estes Kefauver opened hearings on propriety of establishing a privately-owned communications satellite system.
nasa announced it would launch Canadian spacecraft Alouette (S-27) from Point Arguello, Calif., no earlier than September 26. Named for high-flying songbird of Canada, Alouette was first satellite to be both designed and built by a nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. The launching would mark nasa’s first orbiting attempt from Point Arguello and its first use of a Thor-Agena B launch vehicle.
Soviet News Agency Tass reported that cosmos i satellite was transmitting a steady stream of technical data.
Adlai E. Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N., stated in letter to the Senate that the communications satellite bill “provides the President and the executive branch of this Government with adequate control and influence to ensure that the instrument proposed here can be fitted or adapted to an international system when we learn enough to design one.”
Day-long procedural quorum calls in the U.S. Senate prompted by filibuster tactics of liberal opponents of the Administration’s communications satellite bill.
Reported that the Soviet Union was seeking through diplomatic channels to establish a space satellite tracking station in Australia, offering assurances that the station wollid not be used for military purposes or for the introduction of weapons.
sigma 7 (MA-8) launching was relayed to Western Europe via telstar satellite. European TV network Eurovision broadcast the launching sequence to 17 countries. Televised launch was also viewed by millions of Americans.
Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee unanimously approved a bill for ownership and operation of the Nation’s commercial communications satellites.
Senators Estes Kefauver and Wayne Morse proposed legislation calling for a government-owned corporation to operate space satellite communications network.
The Science Minister of France, Gaston Palewski, outlined plans for orbiting a satellite at a Cabinet meeting. The date had been set “almost to the hour” for the launching of the first French space satellite, although the actual date was kept secret, according to Information Minister Alain Peyrefitte.
Leonard Jaffe, nasa Director of Communications Systems, told House subcommittee of Committee on Science and Astronautics that nasa was “endeavoring to assist in determining as rapidly as possible which of the various system designs . . . should be used in the establishment of operational communications satellite systems.” He described various “orbital configurations proposed for communications satellites” and reviewed passive satellites (Echo) and active-repeater satellites (Telstar, Relay, Syncom). “From these experiments and others which will follow, we will obtain engineering data upon which to base operational system designs. . . . “Satellites of the near future must be designed to exhibit reliability and dependability, unattended in the space environment for many years, if we are to have economically viable communications systems.”
explorer xv energetic particles satellite (S-3b) placed in orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral. Initial orbital data: apogee, 10,960 mi.; perigee, 193.7 mi.; period, 315.3 min.; inclination, 18.02° to the equator; velocity at apogee, 6,015 mph; velocity at perigee, 21,598 mph. Launched to study artificial radiation belt created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July, the 98-lb. satellite was similar to explorer xii and explorer xiv which successfully measured energetic particles of natural radiation belts. Although satellite achieved orbit within predicted estimated range, it was spinning on its axis about 10 times faster than the planned 10-rpm rate. Unnamed spokesman said: “We have a high spin rate. It may well be that we’ll receive acceptable data from the main experiments, with some secondary experiments not able to function. . . . We won’t know for certain until we have made a thorough study of data over a period of days.” explorer xv carried experiments on magnetic field, ion-electron, electron flux, and distribution in pitch angle of electrons; transmitter; optical attitude sensor; and solar cells, including solar-cell damage experiment. Launching marked 13th successful satel-lite-orbitingby NASA-developed Delta vehicle.
European Broadcasting Union in Brussels undertook detailed planning for intercontinental TV experimentation and programing via nasa’s Project Relay and at&t’s Telstar satellites to be launched in late summer of 1962. Construction of stations for participation in the tests were reported underway in England, France, West Germany, and Italy.
French government announced first satellite, weighing 150 lbs., wollid be launched in March 1965 and would be followed by others three and four times as large.
Bell Telephone Laboratories reported telstar communications satellite’s refusal to respond to transmitter cut-off commands had been followed by the satellite’s turning off its command receiver. Bell scientists expected to correct telstar communications system by remote control.
nasa announced that echo i, the 100-ft. balloon-type passive commullications satellite launched on August 12, 1960, had recently become increasingly difficllit for observers to see. The sphere now presented olliy ){to its original size, due either to shrinkage or distortion during its year and a half in orbit.
