U.S.S.R. unannounced launching (1963 1-A, 1-C), with fragments re-entering from Jan. 5 through Jan. 11. Launch reported by gsfc in Satellite Situation Report, June 15, 1963. (gsfc Sat. Sit. Rpt., June 15,1963)
nasa announced award of $97,000 study contract to Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., for preparation of plan to use satellites for collection of weather and oceanographic data from unmanned weather stations, buoys, and balloons. Data collection satellite would interrogate each station, store information on magnetic tape, then transmit it to ground retrieval station upon command, (nasa Release 63-116)
Both U.S. communications satellites, telstar i and relay i, came to life, telstar i, silent since Nov. 23, responded to signals sent by Bell Telephone Laboratories; later in the day, relay i, silent since first being orbited Dec. 13, responded twice to television test patterns sent from New Jersey and Maine. (Wash. Post, 1/4/63, Al)
Five New Jersey newspapermen held first press conference through space, using relay i communications satellite in 25-min. broadcast to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Photo of newsmen sent via relay i during conference was of good quality, Rio officials said. (AP, Santa Monica Evening Outlook, 4/17/63)
At Goddard Scientific Satellite Symposium, results from ariel i scientific satellite were presented. Data from ariel confirmed ionospheric temperature relationship with latitude as detected by alouette i. Solar x-ray detectors found solar flares are made up of two phases—(1) heating of sun’s corona above sunspot, increasing x-ray flux by factor of 10; and (2) quiet period marked by flux leveling off at accelerated level, followed by streams of electrons pushed into chromosphere, causing x-ray emissions at 500 times greater than normal. (Av. Wk., 3/25/63, 26)
United Arab Republic announced it planned to orbit a weather satellite this year. (Wash. Daily News, 4/23/63)
Dr. Eberhard Wahl, afsc scientist, announced development of Phototype Optical Surveillance System—electro-optical telescope capable of tracking spacecraft more than 3,000 mi. away. Telescope’s three main components: ‘27-in. optic for gathering light, electrooptical device for measuring light, and computer-command system for controlling tracking of satellites. (AP, NTT, 5/4/63, 26) _
relay i communications satellite, its power supply voltage and temperature returned to normal, responded to command signals turning on its telemetry transmitter and encoder, nasa planned to resume normal experimental operations with the satellite March 14. relay i had been turned off because of severe power drain encountered March 9. (nasa Release 63-56)
Bochum Institute for Satellite and Space Research, Germany, announced reception of 15-min. radio transmission on frequencies normally used by Soviet spacecraft. Commercial radio station in Paris broadcast that U.S.S.R. had placed a man into space but did not elaborate. Soviet news agency Tass made no mention of space launching, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/4/63)
tiros v meteorological satellite, launched June 19, 1962, entered its eleventh month of operation, surpassing previous longevity production record of tiros n. Since launch, tiros v had collected and transmitted more than 53,000 cloud-cover photographs of which more than 42,000 were meteorologically usable, (nasa Release 63-77)
The Rosman, N.C., tracking and data acquisition facility was dedicated by nasa. A key station in nasa’s Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), the 85-ft.-diameter parabolic antenna at Rosman would be used to track and receive the large flow of telemetered data from the large orbiting observatories and would relay the data by telephone and radio to gsfc for processing and analysis, (nasa Release 63-240)
Reported that State Dept, officials were “dismayed” and surprised Kv ronArfc frnm T ArtHnn Hiqf TT TT Cnvommpnf liorl onTPhrl tn ^	---- ^	^ 'y ~~ —"	~ establish independent space communications system with 12 British companies. U.S. was hoping its Communications Satellite Corp. could become the U.S. participant in a global communications system, a noncompetitive, nonduplieative, and cooperative system. State Dept, cabled London to request clarification as to whether U.K. was actually moving to establish a competitive— and potentially duplicating—space communications system. (Finney, NTT [West. Ed.], 3/13/63)
dod launched unidentified satellite from pmr employing Thor-Agena D launch vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
dod launched two unidentified satellites and Tetrahedral Research Satellite (trs n) using Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. 3-lb. trs n was to measure charged particle intensity in Van Allen belts. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev formally welcomed Cosmonauts Valery F. Bykovsky and Valentina V. Tereshkova in ceremony before crowds in Moscow’s Red Square. Later, in Kremlin reception, the cosmonauts were awarded Hero of the Soviet Union and Pilot-Astronaut citations as well as Order of Lenin and Gold Star medals. (Topping, NYT, 6/23/63,1,8) Jv/ne 33: explorer xiv was eclipsed by the moon—a possible first in satellite history. Satellite was some 70,000 km. from the earth with apogee portion in the sun’s direction when a 19-min. shadow occurred between approximately 0151 and 0210 UT. (gsfc Historian)
A solar array characteristics test was run on the orbiting syncom: n synchronous-orbit communciations satellite. The test (on Nov. 22) found a power loss of 20% from the effects of solar radiation on the solar cells during four months in orbit. The text confirmed the desirability of changing the next Syncom satellite—Syncom -c__„ /„________ii„ “liUlll ^Jj 11 ACIIO .1 .000*111. tjuai V£j OOVCl oliuco tu u/ p CCllO with ,012-in. quartz cover slides. The newer n/p cells had shown in ground evaluation to last up to 20 times longer than conventional p/n cells, (gsfc Historian; Goddard News, 12/2/63, 2) Reported in Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering that a “hitchhiker” satellite called Satar (Satellite-Aerospace Research) would be built and tested by General Dynamics. A bullet-shaped spacecraft 12 ft. long and 30 in. in diameter, Satar would be incorporated in Atlas missiles used for training missions. It would consist of a payload section capable of accommodating “several hundred pounds of experiments” and a propulsion section including a solid-propellant motor, guidance, attitude control, and related equipment. Satar would be released after Atlas burnout and coast about 15 min. before its own engine ignited to send it into orbit. First flight was scheduled for next spring. {A&AE, Nov. 1963,158)
Dr. Dwain W. Warner, curator of ornithology at Minnesota Museum of Natural History, proposed in Natural History magazine that scientific satellites be used in tracking animal migrations. Dr. Warner proposed animals be tagged with transistor radios and batteries weighing y2 to 2 oz; satellite in 200-mi. polar orbit would pick up signals and transmit them to scientists who could plot animals’ locations and correlate them with other data from satellites. Transistors had been successfully tested with small animals and large birds, but tracking by ground stations was hindered by horizon line; satellite with 24 ground receiving stations could provide constant contact with migratory creatures. (AP, Balt. Sum,, 2/6/63)
Bell Telephone Laboratories announced telstar i communications satellite disconnected its storage batteries and stopped communicating, apparently after misinterpreting a ground command. As in previous communications blackout in November, shutoff occurred as telstar’s changing orbit brought it into strong sections of radiation belt. This pattern led Bell engineers to “suspect that the continued inhibiting effects of radiation on transistors” is to blame, according to Bell spokesman Bruce Stasser. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/21/63, AS)
relay i communications satellite transmitted its first transatlantic television programs, sending British and French viewers clear pictures of ceremonial unveiling of Mona Lisa in Washington and 10 min. of network program “Today.” (upi, Wash. Post, 1/10/63^.3)
At Fourth Congress of the World Meteorological Organization, being held in Geneva, U.S. delegation circulated paper describing plans to orbit a Nimbus weather satellite in 1963, the satellite to provide daily photographic observations of the globe. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 4/8/63)
usaf announced it would attempt second Project West Ford orbiting belt of 400 million copper filaments “in the near future.” First such attempt, Oct. 21, 1961, was unsuccessful because container failed to eject the needles, mit Lincoln Laboratory, conducting experiment for usaf, said in fact sheet that “no other communication method suggested to date, by satellite or otherwise, offers comparable reliability, in terms of global coverage with virtually complete invulnerability to destruction or jamming . . . .” (dod Release 637-63; Finney, NYT, 5/7/63, 29; Laurence, NYT, 5/12/63, E9)
usaf Space Systems Div. requested proposals from 34 firms for development of medium-altitude communications satellite system. (M&R, 2/4/63,11)
S. Fred Singer, Director of National Weather Satellite Center of U.S. Weather Bureau, was awarded first Astronautics Space Research Medal of British Interplanetary Society. {A&AE, 8/63,119)
January 15: telstar communications satellite relayed pictures of opening of East German Communist party congress to television viewers in U.S. (Chicago Trib., 1/16/63)
dod announced solar radiation i satellite, orbited June 22,1960, with transit n-A, was turned on again on Feb. 25, after 22 months of silence, (dod Release 321-63)
Communications Satellite Corp. issued to industry a Request for Proposals for Engineering Design of a Commercial Communications Satellite, to include satellite design for either a medium-altitude system or a synchronous-orbit system. The RfP’s were directed to development of ComSatCorp’s basic comsat system, with initial global coverage to be achieved not later than 1967 for medium-altitude system or 1968 for synchronous-orbit system. Design proposals, due Feb. 10, would be evaluated and ComSatCorp would select one or more for six-month design contracts. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
General B. A, Sohriever (afsc), addressing Armed Forces Dinner in Louisville, Ky., said: “I am convinced that we must.. . investigate the military potential of space systems. We simply cannot afford to leave the space frontier unguarded. Satellite systems promise to strengthen our present defenses in a number Of ways. For example, they show definite potential for improved warning, communications, and navigation systems. “We may also need to develop the ability to defend ourselves against space-borne weapons. The Soviets have threatened many times to use their space technology for military purposes. Until we know for sure that they will not carry out these threats, it is logical to pursue the development of ways to identify, inspect and rendezvous with a non-cooperative object in space . . . .” (Text, afsc Release 35-R-41)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from pmr using Thor-Agena D launch vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64) August 26: Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) submitted to the House the conference report and statement on bill (H.R. 7500) to authorize FY 1964 appropriations to nasa. As reported, bill would authorize total appropriations of $5,350,820,400. Report was submitted to Senate August 28. (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. II/ 133)	...	.	.
Communications Satellite Corp. announced award of contract to Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. for computer services to facilitate ComSatCorp’s comparative global satellite communications system studies. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from pmr using Thor-Agena vehicle, (upi, Chic. Tnb., 4/27/63)
Navy Bureau of Weapons’ astronautics group approved a study by the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and recommended that the Thor-Able-Star be substituted for the Scout as the launch vehicle for the Navy Transit navigational satellites. Navy had been dissatisfied with the reliability record of the nasa Scout boosters in the Transit program. {Av. Wk., 11/25/63, 23)
tiros vii meteorological satellite discovered Hurricane Debra, fourth hurricane of season, headed north in Atlantic southeast of Bermuda. (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/23/63)
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya ZvezJa (Red Star) quoted Edward Teller (U.S. nuclear physicist), Gen. L. Lemnitzer (usa), and other Americans regarding U.S. plans to “militarize the moon, including the delivery of an ‘absolute’ weapon there for the conduct of interplanetary nuclear war.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 1/4/63,3) Januai'y 5: relay i communications satellite made two successful intercontinental television test transmissions between Andover, Me., and Goonhilly, England, one for 23 min. and the other for an hour; teletype tests were also successfully made from Nutley, N.J., to Fucino, Italy, nasa said relay i’s power difficulty had apparently corrected itself, but “project officials have experienced difficulties with relay responding properly to commands. Tests during the past three days were possible by employing special operational procedures and altering command sequences to the satellite. Experiments will continue to evaluate the satellite’s communications and command systems.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/6/63, A8)	_
stncom ii communications satellite relayed its first live telephone conversations, a transmission between President Kennedy and Nigerian Prime Minister Sir Abubaker Tafawa Balewa and other messages between U.S., Nigerian, and U.N. officials. Arranged by usia, the demonstration program originated from the White House and Voice of America studios in Washington and from ground station aboard usns Kingsport in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. (Goddard News, 8/26/63, 3; Av. Week, 9/2/63, 24)
U.S.S.R. placed cosmos xv scientific earth satellite in orbit (apogee 317 km.; perigee, 173 km.; period, 89.77 min.; inclination to equator, 65°). Tass said onboard the satellite was “scientific equipment intended for continuing the space research according to the program announced by Tass on 16 March 1962.” Onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 4/23/63, afss-t Trans.)
Secretaiy of Commerce Luther H. Hodges released letter of commendation to Francis W. Reichelderfer, retiring as Chief of Weather Bureau, which said: “. . . When you took your post 25 years ago, the Bureau established its first network of radio-sonde upper air observations. On your departure you are leaving a legacy of the world’s largest and most sophisticated weather system, one that is already effectively using such modem tools as satellites and computers. “During your tour of duty, your leadership and inspiration guided meteorologists throughout the world to work toward the common goal of a truly global weather system. Your plans to expand your international activities will, I am sure, contribute much to world cooperation and advancement in atmospheric sciences . . . .” (Commerce Dept. Release G-63-142)
usaf awarded contract to Goodyear Aerospace to study and develop a post-Echo passive communications satellite. Ten ft. in diameter, the satellites would be a wire grid covered with a plastic film. Once inflation in orbit had occurred, the plastic film would dissipate under ultraviolet radiation from the sun, and the circular wire grid would be left. It was thought that greater reflectivity could be achieved with the wire grid than with solid-skin spheres such as Echo and that they would have a more stable orbit since they would not be as subject to the solar wind. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/30/63, 172)	_
usaf satellite (1962 Beta Kappa-1), launched Oct. 26, 1962, to study artificial radiation, had discovered evidence that radiation from U.S. Starfish high-altitude nuclear test would last up to 10 years, Project Director Dr. Ludwig Katz of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories disclosed. The previously unidentified satellite, called “starad,” was built at dod request when it became apparent artificial radiation might be damaging orbiting satellites, carried nine different instruments for measuring the artificial radiation, usaf spokesmen said, in their opinion, data from this satellite were influential in Dr. James A. Van Allen’s reversal of his previous position that the radiation would last only a year (see March 15). Dr. Katz said the satellite found there had been little decrease in artifical radiation’s intensity since the satellite was launched. “The decay of the belt is so small that a lifetime of five to ten years would not surprise me.” starad also detected increased radiation from Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions of Oct. 28 and Nov. 1. It transmitted until Jan. 18 when its batteries deteriorated. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63; Wash. Post, 4/7/63; Av. Wk., 4/15/63,26)
Chief of nasa Future Applications Satellites Capt. Alton B. Moody (usnr), addressing graduating class of U.S. Naval Academy, described nonmilitary navigation satellite system being studied by nasa. One such system could provide position determination, air traffic control, ship surveillance, search and rescue, fleet monitoring, and weather routing services. (Text)
Dr. Simon Ramo, of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, was quoted as being skeptical of feasibility of using artificial satellites for militarily aggressive purposes, saying: “We often hear the mistaken impression that a bomb dropped from a satellite will fall to earth. Of course, it won’t. It will reach the earth only if it is pushed away from the satellite with the right amount of force and with controlled direction. The whole launching operation (from a satellite) is more difficult that that of launching an icbm from a point on earth. Also, the flight will take very much longer....” (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 4/11/63)
nasa and French National Center for Space Studies (cnes) jointly announced signing of Memorandum of Understanding for a cooperative U.S.-France program to investigate propagation of vlf electromagnetic waves. First phase of the program would consist of two electromagnetic-field experiments with French-instrumented payloads to be launched from nasa Wallops Station. Second phase, to be implemented upon mutual consent that Phase I had proved the experiments to be scientifically and technically feasible, would consist of orbiting of scientific satellite, designed and built by France, with a Scout vehicle. (Memo of Understanding; nasa Release 63-49) 741-623 0—64--7
Television photographs of Lt. Col. Valery F. Bykovsky (U.S.S.R.) in orbiting spacecraft were viewed by U.S. television audience. Soviet-bloc TV system Intervision’s broadcast of photographs from space was received in Helsinki, where telecast was put onto Western Europe TV system Eurovision. Telecast was taped and edited in London, then sent to Goonhilly Downs for transmission via telstar n communications satellite to receiving station in Andover, Me.; there it was sent to New York, where all three U.S. networks picked it up. {NYT, 6/15/63, 35)
nasa announced that tiros vi weather satellite was no longer sending usable cloud-cover pictures, after 13 months of successful operation ana some o i ,ow pictures. \ naba AW3ie<»oo uu—Z&Z)
telstar n was successfully tracked for 18 min. by ground station northeast of Tokyo. Satellite microwave beacon signal was turned on by ground station at Andover, Maine. No communications tests were conducted, but tracking exercises between Tokyo and Andover were to continue through July 20, in preparation for communications experiments to be conducted “during the next period of mutual visibility, beginning in April 1964. (Bell Lab. Release, 7/9/63 in SID, August 1963; Reuters, NTT, 7/8/63,36)
relay i communications satellite was turned off because of severe drain on the onboard power supply, a difficulty similar to that encountered during first week after launch. Power drain was encountered March 9 after relay i’s orbit had been in earth’s shadow for five weeks and spacecraft temperatures were low. When satellite was exposed again to constant sunlight, a voltage regulator switch became too hot to operate properly and power drain occurred, nasa and rca engineers were hopeful that onboard batteries could be recharged by power from solar cells during period of rest. Between January 3 and March 9, relay i had operated successfully in about 500 communications experiments, including first voice, facsimile, and teletype links via satellite between U.S. and South America, (nasa Release, 63-54)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D from Pt. Arguello with unidentified satellite. (M&R, 9/16/63, 11-12)
General Electric Co. announced usaf Titan II “carries a re-entry vehicle which would ‘significantly increase’ this country’s ability to penetrate antimissile defenses.” (Witkiin, y7/29/63) July 29: nasa announced syncom u communications satellite was performing “extremely well,” drifting westward at rate of 4.5° per day. Orbital data: 22,800-mi. apogee, 22,110-mi. perigee, 1,454min. period (slightly more than 24 hours), syncom ii was expected to be on station above Brazil in about three weeks. (AP, NYT, 7/30/63)
Communications satellites have been used for some time by at&t to transmit a small portion of the overseas telephone calls that normally would have gone by underwater cable. After each call the telephone company would call up the user and ask him about the quality of his call. None of the users were told that they had talked via satellite, since part of the experiment was to test the user’s psychological reactions and these might have been affected by such knowledge. Although the communications satellites are not licensed for commercial use, at&t would pay the U.S. government a fee for the time used for the experiments. Only the medium-altitude Telstar and Relay satellites were used. (Finney, NYT, 11/24/63, 16)
In International Geophysics Bulletin, nasa proposed contributions to iqsy (1964-65) were outlined. Prominently among them: sounding rockets; ionosphere explorers and monitors; atmospheric structure satellite; Oso, Ego, Pogo satellites; Imp, Pioneer, Mariner, and Surveyor probes. (IG Bulletin, 1/63, 12-19) During January: Engineers Joint Council issued report. The Nation’s Engineering Research Needs, 1965-85, which concluded: (1) present system of allocating resources to U.S. r&d is producing imbalance in technical effort; (2) non-defense agencies of Government do not have adequate research programs relating to problems in public sector of the economy; (3) r&d by private industry is influenced heavily by Government r&d allocations; and (4) r&d efforts applied to creating new materials and products have been highly successful, but have not been matched by development of systems to utilize these products and materials efficiently. ejc recommended: (1) periodic review of U.S. r&d allocations and “their compatibility with national goals”; (2) council and professional societies make periodic studies of technical and social problems to which engineering profession should make significant contributions, but “for which engineering programs and institutions appear to be inadequate”; (3) educational institutions and professional societies expand their programs of systems engineering “aimed at optimizing the technical engineering and social systems within which improved materials and devices perform their designed functions.” (Industrial Research, 1/63, 5)
European interest in a cooperative communications satellite effort was continuing. The U.K. and 12 other European countries met on the subject in Paris in May 1963 and in London in July. Various committees were formed to study the technical, economic, and political problems involved and these committees were to report to a meeting to be held in Rome on Nov. 27. The general direction of the discussions has been toward some sort of partnership between the European countries and the U.S. ComSatCorp. (Farnsworth, NYT, 11/3/63,12F)
U.S. Weather Bureau announced it was purchasing 11 ground stations capable of receiving cloud pictures directly from Nimbus meteorological satellites, to be launched by nasa beginning late this year. The stations would receive cloud pictures of their local areas taken by automatic picture transmission (apt) subsystem in the weather satellite, apt device would take and transmit cloud picture automatically every 208 sec., each photograph showing area of about l,000-mi.-by-l,000-mi. Meteorologists expected to make immediate use of Nimbus cloud pictures. (Dept, of Commerce Release WB 63-3)
Hughes Aircraft Co., nasa contractor for Syncom communications satellite, outlined design features of military synchronous communication satellite for usaf Space Systems Div. and Aerospace Corp. {Av. Wk., 9/9/63, 23)
Enea Bossi, international aviation pioneer, died in Dayton, Ohio. Native of Milan, Bossi built and flew his own airplane in 1908; he designed first Italian seaplane. After coming to U.S. in 1919, Bossi designed first U.S. stainless steel plane, most successful manpowered aircraft, and an early helicopter. He also invented vacuum fuel-intake system used in U.S. automobiles during 1920’s. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/12/63)	...	. ,January 10: explorer xiv energetic particles satellite developed radio transmission difficulty, not repairable by remote control. Exact cause of difficulty, apparently in one of the binary counters of satellite’s encoder system, was not determined, (nasa explorer xrv Program. Rpt. No. 4; nasa Release 63-6)
By this date, 53 communications companies had filed with Federal Communications Commission for authorization to purchase common carrier stock in Communications Satellite Corp. (Av. Wk., 4/1/63, 30)
U.K. Office of the Minister for Science announced contract had been awarded to British Aircraft Corp., Ltd., for development and construction of UK-3 (S-53) satellite, nasa would launch the experimental satellite into orbit in about four years. (AP, Wash. Post, 6/7/63)
Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, in address at Queens College, Charlotte, N.C., said photographs made by U.S. military satellites were providing excellent studies of Soviet military installations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/5/63)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition, described the four areas of nasa’s applications program— communications systems, meteorological systems, future applications satellites, and industrial applications: “The space research and development effort is so broad that there will be ideas and innovations in almost every field. Products, based upon space development and produced using techniques and materials created for space use, may become increasingly evident with time in the everyday life of the nation. “The applications program ranges over a very broad spectrum of scientific and industrial activity. We are concerned with investigations from purely scientific interest in atmospheric physics to problems associated with commercial communications satellites. It is a very challenging area of work and it is most satisfying to our people to find that great benefits are accruing to the nation from meteorological and communications satellite developments, and now from industrial applications as well.” (Testimony)
dod plans to orbit its first two experimental satellites for detecting nuclear tests in outer space reported by New York Times. The Project Vela satellites, under jurisdiction of dod’s Advanced Research Projects Agency, were expected to be capable of detecting unshielded nuclear tests as small as 10 kllotons and as far away as 180,000,000 mi. from earth. To be launched this fall, satellites would orbit earth at 50,000-60,000 mi. (NYT, 8/7/63, 12)
Soviet press agency Tass announced cosmos xviii satellite had been placed in orbit (apogee, 187 mi.; perigee, 130 mi.; period, 89.44 min.; inclination, 65°01' to the equator). Onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 5/25/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
Project Mercury flight MA-9 postponed at T-13 in launch countdown because of technical failure in computer converter at Bermuda tracking station. Earlier, at T-60, countdown was halted for 129 min. to repair faulty fuel pump in gantry’s diesel engine, which had failed to start. Eight-min. recapitulation of prelaunch activities for Project Mercury flight MA-9, Cape Canaveral, was telecast to European viewers via relay i communications satellite shortly after flight was postponed, (nasa Release 63-104; NYT, 5/15/63)
gsfc awarded contract to Yale Univ. to design and develop a worldwide radio monitoring network for study of planet Jupiter. Four stations would comprise the global network, located at approximately every 90° longitude around the earth— one at gsfc in Greenbelt, Md., and the other three at U.S. satellite tracking stations in Hartesbeesthoek, South Africa; Carnarvon, Australia; and South Point, Hawaii. Primary duty of the stations would be to maintain a 24-hr. radio monitor of the mysterious low-frequency radio noises sporadically emitted from the planet. The data should provide information on Jupiter’s magnetosphere, the interplanetary medium, and the earth’s ionosphere. (gsfc Release G-25-6'3)
Reported that a U.S. military satellite, launched by Agena, had established a record 46 days of operation under continued attitude stabilization. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/14/63)
nasa announced explorer xvi meteoroid-detection satellite, launched Dec. 16, 1962, had ceased transmitting usable experimental data on July 25, 1963. Throughout its 7i/> months of transmitting useful data, explorer xvi fulfilled all its primary objectives. The satellite reported these results (one mil equals 1,000th of an inch): 44 penetrations of one-mil beryllium-copper; 11 penetrations of two-mil beryllium copper; 6 penetrations of one-mil stainless steel; one penetration of two-mil copper; and one* penetration of three-mil copper. There were no penetrations of five-mil beryllium-copper or six-mil stainless steel. One cadmium-sulfide cell was penetrated in such a way that sunlight Qnfnrnf at? if on J rsndorsd it mopfiRibls, AJorg than 15,000 niftte-oroid hits were recorded by microphone impact sensors which covered about one-tenth of total exposed experiment surface. These sensors did not measure penetration, (nasa Release 63203; Lane Release)
nasa Director of International Programs Arnold Frutkin discussed U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative meteorological satellite program in Aviation Week and Space Technology interview. Beginning late next year, nasa would launch Nimbus meteorological satellites into polar orbit and U.S.S.R. would launch polar orbiting satellites. Paths of two satellites would be phased so that they are 90° apart, so that one satellite of each pair will cross each spot on globe every six hours. (Av. Wk., 8/12/63)
John H. Rubel, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told House Committee on Science aqd Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition that dod planned to initiate a communications satellite program definition study in May or June, the program based on goal of putting 24-30 operational satellites into orbit by end of 1965. “Approximately six satellites will be launched per booster, using the . . . Atlas-Agena D. The six satellites will be ejected at slightly different velocities into an approximately 6,000-mi.-altitude circular polar orbit, where they will gradually spread out. The successive clusters will be injected into orbital planes spaced 45 deg. apart.” System would be developed jointly by usaf and Army, usaf being responsible for space-related activities and Army for ground stations. (Av. Wk., 4/15/63,27)
Special camera for optical tracking of satellites at Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern, England, described in London Times. Camera weighed 8y2 tons, had focal length of 24 in. with aperture of f/1. According to Ministry of Aviation, the instrument had been working since last November and had photographed Discoverer and Anna satellites in orbit. A second identical camera would be operating at Malvern in several weeks. (London Times, 2/20/63,15, and 2/22/63,22)
Researchers at Technology Audit Corp. continued, under nasa contract extension, to study possible use of a satellite as a navigation aid for advanced aircraft such as the supersonic transport. (M&R, 12/9/63,9)
President Kennedy accepted “with great regret” the resignation of Philip L. Graham as an incorporator of Space Communications Corp., established by legislation to direct U.S. communications satellite activities. Graham had served as chairman of the 13-man board of incorporators. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/63, A9)
nasa announced publication of “Handbook on Space Radiation Effects to Solar Cell Power Systems,” prepared for nasa by Exotech, Inc., of Alexandria, Va. The handbook and the recently published transcript of Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, held m Wash. ington earlier this year, were expected to help industry produce more durable, radiation-resistant solar-cell systems for satellites. (nasa Release 63-187)
Letter from David Samoff, rca Board Chairman, to Leo D. Welch, Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman, was disclosed by Drew Pearson in Washington Post. Referring to new technology of transoceanic transistorized cables, Samoff said: “In my view, the transistorized cable does not alter the fundamental premise that early development of an operational communications satellite system is vital to our national prestige and to continued U.S. leadership in both communications and space technology. “Nevertheless, a second premise—that the facilities of a global satellite system will be needed to meet the expected growth of commercial demand for oversea communications services beyond 1965—now needs careful reevaluation in terms of the possible effects upon the [Communications] Satellite Corporation of this latest technological breakthrough. . . . “One transistorized cable, laid across the North Atlantic, could connect areas possessing nearly 90 percent of all the world’s present telephones .... “One new transistorized cable will have a capacity almost double that of all existing transoceanic cables. . . . “We should now consider an amendment to the present law which would enable the satellite corporation to acquire through purchase the international telephone and telegraph facilities and operations, both present and planned, of all American carriers. “Unification of all the Nation’s international communication facilities and operations—satellites, cables, and radios—would in my opinion assure the satellite corporation’s commercial success, best serve our overall national interests, provide the most flexible and economical service to the public, and maintain America’s leadership in world communications . . . .” (Wash. Post, 5/28/63; Letter, 4/2/63, in CR, 5/28/63, 9207-09)
Because of weather conditions at Cape Canaveral, launching of Syncom communications satellite was postponed from Feb. 13 to Feb. 14. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A6)
usaf selected General Electric Co. and Philco Corp. with Space Technology Laboratories (jointly) to compete for development of dod medium-altitude communications satellite. Under two-month contracts, each contractor would propose technical approach, refine cost estimates, and develop internal management structures. Then, should dod decide to proceed with such a comsat system employing 20-30 satellites, one of the contractors would be selected to conduct development phase of usaf portion, (dod xveiease oi-t—<jo)
U.S.S.R. has not yet named delegates for working groups to work out details implementing U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreements reached this year by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Academician A. A. Blagonravov, Howard Simons reported in Washington Post. U.S. and U.S.S.R. had agreed on coordinated communications satellite exiiiiij'iictiC mapping cooperation. JJCl UllVUlD^ also pointed out Soviet lack of definite response to proposal for negotiations leading to U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in lunar exploration, presented by President Kennedy Sept. 20 and reiterated this month by President Johnson. ^Simons, Wash. Post, 12/26/63)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxm into earth orbit (apogee, 381 mi.; perigee, 149 mi.; period, 92.9 min.; inclination to the equator, 49°), the satellite carrying scientific instrumentation for “continuing the study of outer space” in accordance with March 16, 1962, Tass announcement. Tass said onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 12/14/63, 1, atbs-t Trans.)
nasa and dod announced signing of agreement establishing areas of responsibility in nonmilitary applications of Navy’s Transit navigational satellite system. Under agreement, nasa would determine suitability of Transit equipment for nonmilitary use and necessity for additional equipment. Navy would continue to be responsible for technical direction of Transit system and for r&d in support of military applications of the system, but would also provide nasa with necessary information, specifications, and equipment for meeting nonmilitary requirements, nasa and Navy would coordinate r&d “for mutual benefit and to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort.” (dod Release 315-63)
nasa announced it had awarded letter contract to rca AstroElectronics Div. for fabrication and test of additional Tiros weather satellites; negotiations of final contract were continuing for total purchase of seven satellites—three r&d type, two operational, and two backup. Before this order, eight Tiros satellites had been funded in r&d phase of the program; six had been placed in orbit since April 1960 and two would be launched in 1963. (nasa Release 63-29)
Radar contact with copper dipoles launched in usaf Project West Ford confirmed they were successfully ejected into orbit from unidentified usaf satellite, mit Lincoln Laboratoiy announced. Fibers were still in compact cloud circling earth every 166 min. in near-polar orbit, some 2,000 mi. high and at approximately 87° to equator; on May 13 dipoles had begun to spread in elongated cloud. Fibers were expected to spread along circular orbital path, some 40,000 mi. in circumference, to form ring around earth. Orbital ring would be used in bouncing radio signals back to earth over long distances, (dod Release 666-63; NYT, 5/13/63, 1; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/13/63, A3; Sullivan, NYT, 5/14/63,18)
Photograph was sent from New York to London, Paris, and Rome via relay i communications satellite, and back to New York via transatlantic cable—in total of 11 minutes. This was first demonstration in which the three European capitals simultaneously received a picture and the first in which relay i sent a picture to Italy. Experiment was made by Associated Press in cooperation with nasa and the it&t Federal Laboratories, Nutley, N.J. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63)
Bv its 1,842nd orbit, relay i communications satellite had been used in 930 wideband experiments; 409 narrowband experiments; 95 demonstrations (TV and narrowband). Transponder had been operated for 190 hrs. over period of 454 operations. (gsfc Historian, Memo, 8/14/63)
President John F. Kennedy addressed the centennial meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington: “. . . it took the First World War to bring science into central contact with government policy, and it took the Second World War to make scientific counsel an indispensable function of government .... “Every time you scientists make a major invention, we politicians have to invent a new institution to cope with it—and almost invariably, these days, it must be an international institution. I am not just thinking of the fact that when you people figure out how to build a global satellite communication system, we have to figure out a global organization to manage it. I am thinking, as well, that scientific advance provided the rationale for the World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization—that splitting the atom leads not only to a nuclear arms race but to the establishment of the International Atomic Energy Agency—that the need for scientific exploration of Antarctica leads to an international treaty providing free access to the area without regard to territorial claims—that the scientific possibility of a World Weather Watch requires the attention of the World Meteorological Organization—that the exploration of international oceans leads to the establishment of an Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission .... The ocean, the atmosphere and outer space belong not to one nation or to one ideology but to all mankind. “. . . ours is a century of scientific conquest and scientific triumph. If scientific discovery has not been an unalloyed blessing, if it has conferred on mankind the power not only to create but also to annihilate, it has at the same time provided humanity with a supreme challenge and a supreme testing. If the challenge and the testing are too much for humanity, then we are all doomed. But my own faith is plain and clear. I believe that the power of science and the responsibility of science have offered mankind a new opportunity not only for intellectual growth but for moral discipline—not only for the acquisition of knowledge but for the strengthening of nerve and will.” (CR, 10/28/63, 19279-80)
Hughes Aircraft Co., prime contractor for syncom n communica Ar»o onfnllif a nnnAiinrtAil fli.. nono outuxuiA/^ ciimvuiiv^u liiv cTTnoliT»AT>Aiio	finnr c*ofol 11fa Vvo/1 oj xivm viivuo 'vi	ouxviiito nwu accumulated more message time than all other communications satellites combined, stncom n was launched July 26, maneuvered into 24-hr. station Aug. 15. {Space Bus. Daily, 8/28/63, 306)
usaf announced plans to test fuel cell in space by sending new type of electrical power system into orbit in a satellite within next few months. Working model of the fuel cell, developed by Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co., was displayed at afa convention in Washington. (Finney, NTT, 9/12/63,14)
telstar ii communications satellite resumed operating for first time since July 16. Satellite received and transmitted sound and television picture test sent by Bell Telephone Laboratories on telstar ii’s 622nd orbit. Cause of the satellite’s restoration, like its silence, was not known. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/13/63; NYT. 8/13/63,12)
U.S. is recovering more than three of every four satellites launched in its orbit-recovery program, according to Maj. Gen. Benjamin I. Funk, afssd Commander, writing in Bell Aerosystems Co. magazine: “In the recovery of satellites from orbit, we achieved a 75 per cent success record last year, and this rate has since improved even more.” (Troan, Wash. Daily News, 12/5/63)
International Telephone and Telegraph Corp. (it&t) announced it had filed application with fcc for authority to purchase stock in newly-formed Communications Satellite Corp. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/15/63, C6)
Three-minute portion of U.S. color television program received in France via telstar ii communications satellite, nbc transmitted the program, Bell Telephone Hour, from New York to the satellite through Andover, Me., ground station. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/9/63)
British sources reported U.S. would disclose details of its space launch vehicles to European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) in exchange for cooperative work on joint space projects. (Manchester Guardian, Wash. Post, 1/3/63) January 4; telstar i communications satellite transmitted 10-min. television pictures across the Atlantic, the satellite’s first transatlantic transmission since Nov. 23 when radiation damaged onboard circuits. Eugene S. O’Neill, director of satellite communications for Bell Telephone Laboratories, said btl scientists “tricked telstar’s decoders into receiving commands” by changing the command signals slightly. Remote-control repair was performed after btl constructed laboratory model of telstar i with its faulty circuits and experimented with it to devise corrective signals, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/5/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/5/63, Al, A3)
At Delta Day ceremony, Cape Canaveral, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced nasa had ordered 14 more Delta space vehicles from prime contractor Douglas Aircraft Co., most of which were expected to be used in launching additional nasa communications satellites and meteorological satellites as well as new scientific satellites, (nasa Release 63-39)
U.K. announced it had established a space research station for satellite observation at the Sembawang naval air station in Singapore, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 11/15/65)
Aviation Week reported that usaf and usn were pressing nasa to improve the reliability of the Scout launch vehicle. The Navy was said to have had only 50% success with it in their Transit navigational satellite program, usaf was said to have had a little better performance but only because it had undertaken a complete and expensive checkout of components. Government-furnished equipment was said to be especially unreliable. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63,34)
In the Washington Post, Howard Simons reviewed reconnaissance satellites, referring to previously released information and statements regarding a so-called “Samos” project, and inferring that “Samos” satellites were now onerational. (Wash. Post. 12/8/63, Ei-5)	"	'	'
U.S. television audiences witnessed first public appearance of Pope Paul VI via relax communications satellite, (cbs TV)
Frederick R. Kappel, Chairman of the Board of at&t, was presented Silver Quill Award of National Business Publications at 12th annual State-of-the-Nation dinner, Washington. In accepting the award, Mr. Kappel said that at&t’s telstar communications satellite had “provided basic assurance that satellite communications are indeed feasible and practical, and that design and construction of commercial satellites, and ground stations to work with them, can now be approached pretty much as a straight engineering project. There is no scientific obstacle to designing a commercial system immediately, and bringing it into being as soon as the satellites could be manufactured and put into orbit, say in 2 or 3 years . . . .” {CR, 2/11/63, A656)
First public demonstration of communications exchange via synchronous satellite, when two U.S. wire services and Nigerian newsmen exchanged news stories of about 300 words each via syncom ii communications satellite, hovering 22,823 mi. over Western Africa. Photographs of President Kennedy and Nigerian Governor General Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe also were exchanged. Transmissions were made from nasa station at Lake-hurst, N.J., and usns Kingsport communications ship in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/5/63; nasa Release 63-171)
Hitchhiker radiation monitor satellite on dod unidentified satellite launched June 27, 1963, with Thor-Agena vehicle, was ejected and fired ki,ck motor to attain higher apogee. Satellite measuring magnetically trapped electrons and protons of all significant energy levels showed relation between solar flares and low-energy particles in solar plasma. No distinct division between inner and outer Van Allen belts was found, but instead a gradual transition. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Addressing First World Conference on World Peace Through Law in Athens, nasa Communications Systems Director Leonard Jaffe described role of satellites in communications and said: “. . . Today, approximately 300 telephone channels are available across the North Atlantic. “Notwithstanding these recent and radical improvements in trans-Atlantic telephone service, we can predict the need for still more channels. Every time communication channels have increased, they have been loaded to capacity almost at once—new means for communication have never caused the abandonment of the old ones. During 1960 there were more than three million overseas telephone calls, and reliable estimates indicate a sevenfold increase in overseas calls during the next decade. Such an increase in traffic will overtax the current and planned undersea cables, and high frequency radio facilities. And our current communication facilities have no capability for transmitting television. . . . “Communications satellites should soon be providing a substantial increase in our capabilities for world-wide high quality common carrier communications, at least over those routes where the volume of traffic exceeds present or forecast capabilities, and is also great enough to justify the necessarily large investment in a communications satellite system. Eventually, we hope that communications satellite technology will be improved to the point where service can also be provided to areas not served by other means, either because of their isolation or because the traffic volume does not justify an investment in more conventional communication means. “The objective of the United States in this area was voiced by President Kennedy in a public statement, not too long ago, in which he said: ‘There is no more important field at the present time than communications, and we must grasp the advantages presented to us by the communications satellite to use this medium wisely and effectively to insure greater understanding among the peoples of the world.’ ” (Text)
On his 66th birthday, Pope Paul VT recognized 175th anniversary of Georgetown Univ. by a special address broadcast to U.S. via teistar n communications satellite. (NYT, 9/27/63, 9; nbc-TV, 9/26/63)
George J. Feldman, a director and incorporator of Communications Satellite Corp., said in address before Federal Bar Association in Washington: “The execution of this national program [developing a commercial comsat system] and the task faced by the corporation is difficult, complex, and truly formidable and should be viewed by the objective witb understanding. This is the uncharted region of technology, international relationship and agreements, and national support .... “Up to this point the United States has been the innovator and leader in this field, with great benefit to our national prestige, and international standing and with the satisfaction of pioneering a part of the future. Having taken this pioneering step, we have now assumed our share of responsibility and the latter is the operative word . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/20/63, A3948-49)
injttn i satellite, silent since Dec. 25, responded to signals of State Univ. of Iowa scientists, who did not know cause of the cosmic-ray satellite’s transmission interruption. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/30/63)
George J. Feldman, Communications Satellite Corp., incorporator nominee, said in address on international arrangements for satellite communications: “Last July 10, when Telstar went into orbit; communications via satellite literally entered the homes of millions of men. and women. This historic event symbolized technical developments which open up unparalleled opportunities and will, in time, significantly affect the daily lives of people in many parts of the world. A new dimension has been added to communications by telephone, telegraph, radio and television. . . . “Cooperation on the international level, bilaterally and multilaterally, is a keystone of a successful communications satellite system and it is self-evident that the wider the range of the system, the more extensive will be the need for wider participation and agreement. . . . “The development of the communications satellite system is underway. It will involve intricate negotiation and arrangements, and there are many problems to be tackled. But technology has thrust greatness upon us and, as in some other manifestations of this technological revolution, we are summoned to the challenge. . . .” (Text, CR, 4/24/63, A2426)
usaf launched three unidentified satellites and a TetrahedraL Research Satellite (trs) from Pt. Arguello: a single unidentifiea satellite from a Thor-Agena D vehicle and the other two unidentified satellites with the trs from an Atlas-Agena B launch vehicle. The 1.5-lb. trs was to measure solar cell radiation damage. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64; M&R, 7/29/63, 28)
Official opening of 1963 hurricane season, tiros vi meteorological satellite, launched September 18, 1962, was still operational and U.S. Weather Bureau said additional meteorological satellites may be orbited by nasa before end of season, Nov. 15. (Commerce Dept. Release WB 637)
Communications Satellite Corp. set 1966 as target date to start commercial operation of global satellite communications network. {A&AE, Nov. 1963, 11)
ComSatCorp was planning its initial offering of stock in the spring of 1964, probably on the order of $200 million. Half of this stock would by law have to be made available to the general public at no more than $100 per share, the remaining half being taken by the communications industry. Wall Street predicted that the stock would meet with unprecedented enthusiasm for a large issue by a new and speculative corporation. Meanwhile the ComSatCorp technical staff was still studying the technical and economic factors involved in establishing a global communications net “at the earliest practicable date” that Congress directed. Die goal was for an operating satellite system by 1966-67, employing either medium-altitude or synchronous-orbit satellites. (NYT, 11/3/63, IF)
rca announced relay i communications satellite had operated succesfully for 203 days, setting record for performance and durability by a communications satellite, rca, which built satellite for nasa, said relay i had traveled estimated 156 million mi. and carried out more than 1,350 communications experiments and demonstrations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/29/63)
General Telephone and Electronics Corp. filed application with fcc for authority to purchase stock in Communications Satellite Corp. (AP? NYT, 4/23/63)
U.S.-Canada agreement for cooperative testing of communications satellites launched by nasa was announced by nasa and Canada’s Dept, of Transport. Each cooperating national agency would provide a ground station to receive and transmit television and multichannel telephone and telegraphic signals via communications satellites, according to Memorandum of Understanding signed in April and made operative by exchange of notes today. - (nasa Release 63-194)
nasa announced award of four-month study contract to bca Astro-Electronics Div. for engineering evaluation of whether Tiros meteorological satellite could be modified to increase its cloud-cover photography capability, bca would evaluate Tiros “wheel configuration,” calling for two TV cameras mounted in satellite to point in opposite directions; satellite would be launched into polar orbit spinning on its side, pointed towards earth at all times. Such satellite could provide complete earth coverage every three days. ( nasa Release 63-115)
Third anniversary of orbiting of tiros i, first U.S. meteorological satellite, which provided during its 78-day lifetime more than 19,000 usable cloud-cover photographs, tiros i was followed by five additional successful Tiros satellites, the last two of which—tiros v and vi—were still in operation after more than nine and six months respectively. To date, tiros v had transmitted more than 44,000 useful cloud-system photographs and tiros vi, more than 39,000. tiros v and vi photographed hurricanes and typhoons in July, August, and September 1962; in August alone, they discovered two Atlantic hurricanes and four Pacific typhoons. Since April 1, 1962, there were only seven days when a Tiros satellite was not in operation. Information gathered by satellites was being used in daily operations of Weather Bureau’s National Meteorological Center in weather analyses and forecasts for entire U.S. (nasa Release 63-65; Commerce Dept. Release WB 63-4)
relay i communications satellite was used to transmit electroencephalograms (“brain waves”) from Bristol, England, to Minneapolis, Minn., in demonstration experiment conducted in connection with meeting of National Academy of Neurology in Minneapolis, (nasa Release 63-85)
nasa announced stncom n communications satellite, now drifting westward over Atlantic Ocean at 22,800-mi. altitude, would be stopped when it reached desired position at 55° west longitude. At this location stncom n would be lowered into precise synchronous orbit, so that it would appear to trace elongated figure-8 pattern along 55°meridian to points 33° north and south of the equator, period 1,463 min., perigee 22,221 mi., apogee 22,912 mi., drift rate (degrees per day westward) 6.8. (nasa Release 63-168; gsfc Historian)
Televised White House ceremony, with President Kennedy signing bill making Sir Winston Churchill an honorary citizen of the U.S.j was transmitted to England and Europe via relay i communications satellite. Broadcast was viewed by millions of Britons and Sir Winston himself, and both audio and visual reception were considered perfect, (nasa Release 63-69; Wash. Post, 4/10/63)
U.K. sent television signals across the Atlantic for first time via relay i communications satellite. Signals sent from Goonhilly Downs to Nutley, N.J., were described as “very good” and “ex' ’	1	” ‘hey were also clearly received at ground Fucino. v	, igo Trtb., 1/8/63)
After 10 months of satisfactory operation in orbit, explorer xiv scientific satellite, with its six experiments to measure energetic particles and magnetic fields in space, was still functioning. During the 10 months, data acquisition stations received 6,003 hrs. of data from explorer xiv, of which more than 4,500 hrs. were digitized and 3,200 hrs. were sent to the six experimenters, (nasa explorer xiv Prog. Rpt. No. 5)
nasa syncom ii communications satellite launched into orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle from amr, entering elliptical orbit (140-mi. perigee, 22,548-mi. apogee). Five hrs. 33 min. after launching, apogee-kick motor onboard fired for 21 sec., placing syncom ii in orbital path ranging from 22,300-mi. to 22,548-mi. altitude and adjusting its speed to near-synchronous 6,800 mph. Traveling in slightly lower than synchronous orbit and at less than synchronous speed, satellite began drifting eastward at rate of 7.5° per day. Ground signals would attempt to reverse drifting so that satellite would attain synchronous position over Brazil. Communications tests during syncom ii’s ascent into orbit were successful, including reception and transmission of “The Star Spangled Banner,” a voice message, and a teletype transmission. Once in synchronous position, syncom ii would provide telephone, teletype, and photo facsimile communications between Lakehurst, N.J., and Lagos Harbor, Nigeria, (nasa Release 63-152; NYT, 7/27/63; N.Y. Herald Trib.^ 7/27/63)
nasa announced syncom n communications satellite achieved perfection of orbit probably unparalleled by any other previous satellite. At more than 22,000-mi. altitude, orbit varies from absolute circle by no more than 4.5 mi. Orbital period—23 hrs., 55 min., 54 sec.—is only 10.09 sec. shorter than mean sidereal day. Virtually stationary over 55th meridian of west longitude, syncom n is drifting eastward so slowly that it would take nearly a month to move a single degree. Drifting will be corrected periodically, and the communications satellite can be expected to remain on station and operating for more than two years. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/5/63)
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric said in testimony before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on dod Appropriations: “Our goal is to establish, at an early date, a developmental communications satellite system consisting of a minimum number of simple, reliable satellites together with a minimum number of widely spaced ground stations, which can be tested and evaluated as a ‘package’ within the framework of the established military communications network. This program would demonstrate the technical and operational characteristics of such a system as well as its compatibility with the existing communications complex. The ability to transmit signals between a satellite and two ground stations has already been demonstrated. But the ability of a ‘system,’ comprising a number of satellites and ground stations, to provide a reliable means of military communication has yet to be explored . . . .” (Testimony)
stncom n communications satellite relayed transmission of speech and teletype between Fort Dix, N.J., and moving ship Kingsport about 40 mi. west of Lagos, Nigeria. This was first such transmission via a communications satellite to a moving ship at sea. This was first in series of experiments designed to test shipboard equipment and reception in fringe areas, (nasa Release 63-213)
dod launched two unidentified satellites on one Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
relay i satellite transmitted 12-min. Voice of America program as well as AP and upi news dispatches from Nutley, N.J., to Rio de Janeiro and back. Transmissions were reported perfect, even though ordinary high-frequency radio communication with Rio was not possible because of atmosphere conditions. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/17/63; AP, Wash. Post, 1/18/63,4)
cosmos xvi launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit of 401-km. apogee, 207-km. perigee, 90.4-min. period, and 65°01' inclination to equator. Tass said the satellite contained “scientific equipment intended to continue the space research in accordance with the program announced . . . March 16, 1962.” (Tass, Pravda, 4/29/63, 3; afss-t Trans.)
telstar ii communications satellite went dead during its 450th orbit, and subsequent efforts to reactivate the satellite by radio signal were not successful. Cause of telstar ii’s failure was not known, but at&t said that telemetry data had given “no indication that radiation damage has caused the satellite to fail.” Efforts to turn on the satellite’s communications equipment were continuing. (Osmundsen, NTT, 7/18/63; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/18/63)	_	_
Communications Satellite Corp. issued its first request for contract proposals—proposals for study of multiple access system for communications satellites. (ComSatCorp Release)
syncom n and relay i linked Rio de Janeiro and Lagos, Nigeria, in 20-min. voice conversation, first operation employing both communications satellites in single communications circuit and world’s first three-continent telephone conversation. Signal began from usns Kingsport in Lagos harbor, then to syncom n, which sent it to Lakehurst, N.J., ground station, then by overland wire to Nutley, N.J., ground station, then to relay i overhead which sent it to Rio de Janeiro ground station, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center engineers monitoring the conversation declared quality of transmission to be good, (gsfc Release G-17-63; AP, Wasfu Post, 9/14/63; N.Y. Herald Trb., 9/14/63) *
nasa Director of Communications Systems, Leonard Jaffee, announced nasa would attempt to launch Syncom communications satellite into synchronous orbit with Delta vehicle no earlier than Feb. 13. Previously announced for no earlier than Feb. 6, Syncom launch was postponed “to insure that the [command and control] equipment is completely checked out” aboard usns Kingsport, stationed in Lagos Harbor, and on the launch vehicle at Cape Canaveral. (Teen. Background Briefing, 1/29/63)
Japanese newspaper Yomiuri reported Japanese Space Development Council was preparing to build navigational satellite for launching by U.S. within five years. Plan was to be submitted to Prime Minister Hayato Ikeda for approval. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 6/4/63)
nasa announced relay i communciations satellite had achieved all of its experiments and missions. Performance of relay i, launched by nasa December 13, “has been uniformly excellent” throughout about 500 communications tests and demonstrations in 660 orbits December 13-March 11. Although all planned demonstrations were completed, they would be continued while the satellite remained in operation, (nasa Release (>3-57)
Incorporation articles for Communications Satellite Corp. were filed by board of incorporators and approved by President Kennedy. Articles of incorporation provided two series of common stock: Series I, to be issued to the public, to aerospace industries, and to noncommunications companies; Series II, to be issued to communications common carriers with permission from fcc. Shares of stock were not expected to be issued for at least six months. Incorporators were serving as company directors until first annual meeting of stockholders—expected about six months after public offering of stock—when stockholders would elect 12 directors and President Kennedy would appoint three more. (Wall Street Journal, 2/4/63; AP, Newport News Daily Press, 2/2/63)
WICUOU	AJ\J ) nasa announced it would negotiate contract with Fairchild Stratos Corp. for two meteoroid detection satellites to be launched by Saturn I vehicles. Once in orbit, the two-ton satellite would extend its two “wings” totaling 96-ft. length and providing area of more than 2,000 sq. ft. exposure to possible meteoroid hits. Aluminum skin of wings would be electrically charged; penetration of skin by meteoroid would trigger an electrical pulse which would be recorded and radioed back to earth. First of the satellites was scheduled for launch in late 1965. (nasa Release 63-24)
explorer xvi meteoroid detector satellite recorded 16 punctures by meteoroids dur®% its first 29 days in orbit, nasa reported. Charles T. D’Aiutolo, manager of meteoroid research programs in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said that with explorer xvi “we have established conclusively that there are micrometeoroids out there which can penetrate thin surfaces.” Other spacecraft had reported hits by cosmic debris, but this was first time actual punctures were recorded. If explorer xvi continued as expected to report meteoroid data for a full year, it should enable scientists to determine whether meteoroids are hazardous to spacecraft—both manned and unmanned. D’Aiutolo said the satellite, which exposed 25 sq. ft. of surface to meteoroid impacts, was not large enough to provide good statistical data on larger and rarer particles in space. (Earlier this month, nasa announced plans to orbit two meteoroid-detector satellites, each with exposure surface of more than 2,000 sq. ft. See Feb. 5.) (Langley Release, 2/19/63; upi, Wash. Post, 2/14/63, Al)
cosmos xxiv earth satellite orbited by U.S.S.R. (apogee, 254 mi.; perigee, 131 mi.; period, 90.5 min.; inclination to the equator, 65°). Tass said the satellite carried scientific instrumentation for “continuing the study of outer space” in accordance with program announced March 16,1962, and the onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/20/68, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Informants said in Cairo that Egyptian scientists were interested in obtaining a satellite tracking station from U.S. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/20/63)
Voice and teletype messages exchanged via syncom ii communications satellite between ground station at Paso Robles, Calif., and communications ship Kingsport in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. The test spanned 7,700 mi., greatest surface distance ever spanned between two points on earth via a communications satellite, (nasa “syncom ii Fact Sheet”; N.Y. Herald Tnb., 8/10/63)
Tremendous atmospheric explosion in Kimberley Mountains of Western Australia was reported by observers, who saw trail of smoke and ball of orange flame and heard the explosion. Australian Weather Office spokesman said cause was unknown but suggested possibility of artificial satellite’s exploding during atmospheric re-entry. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 8/21/63)
nasa Acting Director of Office of Applications, Leonard Jaffe, appeared before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, reviewing nasa programs of communications systems, meteorological systems, and future applications satellites. Describing division of responsibility between public interest (nasa) and Communications Satellite Corp., Mr. Jaffe said that “eventually, perhaps” nasa would find way to develop necessary (lower for bouncing radio and TV signals off satellites to “a very arge area of the earth.” Such transmissions would be beyond scope of ComSatCorp. and beyond its charter as common carrier for broadcasters. Yet ComSatCorp. might benefit from NASA-developed technology, particularly in development of tremendous power supplies, under Communications Satellite Act, Mr. Jaffe said, nasa retained responsibility to cooperate with ComSatCorp. and to advise other Federal agencies on the subject, such obligations requiring nasa to maintain independent research capability in communications satellites. (Testimony; Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
Fifth anniversary of orbiting of vanguard i, still orbiting the earth and still transmitting data. The satellite had made more than 19,700 orbits and had slowed about *4 sec. from original 134 min., 27 sec. period. Present apogee: 2,447 mi.; perigee: 403 mi. Scientists estimated vanguard i might have a lifetime of 2,000 years, (dod Release 365-63)
A U.N. space subcommittee addressed a resolution to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space emphasizing the “urgency and importance of the problem of preventing potentially harmful interference with peaceful uses of outer space.” The warning was contained in a diluted version of a resolution in which the Soviet Union had hoped to see a direct criticism of the recent United States launching of millions of small copper wires in a communications experiment. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, the Soviet delegate, had denounced the experiment as a danger to other space studies, including flights by manned satellites. This was denied by Dr. Homer E. Newell, the U.S. representative. In the resolution adopted at the close of a two-week session, the 28-nation subcommittee said that “certain experiments conducted in space may affect present or future scientific activities.” There was no reference to the U.S. “needles” or to any other experiment. (NYT, Western Edition, 5/31/63)
nasa explorer xiv satellite progress report indicated no usable scientific data had been obtained from the scientific satellite since mid-August. In its ten months of operation since launch into highly elliptical orbit Oct. 2j 1962, explorer xiv sent back more than 6,500 hours of data from the six onboard scientific experiments to chart boundaries of earth’s magnetosphere, measure particle population and energies of electrons and protons, and determine how magnetic fields influence these particles. 3,700 hours of data had been processed through computers and scientific analysis was continuing, (nasa Explorer XIV Prog. Rpt. No. 6)
French Scientific Research Minister Gaston Palewski told French National Assembly a satellite launching site would be established in Eastern Pyrenees Department near the Spanish border. France's first satellite was scheduled for launching in 1965; other European satellites may also be launched from the site. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 1/12/63)
dod launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle. (Pres. Reft. on Sface, 1963,1/27/64)
On a date not released, dod launched a pickaback satellite attached to a principal satellite payload boosted by Thor-Agena D. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Bell Telephone Laboratories received patent for improved system of controlling satellite attitude. Invented by C. C. Cutler, system operates by two-way radio which receives signals from satellite for measuring its alignment; ground computer analyzes attitude data and figures any necessary attitude changes, relays them to instruments on satellite which makes corrections in satellite’s position. (Jones, NYT, 5/11/63, 28)
cosmos xvn launched into orbit by U.S.S.R. (apogee, 488 mi.; perigee, 161 mi.; period, 94.82 min.; inclination, 49°02' to equator). As with previous Cosmos satellites, Tass said scientific equipment “intended for continuing the study of interplanetary space . . . was mounted on board. (Tass, Izvestia, 5/23/63, 1, afss-t Trans.)
Weather Bureau stopped its portion of the funding of the Nimbus meteorological satellite because the current Nimbus offers an operational lifetime of no more than one year. Weather Bureau would continue using improved Tiros satellite while cooperating with nasa in development of a follow-on satellite with a lifetime of several years, nasa said it would continue the development of the Nimbus r&d models, (nasa Release 63-220; Commerce Release; Wash. Post, 10/4/63,2)
rand Corp. report on communications satellites estimated that worldwide revenues from international communications would reach $210 million by 1965, $350 million by 1970, and $620 million by 1975. Large part of these revenues would come from undersea cables. (NYT, 4/24/63)
Value of weather Tiros satellites in giving advance warning of tropical storms was underscored by Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D.-Fla.) : “Yesterday’s discovery of Hurricane Flora is a prime example. . . . Through the efforts of the U.S. Weather Bureau, using data supplied bv a weather satellite, warnings were issued a bare 3 hours before the 110-mile-an-hour winds hit the islands [of Trinidad and Tobago]. Because of the 22-mile-an-hour forward speed of the storm, little or no warning would have been possible without the quick work of U.S. weathermen and their new ally, the satellite. While the damage was extensive, untold lives were saved and property damage prevented by the advance warning.” (CR, 10/1/63,17456)
West Germany joined the list of nations participating in satellite communications with the opening of its narrowband station at Raisting. A wideband station to permit television transmission was under construction. Raisting became the seventh station in the satellite communications network. Other narrowband stations were at Nutley, N.J.; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Fucino, Italy. Wideband stations were at Andover, Me.; Goonhilly Downs, U.K.; and Pleumeur-Bodou, France, (nasa Release 63-250)
Reported in Aviation World (Flugwelt) that West Germany has a $25 million-budget to develop a series of 5 satellites to be built under nasa’s established quality control standards. The satellite would consist of three parts: the satellite capsule with a recovery unit, the sun mirror, the energy converter. The first satellite recovery capsule would descend with the aid of a parachute; later models would include a winged glider version. Telemetric transmissions and subsequent evaluation would commence as soon as the satellite enters an Earth orbit. The second satellite and the remainder of the series would be equipped with engines that will permit changes in the orbital parameters. On the second satellite small solid fuel rockets would be used, but the following models could be equipped with ion engines. The satellite’s mission would include research in the guidance and direction stabilization systems during the launching investigation of the orbital rendezvous problems, as well as a study of the radiation belts. In the case of the fifth satellite, the ion engines could be replaced with nuclear-powered engines to permit continuous orbital changes and accelerate to an escape velocity. (Flugwelt {Aviation World), Nov., 1963; sin, Jan., 1964)
Third command and data acquisition station in Tiros meteorological satellite cda system became operational, the Fairbanks, Alaska, station joining those at Wallops Island, Va., and Pt. Mugu, Calif. cda stations receive cloud-cover photographs and other data from orbiting Tiros satellites, relay them to Weather Bureau’s National Weather Satellite Center, Suitland, Md., for analysis, (nasa Release 63-206)
U.S. Navy announced it had successfully permanently stabilized an orbiting satellite through use of 100-ft. boom. Difference in gravitational forces acting on satellite and on end of the boom aligned satellite so that its face will be permanently pointed toward earth. As satellite was tumbling through space with its face toward earth, boom was released from canister, causing entire assembly to rock through 40° arc. Weight attached to boom by 40-ft. spring bobbed yo-yo fashion, slowing oscillation of boom and satellite until nearly all sway was removed. Satellite would remain stabilized indefinitely. Navy announcement said this was first successful stabilization of satellite without fueled mechanical controls, (dod Release 103436)	_
cosmos xx was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. A scientific satellite for “continuing the study of space,” cosmos xx was stated to have an apogee of 311 km. (193 mi.) ; perigee of 206 km. (128 mi.); period, 89.55 min.; and inclination, 65°. (Komsomolskaya Pravda, Oct. 19,1963, 1, afss-t Trans.)
Final approval for contracting the military Medium Altitude Communications Satellite (macs) was being delayed by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara pending a reply from ComSatCorp as to whether a civilian comsat could handle military traffic under wartime conditions, according to Aviation. Week. It was anticipated that the answer would be that several of the military requirements—jam-resistant channels, protection against attack, transportable receiving stations—would not be met by the civilian system. (Av. Wk., 10/28/63, 25)
Mstislav Keldysh, President of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, reported on Soviet progress in science at annual meeting of the Academy: “New successes have been achieved by our scientists in the field of space radio communications. New data have been obtained as the result of the radar observation of Mercury carried out for the first time and the repeated radar observation of Venus. Communications were made possible by reflecting telegraphy signals from the planet Venus . . . “Research by satellites and rockets . . . [is] opening new possibilities for understanding the powerful effect of cosmic factors on electromagnetic and hydrodynamic phenomena in the atmosphere which, in turn, decisively influence life on earth. I think that very important discoveries will be made in the near future in the field of physics of the atmosphere . . . .”	(Pravda, 2/5/63, afss-t Trans.)
S. Fred Singer, Director of National "Weather Satellite Center, told Metropolitan Board of Trade, Washington, that weather satellites would probably make possible prediction of weather trends by as much as a year. By photographing cloud formations and measuring moisture content of atmosphere, satellites should enable meteorologists to discover conditions causing weather trends. {Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A4)
usn Transit navigational satellite program was classified, with no further information to be released until fully operational system is placed in orbit, Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported. {A&AE, 5/63,141)
First international art program via communications satellite was presented over nbc-tv. Entitled “Museums Without Walls,” the half-hour program interchanged views of paintings from the Louvre in Paris and the National Gallery in Washington via Relay communications satellite. The program went off without any significant technical difficulties and reception was excellent. (Gould, NYT, 11/18/63,59)
Launch of nasa atmospheric structure satellite (S-6) from amr was postponed because of difficulties in payload checkout. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/29/63, 1)
Tiros meteorological satellite discovered Hurricane Flora in the Atlantic off northern coast of South America, (upi, Wash. Post, 10/1/63)
Portions of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, telecast by nationwide networks within U.S., were transmitted via telstar n communications satellite to Europe. (cbs-TV, 8/28/63; Wash. Post. 8/30/63,5)	_
usaf announced two 1%-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellites (ths) had been ejected into orbit from an unidentified orbiting satellite earlier in 1963. Twin satellites were second and third of series; first trs was launched in 1962. Primary purpose of trs experiments was investigation of radiation damage to spacecraft solar-power systems and evaluating methods of protecting the solar cells from Van Allen belt radiation. Valuable data obtained by the five radiation-damage experiments in each satellite were transmitted back to earth and received by nasa Minitrack telemetry network, cooperating with usaf in the project, (dod Release 1260-63; trs Fact Sheet)
Effective this date, the International Code would designate all orbiting artificial satellites and space probes with Arabic numerals (1963-1, 1963-2, etc.) rather than Greek letters (1963 Alpha, 1963 Beta, etc.), National Academy of Sciences announced. New system had been agreed upon by all national members of cospar in May 1962. ( nas Release)
nasa awarded four-month study contracts for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite to Radio Corp. of America and Hughes Aircraft. rca would study camera resolution requirements in synchronous-orbit weather satellite and ways to modify Tiros satellite launched into highly eccentric orbit (about 22,000 mi. apogee and 200-300-mi. perigee). Hughes would study way in which a Syncom communications satellite could be modified for installation of weather satellite cameras. (M&R, 4/22/63, 10)
cosmos xiv scientific satellite launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit (apogee, 318 mi.; perigee, 165 mi.; period, 92.1 min.; inclination, 48° 57' to the equator). Tass said satellite was carrying equipment “designed to continue the study of outer space,” and that the satellite was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/14/63, 1, afss-t Trans.; NYT, 4/15/63, 25; upi. Wash. Post, 4/14/63)
Video tape of President Kennedy’s address before World Food Congress in Washington was transmitted to European television viewers via relay i communications satellite, (nasa Release 63-121)
Unnamed nasa spokesman quoted as saying echo i’s orbit was “holding up fine” and could last another year or more. Although partially crumpled, balloon satellite launched Aug. 12,1960, was still visible to naked eye. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63)
U.K. and France were calling conference of European Postal and Telecommunications Administrations to discuss possibility of European communications satellite system, U.K. Foreign Office spokesman said. U.K. had abandoned any plan to develop its own system. Conference participants would be Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom, and West Germany. {NYT, 5/16/63, 19)
New evidence verifying existence of long-lived solar plasma streams in interplanetary space was published in article by four gsfc scientists in Physical Review Letters. Evidence was based on data gathered by explorer xn energetic particles satellite : On two occasions the satellite observed solar events producing solar plasma streams. Indication that they were long-lived was revealed when the plasma streams caused geophysical disturbances more than 20 days after the streams were created. (gsfc Release G-14-63)
usaf launched unidentified satellite using Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle from Pt. Arguello, Calif. This was the 100th launch of an Agena space vehicle, the first having been launched on February 28, 1959. (upi, Wash. Post, 7/13/63; M&R, 7/22/63, 11; A-N-AF Journal and Register, January 1964; CR, 2/18/64, 2909)
On a date not released, dod launched a pickaback satellite attached to a principal satellite payload boosted by an Atlas-Agena B. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Unnamed usaf spokesman disclosed usaf had orbited “thermonuclear converter” aboard one of its unidentified satellites launched from pmr. Device was designed to convert sunlight into electricity with efficiency of solar cells but with more resistance to space radiation, usaf received signals from the converter for four days, according to spokesman, and “test was considered a major step in proving this concept.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 2/16/63)
rcc released letter to Communications Satellite Corp., indicating ComSatCorp. directors should make definite plans for stock issue. Pointing out that ComSat Act of 1962 required ComSat Corp.’s directors be divided among stock-owning public, communications companies, and presidential nominees, fcc said that “undue delay in tne establishment of the corporation may force the present [appointed] Board of Directors to engage in activities and to make decisions which should be left to the representatives of the owners of the corporation.” ComSatCorp. Chairman Leo D. Welch told press that there was “no basis for the concern expressed by the Commission,” and ComSatCorp. would issue stock “at as early a date as the directors determine to be compatible with the public interest and the carrying out of the purpose and objectives of the Act.” (Clayton, Wash. Post, 7/26/63; Toth. NYT, 7/27/63)
V. Arsentyev of State Astronomical Institute, Moscow, was quoted as saying Soviet Cosmos satellites were planned to map the atmospheric layer between 124 mi. and 995 mi., as well as to provide specific data for space flights and spacecraft design. Cosmos satellites supplied current space weather data before and during flight of vostok hi and iv and were used to study ipicrometeoroid impact on spacecraft. {Av. Wk., 4/1/63)
telstar ii communications satellite placed in elliptical orbit (6,717-mi. apogee, 604-mi. perigee, 225.3-min. period, 42.7° inclination to equator). Thor-Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral boosted the satellite into orbit for its 17th straight success, an unmatched record for U.S. satellite-launching vehicles. telstar ii included design changes aimed at protecting it from radiation damage which affected lifetime of its predecessor, telstar i. With apogee nearly twice that of telstar i, it would provide longer periods of communications between U.S. and Western Europe than did telstar i. Like its predecessor, telstar ii was designed and built by at&t’s Bell Telephone Laboratories at at&t expense, launched by nasa with at&t reimbursing nasa for Delta vehicle, launching, and tracking services. Initial communications test, TV transmission from Andover, Me., to Goon-hilly Downs, England, via the satellite on its fourth orbit, was successful, (nasa Release 63-83; nasa telstar ii Prog. Rpt. No. 2; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/7/63)
nasa scheduled the first Synoom communications satellite to be launched into orbit in which the satellite would truly remain stationary with respect to the earth in orbit—synchronous, equatorial, and circular—in the second quarter of 1964. Thrust-Augmented Delta (tad) launch vehicle would boost the spacecraft into 22,300-mi. eccentric orbit from Cape Kennedy, and at apogee Syn-oom’s onboard kick motor would place the satellite in circular orbit. Equatorial position would be achieved by change of orbital plane—once as third stage fires and again as kick motor fires at equatorial injection point. The spacecraft would then move to on-station position at 180° longitude over the Pacific Ocean, where it would be stopped by onboard gas jets. The satellite will provide the first continuous communications link between Asia and North America, (nasa Release 63-263)
After prolonged debate, Senate confirmed nominations of the 14 incorporators of Communications Satellite Corp. (CR, 4/24/63, 6606f; CR, 4/25/63, 6698-99)
explorer xviii (Imp) satellite completed second of its long elliptical orbits (apogee, 122,800 mi.; perigee, 119 mi.), and all systems appeared to be functioning as planned. Lifetime of imp-a, launched Nov. 26 from Cape Canaveral, revised by nasa from estimated 12 months to hundreds of years. (nasa Release 63-265; Ad-A, February 1964, 11)
