Eight Tiros meteorological satellites had taken more than 350,000 photographs from altitudes above 400 mi. The spectacularly successful weather-forecasting satellites did not live up to the one-time charge of “spying,” for of all the pictures, only two showed any indication of existence of intelligent life on earth—and both of these pictures required corroborative knowledge to identify them, (upi, Phil. Sun. Bull., 5/17/64)
The U.S. Weather Bureau reported that a hurricane having winds of 75 mph had been located by tiros VII satellite 1,000 mi. southwest of San Diego. (San Diego Union, 7/18/64; U.S. Weather Bureau)
nimbus i experimental weather satellite ceased operating, after producing more than 27,000 remarkably sharp weather photographs. As result of several days’ buildup of friction in motor that turned satellite’s solar paddles, the solar paddles locked, preventing them from rotating toward sun. Lacking adequate solar power to recharge batteries, the satellite control system, three camera systems, and associated electronic equipment could no longer function, nimbus i surpassed all expectations both as a research spacecraft and as a storm-spotter. During its 380-orbit lifetime it provided the first satellite pictures of nighttime cloud-cover and photographed Hurricanes Dora, Ethel, and Florence, Typhoons Ruby and Sally, (nasa Release 64-243)
U.S.S.R. announced successful orbiting of two satellites, electron in and ELECTRON XV, with a single launch vehicle. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellites were studying the earth’s magnetic field and radiation belts, radiation arriving from deep space, and the physical conditions in the upper atmospheric layers, electron iii was orbiting at 7,040-km. (4,375-mi.) apogee, 405-km. (252-mi.) perigee, 2-hr., 48 min. period, and 60.86° inclination to the equator, electron xv was orbiting at 66,235-km. (41,158-mi.) apogee, 459-km. (285-mi.) perigee, 21-hr., 54-min. period, and 60.86° inclination to the equator. (Tass, Izvestia, 7/12/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/11/ 64)
U.S. Samos (Satellite and Missile Observation Systems) satellites, undiscussed by dod since secrecy policy was adopted in late 1961, had been orbited “periodically” ever since then, Albert Ravenholt said in New Orleans Times-Picayune article. Even though Samos was de-7B6-5D8 0—65-----18 veloped as successor to U-2 high-altitude photographic airplane, Raven-holt said, U.S.S.R. had “made no threatening noises about Samos,” probably because some Russian Cosmos satellites are equipped with cameras; U.S.S.R. has no missile capable of shooting down a Samos; and, if it could down one, the action would open whole new vista of legal problems about control of outer space. (Ravenholt, N.O. Times-Picayune, 8/10/64)
Attempt to orbit NASA Explorer Beacon satellite (S-66) failed when third stage of Delta launch vehicle burned for only 22 sec. instead of normal 40. This was only the second Delta failure and followed 22 consecutive successes. The 120-lb. satellite was designed to transmit data on the ionosphere directly to worldwide network of ground stations. In addition to making major ionosphere studies, the satellite was to have served as test bed for two geodesic experiments—reflection of a laser beam directed from Wallops Island, Va., and transmission on two frequencies permitting ground stations to study Doppler method of satellite tracking and influence of ionosphere on Doppler tracking. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/20/64; Av. Wk., 2/23/64,25; nasa Release 64-60)
SYNCOM in was positioned into near-perfect stationary orbit over the Pacific Ocean. Final corrective maneuvers were completed, and the communications satellite appeared to hang motionless in space above the equator and International Date Line, where it could transmit radio and television signals between Japan and California. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/13/64)	_
fcc approved application of ComSatCorp to build communications satellite for its planned experimental-operational synchronous-orbit network. The authorization was for construction only; further authorization would be required for placing the satellite in orbit and using it in experimental or operational service. (AP, NYT, 4/16/64)
NASA anounced closing the command and control station for Relay communications satellites at Nutley, N J., and moving the operation to the Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (Stadan) at Blossom Point, Md. The move was made to consolidate personnel and equipment and save operation costs, (nasa Release 64-77)
Speaking at Georgetown Univ.’s 175th anniversary convocation, President Johnson said: “For almost the first time the interdependence of nations is not a remote goal or a ringing slogan. It is a fact which we neglect at our peril. “Communications satellites, atomic rockets and jet transports have made distant capitals into close neighbors. Our challenge is to transform this reality into an instrument for the freedom of man. “Today the cost of failure to communicate is not silence or serenity but destruction and dissolution.” (Text, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/64)
General Accounting Office made public report to Congress charging NASA’s “unrealistic delivery dates” for first two Oso satellites had cost an unnecessary $526,000. GAO was critical of NASA for ordering backup Oso eight weeks before scheduled launching of the first satellite, thus spending $273,000 that was not needed. The GAO report also said NASA had unnecessarily limited competition for Oso construction. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/64,2; Finney, NYT, 2/7/64,10)
Third international working conference on satellite communications ended in London after three days of consultation between delegates of U.S., U.K., Canada, Australia, Japan, and European nations. Next conference would be held in Washington in July. (NYT, 6/22/64, 45)
tiros vii completed one year in orbit with all components working as well as the day it was launched. During the past year, the satellite transmitted about 70,000 pictures to earth, 90 per cent of them usable, and spotted 16 hurricanes and typhoons, (nasa Release 64-144)
First anniversary of telstaR ii communications satellite. AT&T reported its second communications satellite was “functioning normally in every respect” and had completed 2,340 orbits of the earth. Nearly 60 public demonstrations, most of them overseas TV transmissions, were conducted with telstar ii. Radiation data collected by telstar n enabled scientists to determine that the very high intensity of electrons in inner region of the Van Allen belt had decayed slowly during the past year. Built with stronger shielding against radiation than its predecessor and equipped with specially, developed transistors to better withstand the space environment, telstar ii was orbiting in higher apogee than telstar i, making possible communications experiments of greater length, (at&t Release)	.
tiros vm meteorological satellite, launched December 21, 1963, was performing highly successfully in automatic transmission of cloud pictures to ground stations around the world, NASA announced. “Reports from 47 ground stations around the world, including five foreign stations, show that with one exception results have been satisfactory. TV signal strength has been good, tracking of the spacecraft based on data furnished daily by NASA has been easy for the ground stations, and picture contrast of the cloud cover photos generally has been excellent.” (NASA Release 64-53)
Leo D. Welch, Chairman of the Communications Satellite Corp., reported that Soviet officials had refused to answer a question as to whether they were developing their own system of communications by satellite. Welch said that the Soviets would say only that they were conducting experiments in the space technology. The questions were asked when the Soviets attended a meeting in Geneva in June at which they received a briefing on the formation of the 18-nation communications satellite network. (Wash. Post, 7/20/64)
Public sale of stock in Communications Satellite Corp. would be offered in April, New York sources revealed, (nytns, Denver Post, 2/21/64)
British Labor party leader Harold Wilson said Soviet voskhod i spacecraft was forerunner of missile-launching satellites that would make Polaris missile obsolete. Such space-based weapons, he said, “would mean that the all-American deterrent on which Sir Alec Douglas-Home bases his defense argument will soon be made obsolete by space missile development.” British election was three days away. (Cul'hane, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64)
NASA announced agreement had been reached by Malagasy Republic and U.S. on the relocation and expansion of NASA tracking station on Madagascar. Previously located at Majunga, the station was being relocated near Tananarive and expanded to include instrumentation for Project Gemini monitoring and communicating and for scientific satellite tracking and recording data. (NASA Release 64-222)
syncom ill might be in position to relay television pictures from Japan as soon as the first week in September, NASA said. The satellite was drifting eastward on the equator at rate of about 483 miles per day. (AP, Balt Sun, 8/25/64)
Among 49 new projects voted by U.N. Special Fund was $582,000 grant to help India establish a satellite tracking station and perform research in space communications. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 6/22/64)
Wolfgang Cartellieri, West Germany Research Ministry state secretary, announced that preparations had begun for a space satellite program involving small research and telecommunications satellites, (upi, NYT, 11/15/64,56)
U.S. and Japanese meteorologists ended week-long conference in Miami where they formulated informal recommendations for increased international cooperation in problems of hurricanes and typhoons. Satellites and rockets were expected to play key role in the program, administered by Japanese Research Council and the National Science Foundation. (M&R, 3/23/64, 8)
UNESCO decided to convene an international meeting of scientists in Paris late next year to study the use of space satellites in mass communications media. No exact date was set for the meeting. (NYT, 11/14/64, 29)
Communications Satellite Corp. requested bids from 15 companies for research data and consultant services for defining design and performance requirements of ground terminals for global comsat system. (ComSat-Coxp Release)
U.S.S.R. announced orbiting of cosmos l satellite into the following orbit: apogee, 150 mi.; perigee, 122 mi.; period, 88.7 min.; inclination to the equator, 51.3°. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/30/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
Senate confirmed President Johnson’s nominations to Board of Directors of the Communications Satellite Corp.: Frederic G. Donner, George Meany, and Clark Kerr, (nasa lar III/187-88)
Scientific results from the explorer xvm satellite—-Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP)—was topic of discussion at GSFC symposium. The NASA satellite was orbited in November 1963, with onboard instrumentation including two magnetometers, three plasma probes, and five sets of low and medium energy particle detectors, imp data revealed a shock wave existed 53,600 mi. above earth’s sunlit surface, formed by interaction of interplanetary magnetic field and high-speed constant wind of particles from the sun. Between shock wave and upper edge of Van Allen belts, a region ranging in depth from 12,000 to 20,000 mi., there is great turbulence; moderately energetic particles constantly flow into the region and drain away. (Simons, Wash. Post, 3/13/64; NYT, 3/13/64; Goddard News, 3/23/64, 1-2)
Morris Forgash, president of United States Freight Co., gave his predictions of transportation in the year 2000, in address at National Defense Transportation Association conference in Frankfurt, Germany. Among his predictions: “By the year 2000 the hydrofoils will be the buslines of the oceans”; “people and things will be transported between all the more distant points on earth by rocket-powered craft.” He concluded: “Before you mark off anything that I have predicted for the next three and a half decades look back on the startling developments of the recent past. The breaking of the sound barrier. Space travel. Substitution of a cushion of air for the ageless wheel. The broadcasting of a message of good will to the world by a President of the United States not by cable, phone, or radio, but from a satellite circling around the globe in outer space—then the erasure of the message and substitution of another while die satellite was in orbit. The Olympic games in Tokyo brought into the homes of people on the far side of the earth through the medium of a relay station in space. Multiply these miracles of science by the rate of change which is being constantly compounded and see if my predictions do not come out on the modest side even to the point of reticence. “I believe the most important fact for us to understand is that transportation, though it opens new worlds and changes old concepts of time and distance, will not shape the world of 2000 A.D. Transportation is the servant of the people—the genie which makes their dreams come true—the magic carpet of their future—the mobility of their desires, their aspirations, and their resources. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/7/65, A70-74)
The “complete success” of Project Vela high-altitude nuclear-detection satellites led DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) to expand and revise the project. Future launchings had been rescheduled farther apart so that subsequent satellites could incorporate any major improvements between launchings, according to arpa Director Dr. R. L. Sproull. (M&R, 4/27/64,11)	_
relay i communications satellite continued operating normally and the one-year onboard timer had not cut off as of this date. ( gsfc Historian)
British Postmaster General Reginald Bevins said in House of Commons that, under the right conditions, “the United Kingdom will be willing to provide up to £15 million of the capital cost of a world system” for satellite communications. He said U.K. would share in design of comsat system, share in its ownership, and play full part in providing satellite launch vehicles and other equipment. He reported that in recent meeting of representatives of European, U.S., and Canadian governments on problems of establishing a global comsat system, “good progress” was made. (upi, NYT, 4/16/64, 9)
Soviets launched cosmos xxxiv artificial earth satellite equipped for scientific study of outer space. It was part of program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962. Period was 90 min., apogee was 360 km. (223 mi.), perigee was 205 km. (127 mi.), and equatorial inclination was 64.96°. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 7/2/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Communications Satellite Corp., authorized two years ago by law as a private corporation to establish a global commercial comsat system, was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Incorporated Feb. 1,1963, ComSatCorp had offered 10 million shares at $20 each, five million to communications common carriers and five million to the general public. (ComSatCorp Release)
Ernest W. Brackett, NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator (Procurement Policy), addressed National Association of Professional Contract Administrators in Orlando, Fla. Discussing some NASA contract matters of current interest, he outlined ways in which NASA worked similarly to and differently than dod contract administration, then said: “Perhaps the outstanding difference between NASA and dod in the field? of- contract administration is in the area of quality control and inspection. NASA’s contracts are almost wholly for research and the development of satellites, space vehicles, engines, etc., the like of which have never been made before. There are no production type contracts and these probably will be very few. The system of inspection and quality control as envisaged by NASA is quite different from the sampling type of inspection used on a production line. “We buy only a few of each item and a failure may mean the compromise of a program. Also, development items are very expensive and the loss of a shot may mean the loss of millions of dollars. There have been failures where the cause has been traced to the failure of a small component costing a hundred dollars or so which might have been caught with proper inspection. The Saturn is an example of a project where very high degrees of quality control have been applied and very detailed inspection has taken place. The six Saturn shots have all been successful and it is difficult to criticize success. “nasa has had over 100 space shots. There have been successes and failures. In 1960 only 47% of the shots were successful,t but in 1963 successes had risen to 85%. You can expect continued emphasis on quality control from NASA. Someone described that degree of reliability that nasa is looking for as being the equivalent of 1,000 TV sets made to run continuously for a year without a single one failing. . . .” (Text)
Soviet news agency Tass said electron i and electron ii scientific satellites continued to function successfully. By 6:00 p.m. Moscow time Feb. 11, electron I had completed 104 orbits and electron ii more than 13 orbits. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/12/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
Impact of global communications satellite systems was predicted by Arthur C. Clarke in Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine. During the coming decade, comsat systems would bring about “orbital post office,” “orbital newspapers,” and “orbital telephony.” And eventually global comsat system would underscore requirement for universal language, which Clarke predicted would be met with English; would educate millions with TV visual aids; and would end barriers to free flow of information (such as censorship and jamming). “The inexorable force of astronomical facts will destroy the political fantasies which so long fragmented our planet. For when all major artistic productions, entertainments, political and news events (not to mention disasters) can be observed and experienced simultaneously by the whole world, the parochialism and xenophobia of the past will not be able to survive. “. . . another [influence], perhaps even more fundamental, may be reversal of an historic trend which has proceeded with scarcely a break for 5000 years. The traditional role of the city as a meeting-place is coming to an end; Megapolis may soon go the way of the dinosaurs it now resembles in so many respects. This century may see the beginnings of a slow but irresistible dispersion and decentralization of mankind—a physical dispersion which will take place, paradoxically enough, at the same time as cultural unification.” (Clarke, A/A, 2/64, 45—48)
New gravity gradient stabilization system utilizing earth’s gravitational field to orient the satellite and earth’s magnetic field to assist in damping was developed by General Electric and recently tested onboard a USN satellite, orbited Jan. 11. Within three days the system stabilized the satellite to accuracy of ±5 degrees. (M&R, 2/17/64, 10; Av. Wk., 2/24/64,57)	_
Rep. E. Ross Adair (R.-Ind.) said on House floor that a fifth transatlantic communications cable (TAT) would be unnecessary: “It is expected that within the next 6 weeks the . . . [ComSatCorp] will announce its plans for financing a communications satellite system and will tell Congress and potential investors when it expects to have a system in operation. I understand that CSC expects to design its first satellites to handle traffic between the United States and Europe. “. . . based on information filed with the fcc by the International Carriers having an interest in these matters ... I am convinced that there is no need for tat 5. If permission is granted to lay tat 5 it would add at least 128 channels of capacity . . and this would mean that there would be no economic justification for orbiting a satellite system in the immediate future . . .” He recommended adopting Mackay Radio’s proposal to change the route planned for TAT 4: “. . . this route would not only make it possible to establish intermediate relay and terminal facilities in the Azores, but also to provide for extension to Spain and Portugal and even down to the Canary Islands. “The U.S. military might well prefer cable links to the Azores and this route could also serve the interests of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, both in Spain and the Canary Islands, where NASA tracking stations are either in being or being constructed. . . .” (CR, 2/6/64, 2220)
Soviet satellites electron in and electron iv were successfully conducting scientific investigation of upper atmosphere and outer space, according to Soviet newspaper source. Since their orbiting last July 11,50 communication sessions had been held with electron III and 19 with electron rv, and valuable scientific and engineering data had been obtained. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/2/64, ATSS—T Trans.)
U.S.S.R. announced launching cosmos XLIX artificial earth satellite into orbit: apogee, 490 km. (304 mi.); perigee, 260 km. (162 mi.); period, 91.83 min.; and inclination, 49° to the equatorial plane. Onboard equipment was said to be operating normally and ground tracking station was processing incoming data. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/25/64,1, ATSS—T Trans.)
Fee ruled AT&T must confine its use of channels in undersea cables to voice and related service, and leave the services of non-voice and combined voice/non-voice to smaller message companies. Although the decision applied to undersea cables, there was speculation that it could affect future commercial communications satellites. As one Fee aide said, “The rationale of the decision would seem to extend to any type of facility.” (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/20/64)
At his news conference, President Johnson stated, in reply to a question about reconnaissance of Cuba by means of planes and satellites: “I will say this: that we, at the time of the Cuba missile crisis, attempted to work out an agreement for inspection and that was refused. This nation, in order to protect its people, must have a knowledge of what is taking place and we propose to keep informed. As to what offers the best method, we will have to determine that.” (NYT, 6/3/64, 25)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xlvii artificial earth satellite “for the further investigation of cosmic space.” Orbital data: apogee, 413 km. (256 mi.); perigee, 177 km. (110 mi); period, 90 min.; and inclination to the equator, 64.77°. cosmos xlvii de-orbited Oct. 7. (Tass, Pravda, 10/7/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; GSFC SSR, 10/15/64)
Sonny Liston-Cassius Clay heavyweight title match was first championship fight to be telecast via communications satellite; video tape of the .match was transmitted to 11 European countries shortly after 1:00 a.m. est via NASA’s relay II communications satellite, (nasa Release 64-44)
In Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet Academician A. A. Blagonravov was interviewed by Tass correspondent regarding the launching of echo ii :	. . in time, international space cooperation will acquire decisive significance. Each country will contribute its best efforts to the peaceful conquest of space. The knowledge obtained will accrue to the benefit of all mankind. Certain long-range communication problems will be clarified by the joint investigations of the U.S. and U.S.S.R. scientists. There are other equally fruitful points of contact. The coordination of the program of space experiments envisages the use of satellites for weather service on a world-wide scale. Also the combined use of sputniks for compiling charts of the Earth’s magnetic field will be a significant contribution to world science. These projects are part of the Soviet-American collaboration in the interests of mankind.” (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/28/64, 4, ATSS-T Trans.)
Opening ceremonies of the Olympic Games in Tokyo were telecast live in U.S. via ComSatCorp’s communications link using NASA’s syncom hi satellite. Telecast was delayed on West Coast and taped for later showing by nbc, which said it was avoiding interference with commercial programing. Japan was reported to have expressed disappointment to U.S. State Dept., and State Dept, in turn was said to be “deeply concerned” over the procedure. NBC confirmed that future coverage of Olympic Games would be taped or filmed. (ComSatCorp Release; Gould, NYT, 10/11/64,1,25)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xxx satellite. Initial orbital data, according to Tass: 383.1-km. apogee (238 mi.), 206.6-km. perigee (128 mi.), 90.24-min. period, and 64.94° inclination to the equator. (Pravda, 5/19/64, atss-t Trans.)
NASA and NBC conducted one-hour test of the syncom II communication satellite hovering in synchronous orbit near the West Coast, testing the satellite’s capability to relay video coverage from Tokyo’s Olympic Games next fall. In the test, signals were transmitted from an antenna at Fort Dix, N.J.; signals returned from the satellite were received at Andover, Me., and relayed to nbc studios by land lines. Quality of the pictures was considered below standard commercial quality but adequate for brief broadcasts of select events. NBC, which had purchased exclusive rights to TV coverage of the 1964 Summer Olympics in the U.S. and Central and South America, would now decide whether to attempt live coverage with satellites or to rely on tapes. (Witkin, NYT, 4/24/64, 55)	_
The U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxxv into orbit. The satellite’s initial orbital parameters were: period, 89.2 min.; apogee, 268 km. (161 mi.); perigee, 217 km. (130 mi.); inclination, 51.3°- The satellite, carrying scientific equipment for space studies, was reported to be functioning normally. (Tass, Izvestia, 7/17/64,1, atss-t Trans.; AP, NYT, 7/16/64)
Sixth birthday of explorer I, first U.S. satellite, which was launched into orbit with a Jupiter C vehicle by jpl—abma team, explorer i has traveled around the earth 26,315 times covering some 775 million miles. With initial orbit of 1,573-mi. apogee, 224-mi. perigee, and 114.8-min. period, explorer i now orbits at 1,011.6-mi. apogee, 212.5-mi. perigee, and 104.6-min. period. It was originally expected to re-enter atmosphere and disintegrate after five years, was now expected to last until 1966. Its smaller transmitter relayed information for 105 days; the larger transmitter, 31 days. Onboard instrumentation discovered radiation belt around the earth, named after Dr. James A. Van Allen who provided the experiment. (Marshall Star, 1/29/64, 4; “nasa Chronicle of Earth Sat. & Space Probes, 1957-60”)
Sixth anniversary of vanguard i satellite, launched into orbit Mar. 17, 1958. The satellite’s stability of orbit had provided geodetic observations, including the determination that the earth is slightly pearshaped. vanguard I was the only satellite orbited before 1959 that was still transmitting. (A&A/1915-60)
General Dynamics/Astronautics received $6 million contract from usaf for additional standardized Atlas space launch vehicles. Atlases produced under this contract were said to be for sending lunar-orbiting probes on photographic missions. (San Diego Union, 9/8/64) Congress opened with statement by President Edmond A. Brun (France) that deliberations “should undoubtedly contribute towards increasing international cooperation in the field of astronautics.” First report to the entire Congres was on the lunar mission of RANGER vn by JPL Director William Pickering and Harris Schurmeier. ranger vn movie was shown five times during the week to packed audiences. Informative U.S. papers on progress on comsats, weather satellites (including NIMBUS I photographs), manned lunar landing program, and bioastronautics, as well as Consideration of the idea of a Lunar International Laboratory, appeared highlights of the 15th IAF Congress. (NASA Hist.)
Communications Satellite Corp. said dod’s last-minute demands on ComSatCorp to change the terms of the international comsat agreement were the reason why DOD-ComSatCorp negotiations fell through. ComSatCorp President Joseph Charyk said DOD had insisted on changes which would have barred foreign members from any voice in letting contracts to build the military portion of the network, dod’s demands were presented in July, shortly before the conference that created the new consortium and after all technical details of the proposed military-commercial sharing plan had been agreed upon in June. (Toth, Wash. Post, 8/12/64)
Plans for first operational weather satellite system, to be called Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, were announced, nasa had selected RCa’s Astro Electronics Div. for negotiations leading to manufacture of five Tiros operational weather satellites, at cost expected to exceed $9 million. Dept: of Commerce/Weather Bureau would finance tos system, provide overall management, and be responsible for its operation. NASA was responsible for spacecraft procurement, launch, and initial checkout after satellite is in orbit. After system begins in late 1965, two meteorological satellites would be in orbit at all times, photographing cloud-cover of the entire earth every day. (nasa Release 64-125; Commerce Dept. Release WB 64-9)
Radio command signal to syncom II communications satellite pulsed onboard gas jets to increase the satellite’s 6,800-mph speed. The satellite began drifting westward at rate of about 1.3 degree per day, was expected to reach vicinity of the International Date Line in mid-May. There syncom ii would serve as backup for a third Syncom, scheduled for synchronous orbit over the Pacific in May and transpacific communications experiments during the summer. (Finney, NYT, 3/19/64, 14) 706-598 0—65---8
Dr. Eugene Fubini, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Deputy Director, ddr&e ), told Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee that dod was “very close to an agreement” with the Communications Satellite Corp. on working out a system for military satellite communications. Although decision had not been reached as to whether DOD would develop its own comsat system or lease channels from ComSatCorp satellites, Fubini said leasing channels “has proved to be more feasible than our fondest hopes.” He emphasized that there would be “no compromise on security” if the commercial system were chosen. (Finney, NYT, 3/18/64, 15; Av. Wk., 3/23/64,19)
By this date U.S. still did not know whether U.S.S.R. would participate in tracking Echo II balloon satellite, scheduled for launching Jan. 23. Earlier this month NASA sent cable to Soviet Academy of Sciences outlining launch schedule and inquiring about Soviet tracking plans, agreed on in principle last summer. NASA received cable in reply, acknowledging receipt of U.S. message but providing no details of Soviet plans. NASA planned to launch the satellite as scheduled, hoped to hear further word from U.S.S.R. (Finney, NYT, 1/19/64)
Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted to recommend Senate ratification of radio communications treaty, drawn up at 70-nation conference in Geneva last fall. Considered a step toward establishment of global communications satellite network, treaty revised radio regulations, provided for international allocation of radio frequencies for communications, navigational, and meteorological satellites. (AP, NYT, 2/19/64 ,15)
Fourth birthday of echo I passive communications satellite, still orbiting the earth in its visible path. G. T. Schjeldahl Co., builders of the 100-ft. sphere for NASA, said echo i’s supply of gas had long ago leaked out through holes made by micrometeoroids, but even so, echo i had “demonstrated the practicability of employing large inflatable and erectable reflectors to rebound intelligent signals beamed at it.” (Schjeldahl Release; Wash. Post, 8/11/64)
Arthur Kantrowitz delivered 1964 von Karman Lecture at AIAA annual During June: Analysis of infrared radiation measurements of TIROS n meteorological satellite was detailed 'by R. S. Hawkins of afcrl. Hawkins suggested that when discrepancies 'between data from satellite and from other sources are understood and accounted for, infrared data from meteorological satellites could provide an invaluable tool for plotting and predicting course of cold fronts as well as for obtaining information on structure of frontal zones and regions of convective activity, (oar Research Review, 6/64, 3)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced it had filed application with fcc for authority to modify at&t ground station at Andover, Me., so it could be used with ComSatCorp synchronous satellite scheduled for launch in March 1965. The application requested fcc approval of technical characteristics of the modified station. ComSatCorp also filed proposed agreement with at&t for modification and operation of the station. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA announced Hughes Aircraft Co. had been awarded contract to develop and build five Advanced Technological Satellites (ATS) based on Advanced Syncom design study. The 650-lb. satellites would be used to test several spacecraft techniques, particularly spacecraft stabilization and orientation in higher altitudes, (nasa Release 64-50; Goddard News, 3/9/64, 8)
relay i and relay II communications satellites were used to broadcast election week previews and results to Europe. Total broadcast time amounted to slightly less than two hours, syncom II synchronous communications satellite, stationed in the Pacific, relayed nearly eight hours of U.S. Presidential election returns to the Far East. Voice of America transmitted the radio signals. (Goddard News, 11/ 16/64,3; nasa Release 64-279)
U.S. Army’s use of orbiting satellite to pinpoint exact locations of land bodies separated by large expanses of ocean was described by DOD. Using secor (Sequential Collation of Range) system with the satellite and overseas ground stations, Army Corps of Engineers’ Army Map Service was for the first time obtaining distance measurements of up to a thousand miles to an accuracy within 30 meters. Nine unknown points were expected to be located in the Pacific during the first year of operations, (dod Release 776-64)
Tass announced electron i and electron II scientific satellites were continuing their elliptical orbits of the earth. By 6:00 p.m. Moscow time Feb. 1, electron i had passed repeatedly through the inner radation belt in its 19 orbits and electron ii had moved four times through the outer radiation belt in its two orbits. Tass said the following studies were being made with aid of onboard equipment: outer and inner radiation belts; charged particles having low energy; concentrations of electrons and positive ions; magnetic fields and radiation belts of the earth; nuclear component of cosmic radiation; shortwave solar radiation; propagation of radio waves; radio-radiation of galaxies; and densities of meteoritic material. Tass said the studies, being accomplished under a unified program in various areas of outer space, were being conducted for the first time. These studies were important for conducting the program of the IQSY and for permitting collection of data to assure radiation safety of manned space flights. Tass said all onboard equipment was functioning normally and ground stations were receiving scientific data from the satellites. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/2/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
Reorientation maneuver was made with syncom ill communications satellite, high above the Pacific Ocean, to align the communications antenna atop the spacecraft for optimum coverage of the earth. This positioned the antenna along a north-south axis perpendicular to the orbital plane. Side effect of this maneuver, plus an orbital adjustment made Aug. 31, was to reduce the eastward drift rate from 3.6° per day to less than 3° per day. (nasa Release 64-230)
dod issued rebuttal to report issued the day before by Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee criticizing dod plans for a military communications satellite system. dod said: “The Defense Department is being operated to provide the highest degree of combat readiness at the lowest possible cost. This policy is being followed in the development of communications satellites. As a result, the defense establishment will have a better satellite communications capability than originally foreseen at anticipated savings of $75-100 millions.” (Finney, NYT, 10/10/64,1,14)
Joint Navigation Satellite Committee (jnsc) established by agreement between Depts. of Treasury, Defense, Interior, Commerce; faa; and NASA, jnsc would evaluate requirements for a nonmilitary satellite system for air-sea navigation, traffic control, emergency and rescue operations, and related functions. If jnsc found navsat system to be the most advantageous means of providing these services, it would recommend appropriate program to develop the satellite system. (Agreement; nmi 2-3-39)
In an Astronautics and Aeronautics editorial, Burton I. Edelson, Chairman of the aiaa Communications Committee, said: “In applying earth satellites to practical tasks, we have long passed the stage of demonstration. Now as we approach the stage of extensive operations, we face another major challenge in what industry terms a ‘market survey.’ We must be alert to the possibility of entirely new markets which evolve once an initial experiment demonstrates capability. The professional community can and should make major contributions to the prompt exploitation of its brain-childs.” (A&A, 12/64, 13)
Delegates from U.S., Canada, Australia, and Japan met with the European Conference on Satellite Communications—a body representing 15 European nations—to further negotiate formation of a world-wide communications satellite system. Francis Trew, secretary of the European Conference, said at the London meeting he was hopeful an agreement “would be ready for ratification in the ‘near future.’ ” (Farnsworth, NYT, 5/26/64,11)
NASA’s explorer xvni (imp-i) satellite, silent since last June because of low power levels, resumed data transmission; it had reached a more favorable sun angle and was able to operate on power directly from its four solar panels. Data received from the satellite, based on preliminary analysis, were described as “good.” (NASA Release 64-242 Addendum)
By midnight deadline, 197 communications carriers had filed applications with fcc to invest in Communications Satellite Corp. (AP, NYT, 3/25/64,53)
Addressing National Space Club in Washington, arpa Director Dr. R. L. Sproull said the nuclear detection satellites orbited last month were operating “without a hitch.” He described the satellites as “experimental”, said they were being used “to determine the most appropriate sensors and the most attractive modes of processing information from them.” He said the success of first launch (October 1963) enabled arpa to revise the program with fewer launches. The satellites were still operating “excellently” and providing information on radiation. (SBD, 8/19/64, 246; NSC Release).
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xxvm. Initial orbital data: apogee, 395 km. (245 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (130 mi.); period, 90.38 min.; and inclination, 65° to the equator. Scientific equipment onboard the satellite was “intended for the further exploration of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass March 16, 1962.” In addition, the satellite contained radio transmitter and telemetering system. All instrumentation was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/5/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. began exchanging weather data over special teletype, Weather Bureau spokesman said, although some operating details had not yet been worked out. Spokesman said U.S. was not yet sending to U.S.S.R. any data gathered from meteorological satellites. (AP, NYT, 10/29/64,58)
ComSatCorp asked 16 companies to propose studies on how to judge the merits of launch vehicles which could be used to put medium-altitude communications satellites into orbit around the earth. ComSatCorp told fcc it planned to launch its first satellite, the Early Bird, in March as a communication link between Europe and North America. The Early Bird would be able to transmit two-way telephone conversations, television computer data, and other types of communications as an experiment in synchronous satellites, placed above the equator at an altitude of 22,300 miles. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 12/9/64>)
Japan’s first television transmission to Europe by communications satellite was received in Pleumeur-Bodou, France, and fed into France’s television network for European viewing. Reception was excellent. The relay was made by telstar d communications satellite. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/17/64)
At White House news conference, President Johnson announced his three appointees to the board of Communications Satellite Corp. “I have appointed Mr. Frederick Donner, who is chairman of the board of General Motors, and has been since 1958. . . . “I have Mr. George Meany, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. I will have Mr. Clark Kerr, president of the University of California. Those are the three Presidential appointees. “This has required a good deal of study and discussion, and I feel very pleased that these men have indicated their willingness to make a sacrifice to lend their peculiar and unusual talents to the direction of this great adventure between government and free enterprise. “Needless to say, all of them have a good many duties at the present time, but because I pointed out the need for their experience and their broad knowledge, they accepted membership.” (Transcript, NYT, 9/22/64)
Rear Adm. Francis D. Boyle, Deputy Director of Defense Communications Agency’s Communications Satellite Project Office, told National Space Club in Washington of dod plans for a military comsat system. He said Titan III—C launch vehicles would orbit up to 24 comsats during the first six months of 1966, placing six to eight satellites in orbit each launch. Orbiting at more than 22,000 mi., the satellites would be “approximately synchronous.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64)
120 delegates from 17 European nations met with U.S. and Canadian delegations in Rome for exploratory talks on European participation in an international communications satellite system proposed by the U.S. (NYT, 2/11/64)	_
usaf announced Atlas-Agena D launch from Pt. Arguello, Calif., with undisclosed satellite payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/12/64)
Communications Satellite Corp. held its first stockholders’ meeting and elected its first Board of Directors—six representing public shareholders and six, communications carriers. (Finney, NYT, 9/18/64, 45)
NASA announced syncom hi synchronous-orbit communications satellite was now in such a precise orbit that its rotational speed was only five seconds slower than that of the earth. Positioned over the equator at 22,300-mi. altitude, syncom m drifted less than l/100th of a degree per day. Orbital parameters: 22,311-mi. apogee, 22,164-mi. perigee, 1,436.158-min. period, and .095° to the equator. Same day, spokesman for Communications Satellite Corp, announced syncom ill was successfully relaying test pictures across the Pacific and their quality was “much better than expected.” The experimental transmissions between Kashima, Japan, and Pt. Mugu, Calif., had begun Sept. 21. (NASA Release 64-241; Finney, NYT, 9/24/64, 13)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxxvii into earth orbit: 300-km. (186.42-mi.) apogee, 205-km. (127.39-mi.) perigee, 89.45-min. period, and 65° angle of inclination to the equator. Tass said the satellite contained scientific equipment intended for carrying on space research according to program announced March 16, 1962. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/15/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
First meeting of Joint Navigation Satellite Committee, composed of representatives from NASA, FAA, and Departments of Commerce, Defense, Interior, and Treasury. Committee would evaluate requirements for improved navigation, traffic control, and search-rescue services, then determine whether navsat system could meet these requirements and at what costs, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 64-253)
Unnamed DOD officials said they were certain that U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos satellites were being used for reconnaissance over U.S. (Hoffman, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/19/64)
Tass announced electron i and electron ii scientific satellites were continuing to send back “valuable scientific information.” electron i had made 53 orbits of the earth and electron ii, 6 orbits. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/64,6)
Spatial orientation and stabilization of Early Bird, ComSatCorp’s first experimental satellite, was to be achieved using a hydrogen-peroxide reaction jet control system. Developed by Walter Kidde and Co., and originally intended for SYNCOM II, newer version would be capable of at least a 10-yr. lifetime. {M&R, 7/13/64, 27)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xlviii satellite into orbit, with the following parameters: 295-km. apogee (183-mi.), 203-km. perigee (126-mi.), 89.4-min. period, and 65.07°-inclination to the equator. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/15/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Communications Satellite Corp. stock had more than doubled in price since heing issued to the public in June and was continuing to rise. Michael Getler, in analysis of the situation, attributed rapid price rise to “basically an amazing scarcity of shares for daily grading—in combination with some rather short-sighted short-selling of the issue based in large measure on early, perhaps overly pessimistic, views of its likely performance. . . .” He quoted security consultant George P. Edgar: “ "The instinct of the public, in this case, has operated better than that of Wall Street. For the most part, professionals have missed ComSat and the public took the ball and ran.’ . . .” (Getler, M&R, 9/14/64, 18)
NASA announced it would negotiate contract with General Electric Co.’s Valley Forge Space Technology Center to design and build gravity-gradient stabilization system for Advanced Technological Satellite. Contract was expected to exceed $5 million. The GE devices would be flown on three satellites; in addition, GE would supply two prototype and two engineering gravity-gradient system models plus ground operations and data analysis. (NASA Release 64-115)
usaf launched unidentified satellite payload aboard a Scout vehicle from Pt. Arguelfo, Calif. Purpose of the shot was not announced. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10)
usn disclosed it was developing seagoing tracking system for its ships and submarines to “avoid those areas of the oceans covered at intervals by spy satellites. Submarines would stay submerged, surfacing only when the sky above is clear.” (Wash. Post, 2/28/64)
Parade magazine’s Intelligence Report said the U.S. had 50 Samos surveillance satellites in orbit photographing Soviet military installations. Photographs were reported to be parachuted to earth between Calif, and Hawaii. Russians were said to have similar satellites spying on U.S. (Parade, Wash. Post, 6/7/64)
President Johnson submitted to the Congress his 1963 report on the activities and accomplishments of the U.S. program to establish and operate a commercial communications satellite system. In his transmittal message, the President said: “The year 1963 has been a period of major accomplishment toward the objectives established by the Congress in the Communications Satellite Act. The Communications Satellite Corporation has been organized, established, has employed a competent staff, and is implementing plans for a commercial communications satellite system. All agencies of Government concerned have contributed wholeheartedly to the furtherance of the objectives of the act. . . (CR, 2/10/64, 2714)
Aviation Week stated that a technological war plan task force under the cognizance of afsc had been established at Space Systems Div., to investigate a variety of subject areas as a continuation of the usaf’s Project Forecast. Participants were expected to include key personnel from industry and NASA as well as afsc. Areas to be studied included boron fiber technology for application to structural materials, operational requirements of biological satellites, manned hypersonic vehicles to investigate thermodynamic and aerodynamic regions, and laser applications and requirements. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 23)
usaf advanced development program to investigate laser’s intelligencegathering capabilities in space was reported. Called “Lariat” (Laser Radar Intelligence Acquisition Technology), program was outgrowth of three-year effort by afsc Aeronautical Systems Div. to develop satellite surveillance system at Cloudcroft, N. Mex. ( Av. Wk., 5/18/64,104)
Firing of hydrogen peroxide gas jets aboard SYNCOM in communications satellite changed its drift rate from 7° east per day to 3.3° per day. (nasa Release 64-217)
dod announced it was abandoning plans to join with ComSatCorp in a space communications system meeting both military and commercial needs. Despite the economies of participation, the factor of international participation in the satellite system and the control foreign nations would have over a communications network that dod wanted for emergency command control over its forces finally tipped the balance against dod cooperation. (Finney, NYT, 7/14/64,15)
NASA announced the details of U.S. geodetic satellite program, designed to provide more precise mapping of the earth’s surface and its gravitational field. Program was based on recommendation of NASA-DOD-Dept. of Commerce Geodetic Satellite Policy Board and involved three types of satellites: Beacon Explorer, equipped with reflectors to reflect laser beams from earth and with Doppler transmitter to measure effect of irregularities in earth’s gravitational field; Geodetic Explorer (instrumented to conduct more experiments than the Beacon Explorer), containing flashing lights, variety of electronic beacons, optical reflectors, and when possible radar reflectors; and passive geodetic staellite, sunlight-reflecting lOO-ft.-diameter Echo-type sphere, (nasa Release 64-236)
NASA’s nimbus i meteorological satellite was launched into polar orbit from Western Test Range with Thor-Agena B launch vehicle, and on its sixth orbit began transmitting weather photographs which were called “the best pictures ever” from space. Orbit of the 830-lb. satellite had been planned as circular 575-mi. altitude orbit; Agena B engines burned for only .84 sec. instead of the 3.8 sec. expected for injection bum, so the satellite was orbiting with 578-mi. apogee, 252-mi. perigee, 98-min. period, and 81° inclination to the equator, nimbus I, unlike the Tiros meteorological satellites, was earth-oriented and stabilized in all three axes. It contained Advanced Vidicon Camera System and Automatic Picture Transmission System, both of which operate during daylight portion of each orbit; High Resolution Infrared Radiometer, first to be flown on NASA meteorological satellite, provided first high resolution night-time cloud-cover pictures and cloud-top temperatures taken from a satellite. About 62 apt stations, including those in 12 foreign countries and 4 owned privately, participated in nimbus i picture reception. The apt system was designed for Nimbus and was first tested—successfully—on tiros viii launched last December. Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said at nimbus i news conference: “. . . This much is certain: We are way ahead of the rest of the world. I am certain that if nothing came out of the space effort but the communications satellite, the weather satellite, and the navigational satellites, which will soon be flying, in a limited number of years, it would more than pay back all of the investment that has been made in space.” (NASA Release 64-195; GSFC Press Briefing Transcript; Wash. Eve. Star, 8/29/64; nasa r&sc Div.)
At Cape Kennedy press conference following Saturn I SA—5 launch, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans stated, “There is little question that it took us ahead of the Russians in our capability.” He noted that payload equivalent of SA-5’s orbiting body was between 19,000	and 20,000 lbs., far exceeding the 14,292 lbs. reported for heaviest Soviet satellites.. {M&R, 2/3/64,18)
Reported that NASA was considering University Explorer program, under which universities would design and build their own scientific satellites with NASA funding. The satellites would be launched from Wallops Island with Scout boosters. (Av. Wk., 10/19/64, 35)
NASA’s explorer xx topside-ionosphere sounder satellite was providing new information on “the arrangement of ionospheric irregularities” and “the structure of plasma resonances,” according to Central Radio Propagation of National Bureau of Standards. (M&R, 10/26/64,23)
NASA announced it had requested proposals from scientists for experiments on Advanced Technological Satellites to be launched from Cape Kennedy in 1966-68. Primary mission of ATS would be to evaluate advanced communication techniques, meteorological components, and gravity gradient stabilization systems, but additional space for scientific experiments was available. (NASA Release 64-153)
The White House and Communications Satellite Corp. announced television coverage of the Olympic Games from Tokyo to the U.S. and Canada would be attempted via communications satellite. Project would be earned out with cooperation of NASA and dod and with Government of Japan and Japan Broadcasting Corp. NASA’s Syncom 3 experimental communications satellite, planned for launch into synchronous orbit during August, would be made available for transmission of TV coverage of the Games, which would take place Oct. 10-24. (ComSatCorp Release; Finney, NYT, 7/23/64,42)
usia communications exhibition to be shown in U.S.S.R. this summer was previewed by Government, industry, and press representatives in New York. Exhibition covered U.S. communications in space satellites, TV and radio, telephone, and business and industry. The space portion featured models of nine satellites and live TV images of visitors bounced off working model of Telstar satellite. (Shanley, NYT, 4/19/64, 47)
Common stock of Communications Satellite Corp. had risen as high as $35 since it was put on sale to the public at $20 last June 2, surprising many Wall Street experts. (Vartan, NYT, 8/7/64,33)
U.S.S.R.’s Ivan Cheprov, speaking at symposium on international space law held in Warsaw in conjunction with IAF congress, criticized the planned global communications satellite network being organized by Communications Satellite Corp. He said it appeared “that the very use of new communications channels by other nations would depend on the whims of Comsat. . . . The right to participate in the management of the space communications system is denied those who are not willing to subsidize and to perpetuate a monopoly in the sphere of producing communications satellites and running space communications business. . . . The other participants merely form a chorus for approving any decisions dictated by Comsat.” He said the U.N. and the International Telecommunication Union could organize an international communications system “on the basis of equality.” (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/11/64)
General order from afsc established Eastern and Western Test Ranges of the National Range Division, wtr would assume range support for icbm and satellite programs on a phased basis, gaining full responsibility some time between Mar. 1 and Jun. 30,1965. Until then, overall responsibilities for these functions continued with PMR; after that time, pmr would continue to operate as a national sea test range under the Navy, ft would comprise facilities in Pt. Mugu-San Nicholas Island area and certain downrange stations in the area of Hawaii, and would be responsible for Pacific Ocean-based launches. (afsc Release 45-R-61; NASA Announcement 61-161)
NASA and ComSatCorp jointly announced the signing of an agreement covering the launching by NASA of “Early Bird”—the first communications satellite intended for commercial use. The agreement provided that NASA would launch Early Bird from Cape Kennedy, Fla., into synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude above the Atlantic as soon after Mar. 1 as NASA found feasible. ComSatCorp would pay NASA approximately $3.5 million for the initial launch, whether or not the Thrust Augmented Delta launch vehicle was successful in orbiting the satellite, and for each subsequent launch under the contract. The $3.5 million would reimburse NASA for the cost of the Delta vehicle, other launch services, propellants, guidance and tracking services, and data processing. Should the first launch be unsuccessful, nasa would try again on a second satellite. The contract gave ComSatCorp the option of calling for additional launches, after July 1, of synchronous satellites of the same type. (ComSatCorp Release, 12/23/64)
USAF’s start (Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-entry Test) program was discussed by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal of the Armed Forces, start, according to Haggerty, “appears to be more than . . . an expansion of the ASSET program. . . . START involves a dozen or more areas of investigation in the general field of re-entry. It could lead to development of a manned re-entry vehicle for use with the Manned Orbital Laboratory, one which could make a maneuvering re-entry to a landing field, as opposed to the ballistic flight path of the Gemini spacecraft which will be the original MOL re-entry vehicle. Looking farther down the road, start technology could provide the basis for eventual development of a large ferry vehicle for shuttling men and supplies to and from an orbiting space station. . . .” First contract for this new type of spacecraft was awarded recently to Martin Marietta Corp. for ablative-type re-entry body, designated SV-5, capable of maneuvering during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere at hypersonic-transonic speeds. SV-5 was said to be only one portion of broad start program, which would investigate a .number of other reentry body shapes, possibly even lifting body types such as M-2 and HL-10 being investigated by NASA. (J/Armed Forces, 9/5/64, 5) September 5: More emigrating scientists and engineers settle in the U.S. than in any other country, according to Dr. Charles V. Kidd, Associate Director for International Activities of National Institutes of Health, writing in UNESCO publication. From 1949 through 1961, 43,000 scientists and engineers (average of 3,350 per year) immigrated to U.S., reaching peak of 5,800 per year in 1957. (O’Kane, NYT, 9/6/64, 20) September 6: NASA announced echo I balloon satellite had been used this summer by French National Geographic Institute to accurately locate satellite tracking stations being built for France and esro across Europe and Africa. According to reports, French National Geographic Institute photographed echo i simultaneously from precisely located cameras in France and Algeria, in order to join the triangulation systems of France and Algeria. Its aluminum-coated mylar skin wrinkled and misshapen, echo i was no longer useful in radio-reflecting communications, but it was still clearly visible in the nighttime sky after more than four years of orbiting the earth. (NASA Release 64-226)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced six companies had responded to its request for proposals for designing international commercial communications satellite, at&t and RCA submitted a joint proposal; Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc., submitted proposal with ITT as principal subcontractor; Hughes Aircraft Co. and Philco Corp. submitted individual proposals. ComSatCorp was evaluating the proposals. (WSJ, 2/12/64)
It was reported dod may coordinate a geodetic survey program combining Secor satellite, a planned Transit satellite, echo ii, and a planned Anna satellite. A ground station would correlate the flashing light of Anna, the optical system of Secor, and the doppler radar system of the Transit, using echo ii as a reference point. (SBD, 6/24/64)
Future Delta launch vehicles with larger propellant tanks, the Thrust-Augmented Delta (tad) , would be used to launch payloads in the Biosatellite, Pioneer, and meteorological satellite families, GSFC reported. (Goddard News, 6/29/64,1)
NASA’s syncom III synchronous-orbit communications satellite was launched into preliminary orbit high above the earth by a tad (Thrust-Augmented Delta) launch vehicle, its premiere satellite launching. Preliminary orbit: 23,675-mi. apogee, 695-mi. perigee, 11 hrs. 35 min. period, and 16° inclination to the equator. Four hours after launch from Cape Kennedy, the satellite received and sent back a test recording of music of “The Star Spangled Banner” as well as test voice and teletype message. Further maneuvers during the next 10 days would move syncom III into a synchronous position over the Pacific, where it would be able to communicate with surface stations at Clark afb in the Philippines, at Guam, and at Camp Roberts, Calif. Work was underway to make it possible to transmit the 1964 Olympic Games from Tokyo via syncom m in October, (nasa Release 64-193; nasa Transcript of Press Conference; AP, NYT, 8/20/64, 51)
European Space Research Organization (esro) announced in Paris its plans for satellite development program. First two esro satellites would be launched into orbit from the U.S. with Scout boosters; launch vehicles for later satellites would be supplied by member nations. ESRO set budget of $300 million for eight years. (NYT, 3/25/64, 31; A&A, 5/64,9)
It was announced that the British government was spending $2.8 million to enlarge its space communications facilities at Goonhilly Downs. Future communications satellites would require more powerful receivers because of higher orbits. (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/4/64)
Information conditioning unit that converts data for computer use much more rapidly than any before had been tested on usn satellite, according to Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., inventor of the system. System was said to reduce to hours the weeks or months pre-1766-598 0—65----5 viously required for conversion of satellite data into usable scientific information. After recent launch of usn satellite with the unit onboard, scientists obtained more than 50 types of information—analyzed, checked, and printed—from the satellite within 12 hours, (upi, NYT, 2/9/64,91)
France and Spain signed an agreement to set up a joint satellite tracking station in the jSpanish-owned Canary Islands, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/5/64)
NASA Goddard Space Fight Center announced plans for negotiation with the General Dynamics-Electronics Co. for purchase of approximately $1.25 million worth of unique ground tracking equipment to be used in the Applications Technology Satellite project. ATS Range and Range Rate electronic systems would be installed in three ground stations to provide ground trackers with extremely accurate satellite position, velocity, and range. The systems would also drive displays and digital data consoles. The contractor would design, manufacture, and test the systems under a cost reimbursable contract with incentive provisions. ATS satellites, designed to advance technology in communications, meteorology, and other applications, would require unique ground systems ready for the first launch in 1966. (gsfc Release G—36-64) 76ft-598 O—65- —28
NASA announced that further analysis of results of the first experiments to use the laser beam for satellite tracking indicated that scientists had accomplished precision tracking of a satellite with a laser device. Tests were conducted on 10 passes of the explorer xxii satellite since the first success on Oct. 11. (NASA Release 64-285)
U.S.S.R. announced launching of cosmos xliv earth satellite into the following orbit: 860-km. (534-mi.) apogee, 618-km. (384-mi.) perigee, 99.5-min. period, and 65° inclination to the equator. The satellite was said to be carrying on the Cosmos program announced March 16, 1962. (Tass, Pravda, 8/29/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
usaf Electronic Systems Division announced award of $1,350,000 fixedprice contract to Space-General Corp. for design, fabrication, and testing of satellite payloads, (dod Release 849-64)
Information about the Van Allen radiation belts, obtained from usaf satellite about a year ago, was reported by Dr. Ludwig Katz, of usaf’s Space Physics Laboratory: “These low energy particles are not a serious hazard to men in space. Over a period of time, however, they could affect the performance of electronic equipment carried aboard a satellite. “The instruments carried aboard the satellite were of six types: a proton detector, plasma probe, electron detector, electrostatic analyzer, geiger counter and magnetometer. The data were gathered from more than 100 orbits.” (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/64)
Spokesman for European conference on satellite communications, meeting in Rome with U.S. and Canadian delegations, said conference had reached agreement on principal points of the U.S. proposed to establish an international comsat system. “They are now discussing the details, upon which the accord isn’t so extensive.” (NYT, 2/12/64,
U.S.S.R launched cosmos xxix into orbit from unspecified site. Soviet press agency Tass said the satellite was in the following initial orbit: 309-km. apogee (192mi.) ; 204-km. perigee (127 mi.); 89.52 min. period; and 65°4' angle of inclination to the equator. Tass said scientific equipment, radio systems, and onboard instrumentation were functioning normally, and ground station was processing incoming information. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 4/26/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
COSMOS xxvil satellite was launched into orbit by U.S.S.R. Announced orbital data were: 237-km. (147-mi.) apogee; 192-km. (119-mi.) perigee; 88.7-min. period; and 64.8° inclination to the equator. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellite carried scientific instrumentation intended for the “further study of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass” March 16, 1962, as well as radio transmitter and telemetering systems. All onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 3/28/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
France planned to launch a series of constant-level balloon weather stations in the southern hemisphere and a satellite to “interrogate” them on their findings. Named Project Eole, it was scheduled for 1967. Up to 256 balloons were to be sent aloft, each carrying four pounds of weather and communications equipment, to remain at fixed altitudes between 16,500 and 33,000 ft. for at least ten days. The French satellite would interrogate each balloon twice during a single pass overhead. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/21/64)
The ground station at Rao, Sweden, about 225 mi. southwest of Stockholm, joined the world network of communications satellite ground stations and would receive taped television messages via NASA’s relay i satellite. The station was the joint effort of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. (M&R, 11/30/64,20-22)
Communications Satellite Corp. submitted its annual report to the President and the Congress on its activities February 1—December 31, 1963. ComSatCorp reported it had made plans for development and establishment of commercial communications satellite system with global capability, calling for launching of one or more synchronous-orbit satellites over the Atlantic Ocean in 1965 on an experimental-operational basis and initial launching of satellite for the comsat system in 1966. (ComSatCorp Rpt., 1/31/64)
usaf launched Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from WTR with unidentified satellite payload. It was later revealed that two satellites were placed in orbit (hhn-48)
U.S.S.R. announced orbiting of two satellites, electron i and electron II, with a single launch vehicle. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellites were studying “the internal and external radiation belts of the earth and physical phenomena connected with them.” electron I was orbiting at 7,100-km. (4,412-mi.) apogee; 406-km. (252mi.) perigee; 2-hr., 49-min. period; and 61° inclination; electron ii was orbiting at 68,200-km. (42,379-mi.) apogee; 460-km. (286-mi.) perigee; 22-hr., 40-min. period; and 61° inclination. (Tass; Wash. Post, 1/31/64, A14)	_	_
SAN MARCO i (SM-1) was orbited from NASA Wallops Station. The NASA-trained Italian crew launched the 254-lb. Italian-designed satellite on a four-stage solid-propellant Scout to an orbit with an apogee of 490.04 mi., a perigee of 124.62 mi., an orbital period of 94.7 min., and an inclination of 37.77°. It was the first time a foreign country had designed, built, and launched a satellite in orbit in the course of nasa’s international program. The satellite would measure air density and ionospheric characteristics related to long-range radio transmissions and would qualify satellite and train crew for subsequent launches from sea platform in Indian Ocean. (Wallops Release 64-91)
U.S. Army presented two pioneer communications satellites, Score and Courier, to Smithsonian Institution during opening of Museum of History and Technology’s Hall of Electricity. Both satellites were developed at present Army Electronics Command, Ft. Monmouth, N.J. (Balt. Sun, 7/8/64)
usn announced a solar-powered, 120-lb. satellite was launched pickaback last Sept. 28 along with a previously announced nuclear-powered satellite. On board the solar-powered satellite were six transistors and several radiation detectors, testing means of protecting the transistors from radiation damage. (AP, NYT, 1/10/64, 86)
Soviet Academy of Sciences announced Soviet ground stations were tracking echo ii passive communications satellite, in first joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. space experiment. Academician A. A. Blagonravov said Soviet ground stations observed the 135-ft. balloon as it inflated in space and three observatories succeeded in photographing the satellite. Observation stations reported the satellite appeared very bright, varying from magnitude-1 to zero. “Observers in Arkhangelsk report that two additional objects are moving in front of and slightly faster than the satellite proper, and a third object is moving behind it. The results of the first observations are being forwarded to the U.S. The optical stations will continue tracking the echo n. The radio communications experiment is slated to begin somewhat later.” (NYT, 1/27/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/27/64; Izvestia, 1/28/64,6, atss-tTrans.)
ComSatCorp said it would award three additional study contracts for design of communications satellites systems. AT&T and RCA would design a system of 18 satellites to be placed in random orbits. TRW Space Technology Laboratories would engineer a system of 12 satellites in controlled orbits. Hughes Aircraft would plan an improved synchronous-orbit communications satellite. Based on these preliminary studies, a choice was to be made for use in the initial comsat system to begin operation in 1966-67. (ComSatCorp Release; Wash. Post, 6/9/64; Balt. Sun, 6/9/64; NYT, 6/9/64,25)
Fee announced Communications Satellite Corp. planned negotiation of $8 million contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for development, fabrication, assembly, test, maintenance, and service for “Early Bird” communications satellite—the proposed experimental-operational comsat system. The proposed contract would be subject to Fee approval, (upi, Houston Chron., 3/17/64; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/64; M&R, 3/23/64,8)
Delegates from 10 nations and the Vatican formally signed in Washington an agreement for a global communications satellite system. Previously initialed by the negotiators, the agreement designated Communications Satellite Corp. of the U.S. as the partnership’s “manager in the design, development, construction, establishment, operation of the space segment.” (Ward, Balt. Sun, 8/20/64)
Party of scientists led by Nikolai Yerpylev, scientific secretary of Soviet Academy of Sciences, left Moscow for Cuba to “start the preliminary stage of the work” to establish Soviet satellite observation station on the island. Tass said equipment for the station already had been sent to Cuba, (upi, NYT, 2/27/64,12)
Dr. V. A. Bailey, prof, emeritus of physics at Univ. of Sydney, Australia, stated in the British journal Nature his theory that the sun has a large negative electric charge. He proposed that two satellites be launched around the sun, one clockwise and the other counterclockwise, to learn whether or not the sun had electrical charge and whether such a charge was negative or positive. Most physicists believed sun had no electrical charge. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 3/31/64, 21)
Second anniversary of orbiting of anna Ib first satellite designed for use in measuring size and shape of the earth. Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, builder of the satellite, said anna ib was still flashing its beacon and relaying radio signals to earth upon command. (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
Plans for military communications satellite system were described in Aviation Week & Space Technology, which reported that latest dod plan for interim military comsat network called for two or three Titan III—C boosters to place 16-24 satellites into near-equatorial orbit. First launch was scheduled for February 1966. (Av. Wk., 8/17/64, 19)
aec scientists were reported to be planning even more sophisticated nuclear radiation detection satellites to follow the two identified by press sources as having been maneuvered into patrol positions during the preceding weekend. The advanced Sentries were reported to carry optical devices to monitor not only space nuclear blasts but also those in the earth’s atmosphere. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center issued request for proposals for study of deep space laser acquisition and tracking techniques in manned space missions. Specifications called for high priority development of laser tracking techniques between earth and a manned deep space vehicle or between a satellite and two manned deep space vehicles. System must be capable of handling two-way telemetry and voice communications, as well as spacecraft-to-ground TV. 22 companies were invited to bid on the six- to nine-month study, (msc Release 64-3)
NASA and Australian Ministry of Supply announced installation to command flight of Syncom C synchronous-orbit communications satellite would be installed at Salisbury, Australia. Installation would have two functions: monitor the Syncom’s attitude and command its apogee-motor firing, and command the satellite’s control system to make any necessary adj ustments to maintain synchronous position. (NASA Release 64^47)
NASA and French National Center for Space Studies (CNES) agreed to proceed with cooperative space project of launching satellite to investigate characteristics of vlf electromagnetic wave propagation in the ionosphere. The French satellite would be launched from PMR using a Scout vehicle provided by NASA. This would be Phase II of two-phase CNES-nasa program for vlf investigations, pursuant to Memorandum of Understanding dated Feb. 18, 1963. Phase I consisted of two suborbital launches of French experiments with U.S. Aerobee sounding rockets, to demonstrate the feasibility of scientific experiments to be performed by the satellite. (NASA Release 64-61)
Communications Satellite Corp. re-emphasized to Fee its need to own and operate initial satellite terminal stations in U.S. ComSatCorp was replying to statements filed with fcc by communications common-carriers which requested fcc to deny ComSatCorp’s request, originally filed Aug. 14. (ComSatCorp Release)
Unspecified “informed sources” in Paris said that the first foreign base on U.S. territory—a satellite tracking station in Alaska—was to be established by the European Space Research Organization. It was reported that the establishment of die station had been agreed to in principle by the U.S. State Department, and that a formal agreement was expected to be signed in the near future. ESRO had plans for launching about 400 sounding rockets, 6 small satellites, 8 medium satellites, 7 space probes, and an orbiting astronomical observatory during the following 8 years and would use the station to help track, control, and communicate with these spacecraft, esro planned a network of similar stations extending from Alaska across North Pole to the Shetland Islands, Belgium, and Italy. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/29/64)
U.S.S.R. launched earth satellite cosmos xxxi. The orbit had the following initial parameters: period of rotation, 91.6 min.; apogee, 508 km. (309 mi.); perigee, 228 km. (141.67 mi.); inclination to equator, 49°. (Izvestia, 6/7/64:, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Tass reported Soviet Union had launched COSMOS XXXII, latest satellite in series of launches initiated in March 1962. Initial orbit: 333-km. apogee (206.9 mi.), 209-km. perigee (130.5 mi.), 89.78-min. period, and 51.28° inclination to the equator, cosmos XXXII re-entered earth’s atmosphere June 18.	(Pravda, 6/11/64, in msfc SIN, 7/64; GSFC SSR, 6/30/64)
NASA Hq. received telegrams from Soviet Academy of Sciences containing first data from Soviet optical observations of echo ii passive communications satellite. The data were obtained Jan. 25 from Soviet optical observation stations at Tashkent, Ashklabad, Erevan, Vologda, Archangel, Dushanbe, and Vorkuta, were being analyzed along with observations made at NASA stations around the world. Soviet Academy also indicated photographs of echo ii were obtained at five stations. (nasa Release 64-21)
Cape Kennedy, prepared for the onslaught of Hurricane Dora by advance warnings including photographs by nimbus i satellite, escaped the second hurricane in a month with virtually no damage. (AP, 9/9/64)
Appointment of David S. Johnson as Director of National Weather Satellite Center, effective April 1, was announced by Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau Dr. Robert M. White. Mr. Johnson succeeded Dr. S. Fred Singer, resigning to become Dean of new School of Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Univ. of Miami. Deputy Director of the Center since its formation in 1962, Mr. Johnson had been engaged in research, development, and technical management of meteorological satellites and sounding rockets since 1958. (Commerce Release WB 64-6)
U.S.S.R. orbited cosmos xxv scientific earth satellite from unidentified site in Soviet Union. Initial orbital data, according to Tass: 526-km. (320.6-mi.) apogee, 272-km. (169-mi.) perigee, 92.27-min. period, and 49° angle of inclination to equator. Scientific equipment and communication systems onboard the satellite were said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/28/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Institute for Satellite and Space Research scientists in Bochum, W.	Germany, reported monitors had picked up both radio signals and voice broadcasts on the same frequency used by the Soviet Union for manned spacecraft. No manned space launch had been announced by U.S.S.R. (Sci. Ser., Wash. Daily News, 11/13/64)
NASA’s SYNCOM iii synchonous-orbit communications satellite was 178.12° east longitude and 0.03° north latitude at noon, and was traveling along the equator drifting eastward at the rate of 2.8° per day. It was expected to reach the International Date Line (180°) tomorrow, syncom in was inclined 0.081° to the equator, and its orbit ranged in altitude from 21,690-mi. perigee to 22,509-mi. apogee. Control maneuvers would be signaled tomorrow to decrease the satellite’s apogee and increase the perigee, thus giving it a more nearly circular orbit, (nasa Release 64-230)
At international conference in Washington, two interrelated agreements for establishment of global commercial communications satellite system were initialed by the negotiators from 13 participating countries. Five other nations planned to join the agreement on or before Aug. 19, date of formal enactment. Under these agreements, ownership in the $200 million enterprise would be shared among 18 nations and Vatican City, with the United States’ Communications Satellite Corp., owning 61% of the shares and serving as manager of the system on behalf of all participants. Agreement would be open for six months beginning Aug. 19 to any nation belonging to International Telecommunications Union. (ComSatCorp Releases;’ Finney, NYT, 7/25/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/25/64; WSJ, 7/27/64)
National Weather Satellite Center was seeking sources for services and material for advanced development models of water-borne automatic unmanned weather stations by January 14,1965. Companies with mooring and static meteorology sensor technology and design capabilities were being sought. (M&R, 12/21/64,8)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara issued statement amplifying the President’s Sept. 17 announcement of U.S. systems for intercepting and destroying armed satellites. Secretary McNamara said one of the systems was operated by the Army and used Nike-Zeus missile; other system was operated by usaf and used Thor missile. In tests both systems had “intercepted satellites in space, their missiles passing so close as to be within the destruction radius of the warheads.” Army system became operational Aug. 1, 1963, and usaf system May 29, 1964. (dod Release 673-64)
U.S.-Japan telecommunications cable broke at the peak of traffic from the Olympic Games in Tokyo, including sound track for films telecast from Tokyo and sent via syncom in communications satellite. Japanese officials estimated earliest repair date as Oct. 23. (NYT, 10/17/64,13)
It was announced that President Johnson had designated December 1964 as United States International Aviation Month to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the International Civil Aviation Organization (icao), a division of the United Nations. The icao was responsible for making the international rules and setting international standards for all civil aviation activity, including the field of general avaiation. (naa Release) December 4: usaf launched Aflas-Agena D from wtr with unidentified satellite payload, (hhn—48)
Danish Government announced it would join international telecommunication system based on global communications satellites. (AP, NYT, 2/6/64,6)
The “strange object” that fell from sky near remote Venezuelan village was identified by two U.S. Army officers as a U.S. satellite, according to U.S. Embassy spokesman in Caracas. The 175-lb. satellite had been charred by re-entry heat, damaged by impact, and partly dismantled by local residents, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/7/64)
New and more detailed information about Van Allen belts gleaned by hitchhiker I satellite was reported to cospar by Ludwig Katz, afcrl project scientist, hitchhiker satellite was launched pickaback on usaf satellite and separated last July 1. In the afcrl measurements the count rate for protons between one and five million electron volts (mev) indicated that for this energy region there were two distinct Van Allen belts. The count was significantly lower in the middle region between two belts. A second feature, found in measurements between 15 and 100 kev, was that more electrons were found in energy region of the radiation belt, although there was decrease in total flux of electrons from the inner to the outer areas of earth’s magnetic lines of force. (usaf oar Release 5-64-2)
Capt Robert E. Jasperson (usn, Ret.) recently received patent for invention of “satellite alert,” a hand-held computer for informing ships’ officers when to expect radio reports from navigation satellites and meteorologists when to expect readings from weather satellites. (Jones, NYT, 5/23/64)
NASA announced two industry teams had presented to NASA and other agencies their feasibility studies for nonmilitary navigation satellite system. General Electric Co. and Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. made one study under $156,000 NASA contract, while Westinghouse Electric Corp. studied another approach under $225,000 contract. The proposed satellite network would provide worldwide, all-weather coverage for ships and aircraft. (NASA Release 64-37)
NASA announced that Europeans in nine countries would be able to watch the Republican National Convention via NASA’s relay ii communications satellite. Television networks in England, France, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, and Italy were to use relay ii five times during the four-day convention, July 20-23. Similar coverage would be provided during the Democratic National Convention, beginning August 24. (NASA Release 64-170) *	NASA announced that four flight tests of liquid-hydrogen stages in Centaur and Saturn rockets had established liquid hydrogen as a new high-energy fuel for space vehicles. Liquid hydrogen, when mixed with liquid oxygen, produced about 35 per cent more thrust than the kerosene-type fuels normally used, (nasa Release 64-164) *	It was probable that the Soviet space probe zond i, was nearing Venus and would try to send back the first close-up television pictures of that planet, reported Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Radio Experimental Station, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/13/64) *	Aec disclosed decision to discontinue Project Pluto, attempt to build lowflying, atomic-powered missile, despite ten years of effort and $200 million investment. Livermore Radiation Laboratory, initiator and developer of project, had been notified of decision about ten day & earlier. Cause of discontinuation was reportedly combination of indecision, indifference, and lack of support by dod. (Finney, NYT, 7/13/64, 11) July 12: Abraham Hyatt, formerly NASA. Director of Plans and Program Evaluation, was appointed Jerome Clarke Hunsaker Professor of Aeronautical Engineering at MIT. (Boston Sun. Globe, 7/12/64)
cosmos xxvi scientific earth satellite was launched into orbit. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellite’s initial orbital parameters were: apogee, 403 km. (250 mi.); perigee, 271 km. (168 mi.); period, 91 min.; angle of inclination to the equatorial plane, 49°. Onboard scientific equipment, radio system, and instrumentation were said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/19/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
At conclusion of Rome meeting of European Conference on Satellite Communications with representatives from U.S. and Canada, head of U.S. delegation Abram Chayes said “the most significant result of the conference is that a number of European countries as well as Canada have now expressed serious interest in joining as copartners” in the international comsat system. Discussions would continue, and another meeting was scheduled for mid-March in Washington. (Woll-emborg, Wash. Post, 2/14/64)
At two meetings of European Conference on Satellite Communications in Geneva, representatives proposed plans for regional comsat network independent of the U.S., while not ruling out participation with U.S. in global network. {M&R, 11/9/64,12-13)
A joint British-American group of communications engineers was preparing recommendations for a communications base in the Seychelles Islands, northeast of Madagascar. Station would fill a wide gap between Atlantic and Pacific stations in the present worldwide chain of receiving-transmitting stations for satellites. Existing network, set up by the U.S. Navy, had to rely on shipboard stations for Indian Ocean coverage. British responsibility would be limited to the real estate involved while the U.S. would build and equip the station and furnish most of the operating personnel. (Watson, Balt. Sun, 12/31/64)
ComSatCorp petitioned fcc for rule to give it exclusive eligibility for ownership and operation of the initial ground stations for the global commercial comsat network. Under Communications Satellite Act of 1962, fcc must decide whether ComSatCorp or other commercial communications carrier, or both, shall build and operate the ground stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
AEC spokesman said about 2.2 lbs. of plutonium 238 had been lost over the west coast of Africa last month after usn satellite carrying it had failed to orbit (see May 11). Onboard as fuel for Snap—9A generator, the plutonium apparently vaporized on re-entry into earth’s atmosphere and now was dispersed in very fine particles at the edge of space, where it would gradually lose its radioactivity. It posed “no health hazard to the world’s population,” aec spokesman said, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/24/ 64)
relay ii active communications satellite launched into orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle from AMR (4,606-mi. apogee; 1,298-mi. perigee; 195-min. period; 46.3° inclination to the equator). The 184-lb. satellite would continue communications tests of relay i, still orbiting the earth, and provide evaluation of improvements in the new comsat. relay II completed its first communications test during its first orbit, receiving radio signals and TV test pattern from Mojave, Calif., ground station and beaming them back to earth, relay n was initially in excellent mutual visibility position between North America and Europe for TV transmission between the two hemispheres. Mutual visibility with Japan, about 40 min. at maximum, would decrease gradually to nothing by mid-July and continue with no mutual visibility again until mid-November, relay n was equipped for transmitting one-way wideband communications (one-way TV, 300 one-way voice channels or high-speed data) or two-way narrow-band communications (12 two-way telephone conversations or teletype, photo-facsimile and data). Unlike its predecesor, relay ii had ho automatic cutoff device; it had negative-on-positive (n-on-p) solar cells for greater resistance to radiation than relay i’s p-on-n solar cells, relay n was 22nd straight launch success of Thor-Delta launch vehicle, (gsfc Historian: Goddard News, 1/27/64,1;AP,AHT, 1/22/64,17)	_
Communications Satellite Corp. stock reached $48, highest price since it went public June 2 at $20. (Hammer, NYT, 8/20/64, 37)
relay I communications satellite continued transmitting despite an onboard timer set to turn it off after one year. Electrolytic solution was supposed to have eaten through main power lead to switch off transmission power. NASA and rca experts speculated erosion was slowed because environmental temperatures were cooler than anticipated. Launched into orbit Dec. 13,1962, relay i has been used for 2,000 communications experiments with more than 290 hours of transmission time, most of which was wideband transmission or TV. (nasa Release 64-1)
Beginning of cable circuit connecting New York and Offenbach, West Germany, announced by Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau, for exchange of meteorological information between North America and Europe. Inauguration of cable circuit, expected to yield improved reception of weather data because of freedom from radio propagation occurring on radioteletypewriter circuit, represented major achievement in global exchange of weather information. International meteorological community now was planning for future exchanges using highspeed computers and communications satellites. (Commerce Dept. Release WB 64-1)
Managing underwriters of ComSatCorp’s 10-million-share public offering at $20 a share announced the offering was oversubscribed and the books closed. Thus ComSatCorp had enough money to launch the fleet of satellites that was expected to be handling global communications by 1967. (WSJ, 6/9/64; NYT, 6/12/64,47)
Unnamed “high State Department official” told New York Herald Tribune that talks between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. regarding Soviet cooperation in worldwide comsat network had been scheduled for June in Geneva. The official said the talks came in response to Soviet government’s recent expression of interest in such negotiations to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. Other sources indicated Soviet representatives had visited Communications Satellite Corp. in Washington and fcc inquiring ajsout procedural arrangements. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 4/1/64; Av. Wk., 4/6/64,15)
dod announced Army Corps of Engineers’ secor (Sequential Collation of Range) geodetic satellite was performing “exceptionally well,” confirming Dr. Albert Hall’s disclosure of Feb. 18. The 40-lb. satellite was orbiting at about 600-mi. altitude in periods of about 100 min. secor system tests were being conducted by Army’s Geodesy, Intelligence and Mapping Research and Development Agency (gimrada) , which had contracted for the satellite from itt Federal Laboratories. gimrada ground stations were measuring distances by sending and receiving signals through satellite’s onboard transponder, then acquiring ranging data for use in automatic data reduction process by Army Map Service to determine station positions, afsc/ssd had lofted the satellite into orbit for gimrada; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was providing orbital data and telemetry support, (dod Release 156-64)
Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell discussed objectives, progress, and future plans of NASA’s programs in the area of space science (space environment, sun-earth relationships, geodesy, investigation of moon and planets, investigation into nature of the universe, exobiology) and applications (meteorological satellites, communications program, and advanced technological satellites). Some of the space environment results obtained during the past year: “1. The existence of an appreciable number of protons in the outer Van Allen Belts was established. “2. The lifetime in the belt of artificially injected electrons was determined. . . . “3. Trapping lifetimes and rates of enhancement of electrons of varying energies in the outer radiation zone have been correlated with magnetic storms. “4. Large low energy electron fluxes have been found on lines of magnetic force which appear to trail off to immense distances out into deep space. “5. Contours of constant counting rate near the magnetic equator were found to draw closer to the Earth on the night side of the Earth than on the day side. “6. Repeated observations were made of simultaneous vlf electromagnetic emission, auroral optical emission, and particle precipitation into the atmosphere. “7. It was discovered that the Earth’s magnetic tail in the antisolar direction extends at least half way to the Moon’s orbit. “8. Direct observations were made of the way in which solar plasma on the sunward side of the Earth piles up outside the boundary of the Earth’s magnetic field, and in so doing appreciably compresses the geomagnetic field. “9. Direct extended observations were made of the particle density and velocity of solar interplanetary plasma. These densities and velocities were found to have direct correlations with magnetic activity on the Earth and calcium plage activity regions on the Sun. “10. Extended measurements were made of the interplanetary magnetic field and solar and galactic cosmic ray intensities. “11. The true energy spectrum possessed by solar cosmic rays at their source on the Sun was deduced from the observational data. . . . “12. First simultaneous measurements were made of electron temperature, positive ion density, and neutral atmospheric constituents in the Earth’s high atmosphere. “13. A new theory was developed to account for the types of ions found in the ionosphere, specifically the ratio of helium to hydrogen. “14. Sounding rockets furnished important information on the ionospheric D region from 35 miles to 55 miles and the origin of the sporadic effects in the E region of the ionosphere at about 75 miles. “15. Diurnal and seasonal variations in the ionosphere were established. “16. Sounding rockets launched simultaneously with an overhead pass of the satellite Alouette reached within a few miles of the satellite, thereby connecting up ionospheric measurements in the lower atmosphere with those being made by the satellite.” (Testimony)
Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications conducted its first TV test with syncom ni communications satellite from ground station at Kashima, receiving return picture with satisfactory resolution. Purpose of test was to investigate parameters of the Station. Transmission tests to Pt. Mugu, Calif., via the comsat were planned for early October. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64,30)
First TV transmission from Japan to the U.S. was made, nsing NASA’s relay II communications satellite. Quality of the live pictures as well as the sound was excellent. In the telecast Prime Minister Hayato Ikeda offered his country’s apologies directly to the U.S. for the “unfortunate coincidence” of the stabbing of U.S. Ambassador Edwin Reischauer by a deranged Japanese youth the previous day. The eight-minute telecast was seen simultaneously on the three national networks. (nasa Release 64-63; upi, NYT, 3/26/64,3 ; AP, Wash. Post, 3/26/64)
A $ 100-million issue of Communications Satellite Corp. stock was put on the market and almost immediately sold out. Five million shares were involved in the stock issue. The maximum allotment was 50 shares per customer from each security house, but the average was only about 15 shares because of the great public demand. The par value of the stock was $20 per share, and it closed at around $23 after having reached a high of $27 in the first few minutes of trading. (NYT, 6/3/64, 59)
cosmos XXxiii launched into orbit with the following initial parameters: apogee, 293 km. (182.06 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (129.87 mi.); period, 89.38 min.; and inclination to the equator, 65°. Tass said the satellite carried scientific apparatus designed for investigation of space in accordance with program announced March 16, 1962, and onboard instrumentation was operating normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 6/24/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
explorer ix re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated after more than three years in space. The lightweight, 12-ft.-diameter balloon was NASA’s most effective satellite for measuring atmospheric density and temperature. Placed in orbit Feb. 16, 1961, explorer lx traveled more than 340 million mi. during its 14,000 orbits of the earth. It provided a better understanding of upper atmosphere characteristics, determining more precisely the relationships between air density and solar radiations. Measurements of the satellite’s atmospheric drag effects were correlated with those of a similar inflated sphere, explorer XIX, orbited Dec. 19,1963. explorer ix was the first satellite orbited by a solid-fuel launch vehicle (Scout) and the first satellite launched at Wallops, (nasa Release 64-81; Wallops Release 64-35)
According to press reports, the twin satellites launched July 17 by USAF continued to send back clear signals from space. Press sources had indicated the satellites were Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites, said one satellite was in almost perfectly circular orbit ranging from 63,314 mi. to 64,915 mi. altitude, while the other was in slightly higher orbit ranging from 58,686 mi. to 69,387 mi. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/26/64; Wash. Sun. Star, 7/26/64)
The U.S.S.R. launched another earth satellite, cosmos xxxvi. The initial orbital parameters were as follows: period, 91.9 min.; apogee, 503 km. (300 mi.); perigee, 259 km. (155 mi.); inclination, 49°. {Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/31/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.) 768-598 O—65---18
syncom in was in near equatorial orbit over the Indian Ocean, with mean altitude of 22,395 mi. and 1/4° inclination to the equator, while drifting westward at the rate of about 3° per day. On ground command, the satellite ejected two bursts of steam, correcting its position to 21,890 mi. mean altitude (22,540-mi. apogee and 21,240-mi perigee) and inclination of less than 1° to the equator. It then began drifting eastward; the drift would be halted by onboard control jets, fired by ground command, once syncom ill reached the International Date Line. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/23/64; NASA Release 64-193 & Press Conf. Transcript)
