COSMOS LViu satellite, containing “scientific equipment,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 659 km. (409 mi.); perigee, 581 km. (360 mi.); period, 96.8 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/27/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
NASA’s PEGASUS I meteoroid-detecting satellite recorded 19 wing punctures in its 3 to 4 million mi. travels. Earth-transmitted electronic signals might have been the cause of several recorded hits, but some were definitely meteoroid particles. PEGASUS I orbited the earth every 97 min.	(ap, NYT, 3/4/65, 50; ap, Wash. Post, 3/4/65)
fcc received 27 statements on the question of direct purchase of communications services from ComSatCorp. A brief submitted by the American Newspaper Publishers Assn, argued that “a basic policy determination [should] be made at this time, assuring access by the press to ComSat facilities for news media dissemination. ...” A brief by AT&T argued that “authorized users” of ComSat services should be common carrier companies only not any communications organization wishing to rent satellite channels. The “only interpretation . . . consistent with the specific language of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962,” argued at&t, is “the view that ComSat is to function as a ‘carriers’ carrier,’ except possibly in the case of the U.S. Government. . . .” Weekley, Wash. Post, 11/4/65, C9)
U.S.S.R. orbited cosmos lii earth satellite. Orbital data: apogee, 304 km. (188.9 mi.) ; perigee, 205 km. (127.4 mi.) ; period 89.5	min.; inclination to the equator, 65°. The satellite carried scientific equipment “for the further investigation of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass on the 16th of March, 1962.” (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/12/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
ComSatCorp invited design proposals for a multi-purpose satellite having at least 20 times the communications capacity of EARLY bird I. Firms throughout the world were asked to submit proposals. ComSatCorp said more than one study contract could be awarded. Proposed new satellite would make nationwide and international distribution of television feasible, provide a sending and receiving capability between ground stations and ships at sea or aircraft in flight, provide complete interchangeability from one type of service to another within a single satellite, and permit access to these services by any number of earth stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
According to a report in a West German publication, Luftfahrttechnik Raumfahrttechnik, Soviet communications satellite MOLNIYA i transmitted color television programs for nine hours in May 1965. Quality of the transmissions was good. (Luftfahrttechnik Raumfahrttechnik, 9/65, 237)
ComSatCorp was seeking establishment of a world-wide satellite communications network to be leased jointly by NASA and commercial telecommunications carriers, reported Katherine Johnsen in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Miss Johnsen reported that last week the National Communications System (the U.S. Government’s centralized communications agency) and ComSatCorp appeared to be approaching “agreement on an arrangement under which it would pay about $80 million over a 10-year period for use by NASA of the global network, primarily for the Apollo manned lunar landing program.” Several variations of the proposal were also presented and ComSatCorp executives were optimistic that one would be approved. (Johnsen, Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 35)
Dr. Burton I. Edelson, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke on communications satellites at the aiaa meeting in Las Cruces, N.Mex. He said: “There is a general growing interdependence of politics, economics, and technology, and in no area do these forces interact more noticeably, than in international communications. When we try to predict the course that communications satellites systems will follow in the years to come we must consider not only decibels and megacycles, rocket thrusts and orbital elements, but the competitive economic pressure of transoceanic cables and the political aspirations of developing nations. . . . “Finally, I believe the words of Arthur Clarke, the visionary who first conceived of the communications satellite, will be fulfilled: ‘Com-sats will end ages of isolation making us all members of a single family, teaching us to read and speak, however imperfectly, a single language. Thanks to some electronic gear twenty thousand miles above the equator, ours will be the last century of the savage.’ ” (Text)
early bird I transmitted clear pictures and sound of live television programs between Europe and North America for 14 hrs. demonstrating its usefulness in regularly scheduled television. For three weeks, television’s use of early bird i would be restricted to Mondays; daily commercial use would not begin until fall when rates had been fixed. The satellite would be used on other days for telephone purposes and transmission of recorded information. (ComSatCorp; Gould, NYT, 5/4/65, 75)
Dr. Homi J. Bhabha, chairman of India’s Atomic Energy Commission, denied reports that India was secretly preparing to explode a nuclear device. In an interview, he said: “We are still eighteen months away from exploding either a bomb or a device for peaceful purposes and we are doing nothing to reduce that period.” (NYT, 11/29/65, 8) November 27: Soviet Union launched COSMOS xcvm unmanned satellite with “scientific apparatus to continue space investigations,” Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 570 km. (354 mi.) ; perigee, 216 km. (134 mi.); period, 92 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 11/28/65, 4)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched cosmos cii and cosmos ciii unmanned satellites to continue space investigations, Tass announced. Orbital parameters for cosmos cii: apogee, 172 mi. (278 km.); perigee, 135 mi. (218 km.) ; period, 89.24 min.; inclination, 65°. COSMOS CHI had been placed in near-circular orbit at 372-mi. (600-km.) altitude, with a period of 97 min. It was not specified whether the two spacecraft were launched simultaneously or whether there was an interval between launchings. All onboard systems were functioning normally. (Pravda, 12/29/65, 1)
usaf announced that data from aec’s Snap-10A satellite indicated “an extremely high noise factor” when the ion engine was turned on, making it impossible to determine whether it was operating properly. Scientists said the engine, which on Apr. 2 had operated normally for an hour, would not be tested further until additional analyses were made. The difficulty had not interfered with the major experiment— operation of the Snap-10A nuclear reactor, (upi, NYT, 4/8/65)
Soviet’s first communications satellite MOLNIYA i maintained direct radiotelephone communications between Vladivostok and Sofia, Warsaw, and Prague for almost three hours. (Tass, 5/12/65)
alouette i, Canadian scientific satellite launched by NASA on September 29, 1962, had completed its third year in space and was still operating normally. Satellite was using the swept-frequency topside sounding technique to gather information about ionospheric electron density and distribution during the four-to-six hours daily it was activated by command from the ground, (nasa Release 65-312) September 29: Bureau of Naval Weapons announced it had placed two more navigation satellites in orbit. The two 135-lb. spacecraft, launched June 24 and Aug 13, were intended “to augment the now operational all-weather satellite navigation system and to allow for more frequent position fixes by ships at sea.” (ap, Balt. San. 9/29/65)
United Press International had announced it would seek to establish a worldwide satellite communications system, either on its own or in partnership with others, if the governments concerned granted the necessary permission. {NYT, 5/23/65)
ComSatCorp had awarded three six-month study contracts totaling $240,000 to the U.K. General Post Office (gpo) for research into certain aspects of satellite communications. Studies would be carried out in cooperation with U.K. industry—Marconi, Plessey, General Electric Co., Mullard, and Standard Telephone Labs.—and would involve research into three major areas of technology involved in commercial communications of all types via satellite. (ComSatCorp Release)
Launch Dec. 15 of Pioneer 6 sun-orbiting satellite was postponed to avoid conflict with launch of Gemini vi. (ap, NYT, 12/15/65, 22)
Scientists and broadcasting executives from 20 countries began a fourday conference in Paris, sponsored by UNESCO, on communications satellites and their probable effect on press and radio. (Reuters, NYT, 12/6/65, 3)
explorer xxix Geodetic Explorer satellite (Geos A) was successfully launched by nasa from etr by a Improved Thrust-Augmented Delta with a new enlarged second-stage fuel tank to provide longer engine burn. Because the guidance system did not shut down the second stage at the desired time, the achieved orbit had the following parameters: apogee, 1,412.4 mi. (2,274 km.); perigee, 695.6 mi.
NASA announced it would negotiate with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. for mission modifications on seven Agena-D second stages for future missions. Total cost of the modification would be more than $13 million. Five of the Agenas would be used with Atlas boosters to launch the Applications Technology Satellites (Ats); the other two, also to be boosted by Atlas launch vehicles, would be used for the third and fourth Orbiting Astronomical Observatories (Oao). Lockheed would design, develop, and fabricate equipment and match the Agenas with the Atlas boosters and the spacecraft, (nasa Release 65-199)
Danish satellite tracking station official reported what he believed to have been the explosion of a U.S. satellite launched by usaf Mar. 25. About ten brilliantly lighted objects crossing the sky were at first assumed to have been meteors. (M&R, 4/26/65, 11)
Soviet Union launched cosmos LXIX artificial earth satellite containing scientific equipment for the study of outer space. Orbital parameters: apogee, 332 km. (206 mi.) ; perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.) ; period, 89.7 min.; inclination to the equator, 65°. All instruments were operating normally. (Jzvestia, 6/26/65, 1, atss-t Trans.; Prav-da, 6/26/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
ComSatCorp had selected Holmes and Narver, Inc., Los Angeles architectural and engineering firm, for design work on two new earth station sites in Hawaii and Washington—the U.S. ground links in a worldwide commercial communications satellite system. The contract provided for $186,000, plus additional costs for optional on-the-site construction supervision and related services. Detailed drawings and specifications would be supplied to ComSatCorp no later than December 1. (ComSatCorp Release)
ITT World Communications, Inc., asked FCC for permission to use early bird I satellite for live television coverage of part of the Gemini v mission scheduled for Aug. 19. ITT would like to set up a portable ground station in the Atlantic aboard carrier U.S.S. Lake Champlain, expected to be the primary recovery ship, (ap, NYT, 7/20/65)	_ _
COSMOS LVii earth satellite was launched by the U.S.S.R. Orbital data: apogee, 512 km. (318 mi. I ; perigee, 175 km. (109 mi.) ; period, 91.1 min.; inclination, 64°46'. Tass said the satellite carried scientific apparatus “intended for the further investigation of outer space.” Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/23/65, atss-t Trans.)
A second molniya i communications satellite was launched by U.S.S.R. into a high elliptical orbit with the following parameters: apogee, 40,000	km. (24,800 mi.) ; perigee, 500 km. (310 mi.) ; period, 11 hrs., 59 min.; inclination, 65°. Tass said: “With the launching of the second molniya I satellite, verification will begin of the possibility of organizing a communications system with the simultaneous use of several Sputniks. . . . “The main purpose of the launching ... is to further develop the system of two-way long-distance television and telephone-telegraph radio communication, and its experimental operation. The entire equipment ... is functioning normally. “The second molniya-I . . . has already been used for telephone calls and an exchange of television programs between Moscow and Vladivostok.” (Tass, 10/14/65; Wash. Post, 10/15/65, A4)
U.S.S.R. satellites electron i and electron ii were among the new exhibits in the “Kosmos” (Space) Pavillion at the Soviet exposition on achievements of the U.S.S.R. national economy, reported KryVya rodiny. These satellites, launched to study the near-earth radiation belts, were said to have made it possible for Soviet scientists to safeguard the cosmonauts during their flights in this region. (KryVya rodiny, 7/65, 1)
cosmos xciii unmanned satellite was launched by U.S.S.R. Onboard was scientific apparatus for continuing studies of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962. Orbital data: apogee, 522 km. (324.2 mi.); perigee, 220 km. (136.6 mi.); inclination, 48°24'. All instrumentation was functioning normally. (Tass, 10/19/65)
French scientists bounced laser beams off NASA satellite EXPLORER XXII three times, according to French Ministry of Scientific Research on Feb. 3. Laser beams were reflected from glass prisms on the satellite, (ap, NYT, 2/4/65, 3)
“There are 593 objects in earth orbit today,” said Maj. Gen. Horace A. Hanes (usaf), Commander of the 9th Aerospace Defense Div., at an Armed Forces Week celebration at Selfridge AFB, Mich. He said these ranged from the six-in.-dia. Vanguard satellite through the 90-ft.-dia. Echo satellite. Hanes said the primary mission of his division was to detect and warn the U.S. of a mass ballistic missile attack: “We use radar stations in Alaska, Greenland, and England for this. But to detect satellites and other objects in earth orbit we use these radars plus a variety of other equipment including special optical cameras eleven feet high that weigh 3,000 pounds.” (Pipp, Detroit News. 5/16/65)
Frederick G. Donner, chief executive of General Motors, appeared before a Senate Commerce Committee on his renomination by President Johnson as a director of the Communications Satellite Corporation. Asked about rivalry from the Soviet Union in view of their recently-launched comsat, Donner said he regarded this about the same way he did Soviet automobiles as far as competition was concerned, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/28/65)
ComSatCorp’s early bird i communications satellite reached its permanent station over the Atlantic Ocean:	apogee, 22,243 mi. (35,811 km.); perigee, 22,224 mi. (35,780 km.); period, 23 hrs. 56 min. 57 sec.; inclination, .085°; location, 28.0° west longitude. (ComSatCorp)
explorer xxix, first nasa satellite to use a gravity-gradient system for stabilization, had pointed its instrumentation toward earth and was expected to be programed for operation within several days. Achievement of the desired attitude was confirmed by magnetic and solar sensors and by marked increase in the strength of radio signals. Project officials at NASA gsfc and Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory reported four explorer xxix geodetic measurements systems had been checked out and were performing as expected; the fifth, using laser beam reflectors, would be tested when the spacecraft had completed its stabilization phase, (nasa Release 65—354)
LES IV communications satellite, released into an unplanned orbit Dec. 21 by Titan m-c, had been activated and was operating well, Lincoln Laboratory reported. Tumbling had prevented restart of Titan III-C for intended orbit, (ap, NYT, 12/30/65, 11)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xcvii artificial earth satellite “containing scientific equipment for continuing outer space research,” Tass reported. Orbital parameters were close to the calculated ones: apogee, 2,100 km. (1,304 mi.); perigee, 220 km. (136.6 mi.); period, 108.3 min.; inclination to equator, 49°. Onboard equipment was operating normally. (Pravda, 11/27/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite payload was launched by usaf from Western Test Range. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 132)
More than 50 million Europeans—including viewers behind the Iron Curtain—had received same-day transmission of the Tokyo Olympic Games via U.S. satellites syncom iii and relay i last October, nasa announced, (nasa Release 65—2)
early bird I communications satellite experimentally transmitted to a Paris physician an electrocardiogram of a passenger on the S.S. France, 2,000	mi. at sea, the French Line reported. {NYT, 6/15/65, 70; ap, Wash. Post, 6/15/65, A14)
ComSatCorp, rejecting petitions by seven communications carriers to reduce its authority, strongly supported Fee’s decision giving ComSatCorp “sole responsibility for the design, construction, and operation” of three ground stations to support the Corporation’s global satellite system for commercial communications. Answering the charge that station ownership and operation should be assumed by the carriers on a competitive basis, ComSatCorp said the operational date of the global system would be needlessly delayed if ownership of stations were decided on a case-by-case basis. To the complaint that the Fee decision gave ComSatCorp control of “terrestrial facilities” for traffic-processing between interface points and the stations themselves, ComSatCorp replied that it would “look first to the carriers to provide” the facilities. Further, “should Com-SatCorp determine, in any particular situation, to propose construction of its own communications links, the soundness of any such proposal would, of course, be subject to scrutiny by the Commission with full consideration of the views of all interested parties.” Against the allegation that ComSatCorp-constructed terrestrial facilities would introduce costly “backhauls,” ComSatCorp said backhauling was “routine and unavoidable” throughout the communications industry. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA disclosed plans for the new Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) that would appear to hover over a given spot on earth to check out communications, weather, scientific and engineering ideas. There would be five in all, with four in synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude. First Ats was scheduled for launch in 1966; two more would be launched in 1967; the last two in 1968. Primary aim of the Ats program would be to find out (1) what happens to satellites in synchronous orbit, and (2) what can be done by a satellite continuously above one area of the earth. Among experiments planned were color television transmission, the first attempt to “talk” among unmanned satellites and aircraft, and photographing cloud formation changes in one place over a long period of time, (nasa Release)
France postponed her first attempt to orbit a satellite. No reason was given, (upi, NYT, 11/23/65, 52)
tiros X meteorological satellite photographed an area of unusual cloudiness in the Atlantic about 2,400 mi. east-southeast of Miami, the Miami Weather Bureau said. A hurricane-hunter aircraft would be sent to check. (Miami Her., 8/5/65)
High-speed transmission of weather data between the U.S. and France was provided by early bird i communications satellite. Information gathered by tiros ix weather satellite during a 24-hr. period and assembled on a chart at the World Weather Center in Maryland, was relayed to the Andover, Me., ground station; then, via early bird I, it was transmitted to the French ground station at Pleumeur-Bodou and on to the French National Weather Center in Paris. Conducted jointly by the Weather Bureau and ComSatCorp, in conjunction with Press Wireless, Inc., and Alden Electronics Corp., the demonstration illustrated a new and advanced forecast method which would include transmissions of facsimile charts and data at eight times the speed of present networks. (ComSatCorp Release; ap, Balt. Sun, 6/16/65)
British Broadcasting Co. filed a petition with the FCC to request halving suggested fee of $3,825 for a half-hour’s television use of early bird i communications satellite. In addition to ComSatCorp’s charge, any television user must pay an identical fee to the group of 17 European countries that helped finance EARLY BIRD I; this combined fee of $7,650 would cover the cost of transmission only between Andover, Me., ground station and one European point and would not include costs for ground lines to broadcasting stations. One bbc expert, who estimated that at the proposed rates a half-hour transatlantic program would cost more than $11,000, concluded that British broadcasters would be able to use the satellite only for the “most compelling matters.” (Lewis, NYT, 6/13/65, 1)
A newspaper article summarizing a report of the International Civil Aviation Organization on the safety record of the non-Communist world’s airlines in 1964 said: “. . . its more than 100 member airlines, which include U.S. carriers, ended the year with the lowest fatality rate on record, 0.61 deaths to 100 million passenger-miles flown, 22.5 percent below 1963, the best previous year.” (CR, 5/19/65, 10592) Week of May 16: A $300,000 telescope produced through gifts of parts and money was put on display at the Stamford (Conn.) Museum and Nature Center. The 22-in. photo-visual telescope, designed to track even man-made satellites, was the result of a project compared to a “barn raising.” A spokesman said that at dedication on June 13, plaques would be distributed to 51 major contributors of equipment and labor, and certificates to 81 other cooperators. (Devlin, NYT, 5/23/65)
NASA announced it had approved a Rice Univ. proposal for a satellite to measure radiation and radiation loss in the Van Allen belts, aurorae and airglow, bombardment of the upper atmosphere by energetic particles from space, and galactic and solar cosmic rays. The 125-lb. scientific satellite, to be known as Owl, would be designed, developed, and built by a Rice group headed by Dr. Brian J. O’Brien, and would be injected into a near-circular orbit at about 400 mi. altitude by Scout launch vehicle. After achieving orbit, the satellite would be oriented by a large permanent bar magnet so that one axis would be continuously aligned with the earth’s magnetic lines of force. The Rice project would be part of the NASA University Explorers Program. Spacecraft and experiments would be tested at NASA facilities under the direction of NASA’s Wallops Station, which also was assigned project management of Owl. (nasa Release 65-29)
USN announced the Transit navigational satellite system was operational and had been in use since July 1964. The three gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites, weighing between 110 and 160 lbs. each, were launched on Thor-Able-Star boosters into near-circular 600-mi. polar orbits from Pt. Mugu, Calif. Operational lifetime of the satellites was expected to be about two years. The satellites emitted radio signals which ships used to determine their positions, and could provide ships with navigational fixes—accurate to 0.1 mi.—about every 90 min. The shipboard computer operated automatically, beginning when the satellite approached, receiving the data, computing the ship’s position, and typing the results for the navigator. A number of fleet units were reported to be using the system. Capt. F. H. Price, Jr. (usn), who tested the system from the nuclear-powered cruiser U.S.S. Long Beach, called the system “the most reliable means of providing navigational information” and said it met the requirement of an “accurate, dependable, worldwide, all-weather, 24-hour-a-day capability.” This was the first continuous use of space technology in direct support of the fleet. It was predicted, but not officially confirmed, that the Polaris missile-firing submarines would adopt the navigational satellite system. NASA was studying commercial applications of a navigational satellite system and considering the possibility of developing its own system if it proved economically feasible, (dod Release 16-65; ap, Chic. Trib., 1/13/65; Watson, Balt. Sun, 1/13/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 14)
ComSatCorp invited 29 manufacturers to submit by September 30 proposals for communications and control equipment to be installed at two ground stations in Hawaii and Washington state—-U.S. links in the proposed worldwide communications satellite system. Two sets of ground communications equipment with one control unit would be integrated with two antenna systems in both earth stations. Each station was expected to cost about $6 million. Work was to begin in the fall and to be completed in about a year. (ComSatCorp Release)
Defense Communications Agency had awarded contracts to six firms to conduct parallel systems design studies for the Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project: ComSatCorp, General Electric Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., Philco Corp., rca, Defense Electronic Products, and Space Technology Lab. The fixed price contracts ranged from $135,000 to $196,000. The studies, to be completed in three or four months, would be used as a basis for design of any advanced operational satellite communications system, (dod Release 402-65)
Yemen and Pakistan had signed agreements increasing to 46 the number of countries which had joined in the international joint venture for development of a global commercial communications satellite system, ComSatCorp announced. They would share with other nations in the financing and ownership of the space segment of the global system, consisting of the satellites themselves, tracking, control, and related functions, but not earth stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
EARLY BIRD communications satellite would relay a sampling of scientific, cultural, and entertainment events televised live at 35 sites in North America and Europe during an hour-long inaugural program, “This is Early Bird,” scheduled for 1 p.m. est, May 2, ComSatCorp announced. (ComSatCorp Release; Adams, NYT, 4/21/65, 91)
NASA had requested industry to submit proposals for a study of the feasibility of a satellite capable of broadcasting directly to conventional home fm radios and/or shortwave radios. Potential contractors were expected to have their proposals back to NASA in 45 days. Following a NASA evaluation, one or more contracts would be awarded for a detailed six-month mission study, (nasa Release 65-363)
ComSatCorp announced delay of Early Bird synchronous satellite launch, previously targeted for end of March, because of decision to replace defective transistors and retest replacements. (ComSatCorp Release)
18 additional countries were applying for ownership in the $200-million international consortium to operate a global communications satellite system, it was reported. Eighteen nations and Vatican City had originally participated in forming the consortium in July 1964. U.S.’s ComSatCorp acquired 61% ownership and would serve as manager for the consortium. The new nations applying for ownership participation were Monaco, South Africa, New Zealand, Syria, Kuwait, Libya, Yemen, Brazil, Morocco, United Arab Republic, Sudan, Iraq, Lebanon, Tunisia, Argentina, Jordan, Indonesia, and Ceylon. (Av. Wk., 2/8/65, 25) February 8: The world’s first nuclear-powered weather station, designated Navy Oceanographic and Meteorological Automatic Device (Nomad), began its second year of successful operation 300 mi. out of New Orleans in the Gulf of Mexico. Developed by the Navy, the unattended station was powered by the aec generator, Snap-7D. (NYT, 2/14/65, 90)
U.S.S.R. formally protested to Norway plans of the European Space Research Organization to establish a satellite tracking station in Spitsbergen. The U.S.S.R. said such a ground station for tracking space satellites could be used for “military purposes” in violation of the 1920 Spitsbergen treaty. Norway later rejected the Soviet charge. (.NYT, 2/20/65, 2)
David Sarnoff, Chairman of RCA, accepting National Commander’s Award for Distinguished Service, said at the American Legion’s fifth annual Washington conference: “The same sense of mission that ignited our young nation’s Westward expansion a century ago should now be brought to bear in support of the President’s space objectives. . . . “Leadership in space and in the communications art which is the key to mastery in space, translates itself today into political, military, economic and social leadership among the nations of the world. Technological leadership resembles a magnet which attracts other forces. When it is weakened, these forces are drawn into other orbits.” President Johnson sent a message endorsing the award and praising Mr. Sarnoff’s achievements “on behalf of a grateful nation.” (NYT, 3/2/65) Editorializing in Missiles and Rockets, William Coughlin suggested a “useful mission” for which ranger ix might be adapted: “Our unsolicited proposal to NASA is that Ranger be employed to return to Earth photographs of Earth from space. Satellites have told us the Earth is ‘pear-shaped’ rather than round and that it draws a perhaps invisible but comet-like tail after it through space. Photographs of the entire Earth globe as seen from space would have high scientific value. As a propaganda triumph, it would be unequalled. . . .” H/fjp.j? q /l /fit; Lfi U.II, tJ/ J./ Vi), I V; President Johnson, addressing 40 winners of annual science talent search, said science and politics should strive to "serve humanity.” He added that this country was “very anxious to produce all the scientists that we can,” and expressed hope that scientists would learn about government and politics. Larry Dean Howard of Canoga Park, Calif., won first prize for having developed a method of accurately defining the orbits of earth satellites through the use of differential calculus. Prize was a $7,500 Westinghouse scholarship. (ap, NYT, 3/1/65; Loftus, NYT, 3/2/65,14)
ComSatCorp announced a $4,650,000 contract with Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., for two large antenna systems to be installed at earth stations in Paumalu, Hawaii, and Brewster Flat, Wash. Movable portions of the 85-ft. dish antennas would weigh more than 135 tons and, when in place atop concrete foundations, be up to 110 ft. high. When completed, the stations would serve as links in a worldwide commercial satellite, communications system. I.ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
A special educational television satellite station to carry color or blackand-white TV direct to home receivers was proposed to NASA by Hughes Aircraft engineer Dr. Harold Rosen. (Time, 5/14/65; CR, 5/20/65, A2549)
Sigvard Eklund, general director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, told Tass that Soviet Union had a new type of nuclear reactor that could be used as a power station in space. He said the Romashka (Daisy) reactor provided electricity “on the basis of direct conversion of heat given out by a chain reaction from nuclear fission,” and that such a source could “feed scientific instruments on sputniks or satellites.” (Wash. Post, 12/12/65, A28)
echo I, launched by NASA five years ago, had traveled more than 659 million miles and circled the earth more than 22,600 times. Orbital data: apogee, 1,165 mi. (1,875.7 km.); perigee, 560 mi. (901.6 km.) ; period, 113 min. The satellite had demonstrated that large inflatable spheres could be used as passive communications reflectors in space, (gsfc Release G—19-65)
In a speech before the National Association of Broadcasters in Washington, D.C., Gen. Bernard A. Schriever ( usaf) remarked that the Soviet’s space science timetable “always seems to put them one step ahead of us.” He said: “It is still true that we lead in some aspects of space exploration, such as the total number of space shots, number of scientific probes, and practical applications of space satellites for such purposes as communications and weather observation. On the other hand, the Soviets lead in a number of areas with both propaganda and practical implications. “. . . Thus, they have put into space the first satellite, the first living creature, the first man, the first woman, the first multi-man space ship and now the first man to step out of the capsule and into space itself. They also hold the world record for time in orbit, orbital distance, orbital weight lifted, and highest orbital altitude. . . . “How will the Soviets use their space capabilities? ... we are interested. . . .” Gen. Schriever said ground tests would begin shortly for a collapsible and expandable space laboratory for possible use as a space station: “The structure can be compressed into a small package and expanded to a cylinder 10 ft. in dia. and 25 ft. long.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxvii, 13th Soviet spacecraft orbited in the last two months. Initial orbital data: apogee, 300 km. (187 mi.); perigee, 184 km. (114 mi.) ; period, 89.3 min.; inclination to the equator, 51.8°. Tass said the unmanned satellite would gather data to prepare equipment for manned flights; instruments were functioning normally. (Pravda, 8/4/65, 1; upi, NYT, 8/4/65, 4)
DOD refused request by television networks to present live coverage of the recovery portion of the Gemini v flight scheduled for Aug. 19. Equipment necessary to set up a portable ground station on the aircraft earner U.S.S. Lake Champlain “might interfere with operational requirements and shipboard communications,” DOD said. The networks had intended to send pictures to early bird i satellite for relay to the Andover, Me., ground station.	(NYT, 7/31/65, 35)
NASA had awarded a contract to the Univ. of Iowa for preparation of an Injun spacecraft to be used in a dual satellite launch in 1967. The Injun Explorer would be teamed with a 12-foot inflatable Air Density Explorer and flown on a single Scout launch vehicle in the same way explorers xxiv and xxv were orbited Nov. 21, 1964. The contract, valued at $1,070,488, covered construction of the Injun spacecraft, preparation and integration of the onboard experiments, and integration with the Air Density Explorer spacecraft as a single Scout payload. Dr. James A. Van Allen of the Univ. of Iowa would be the principal scientific investigator, (nasa Release 65-338; LaRC Release)
The Wall Street Journal, commenting on President Johnson’s decision to develop Manned Orbital Laboratory, wrote: “The President didn’t enumerate the MOL experiments, but there is little doubt they would involve such possible missions as: —High-altitude reconnaissance over the Soviet Union and China; —Inspection and possible destruction of non-U.S. space satellites; —Antisubmarine surveillance of the oceans . . .” (Beecher, WSJ, 8/26/65, 2)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite from Western Test Range. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
cosmos ci unmanned satellite was launched by the U.S.S.R. “to continue space investigations,” announced Tass. Orbital data: apogee, 550 km. (341 mi.); perigee, 260 km. (165 mi.) ; period, 92.4 min.; inclination, 49°. Equipment was functioning normally. (.Pravda, 12/22/65, 1)
“The world’s first international school for training specialists in satellite tracking,” would be opened in Tashkent, capital of Uzbekistan in Soviet Central Asia, Tass announced. Fifteen young scientists from Soviet satellite countries and 20 Soviet scientists would pursue each nine-day course. The school was set up within the framework of the U.N. International Commission for Space Research, (ap, NYT, 9/8/65, 5)
Data from SOLRAD, the Naval Research Laboratory’s satellite monitoring the sun’s x-ray behavior during the 1964--65 International Years of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), indicated that the sun was at its quietest during May, June, and July, 1964. Information from SOLRAD also suggested that the x-ray region of the corona, instead of being a homogeneous region of a million miles or so, was a series of small cells that flared up to emit hard x-rays and then decayed rapidly. What was seen on earth was the net effect of many knots of very hot, flashing gas giving the appearance of a homogeneous region. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/11/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/65; M&R, 1/18/65)
AH five geodesy experiment systems on the new NASA EXPLORER XXIX satellite had been tested successfully and operational programing of the spacecraft was expected within a few days, NASA announced. explorer xxix, popularly referred to as geos i, was launched from Eastern Test Range Nov. 6. (nasa Release 65-359)
Philco Corp. had been awarded a $3 million increment to a contract with usaf for work on a satellite tracking network, (dod Release 651-65)
U.S. Army disclosed it had orbited a three-satellite earth-mapping system, with two of the spacecraft circling the earth from west to east and the third traveling from pole to pole. The satellites were of the Secor type. Two were fired into orbit earlier this month; the other was launched Jan. 11, 1964. The three spacecraft, each with a radio receiver and transmitter, were helping pinpoint locations on earth that were widely separated by large bodies of water, (ap, NYT, 4/1/65, 11; M&R, 4/5/65, 12)
European Broadcasting Union’s administrative council issued a statement saying it was concerned by the possibility that “prohibitive” charges might make it impossible to transmit television programs over EARLY bird i communications satellite. The council expressed the hope that the first three experimental years of intercontinental satellite television would not be “cut off at the start of commercial satellite operation.” (Reuters, NYT, 5/23/65, 19)
Data were summarized from nimbus i meteorological satellite, which had provided first high-resolution, nighttime, cloud-cover pictures and cloud-top temperatures taken from a satellite. Circular 575-mi.-altitude orbit had been planned for the 830-lb. spacecraft; but short burn of the Agena stage—resulting when about 100 lbs. of fuel which should have been loaded on board the Agena had escaped through a faulty valve prior to launch—had injected nimbus i into an elliptical orbit. Launch was made Aug. 28, 1964. Results from Hrir (High Resolution Infrared Radiometer) data had demonstrated: (1) feasibility of complete nighttime surveillance of surface and land features on a global scale; (2) detailed vertical structure of intertropical convergence zone and formation of tropical storms and of frontal zones; (3) capability to detect temperature gradients over earth’s surface under clear skies; (4) applicability of high-resolution radiometry for glaciology, geology, and oceanography. Apt (Automatic Picture Transmission) system experiments provided almost instantaneous data on clouds for thousands of square miles around Apt ground stations, demonstrating that the system could provide cloud-cover data for almost all local forecast requirements; thus, it would be a basic element in the Tiros Operational Satellite program. Avcs (Advanced Vidicon Camera System) experiment provided first near-global, relatively high-resolution cloud pictures ever assembled. Proved capabilities of camera assembly and confirmed decision to use it as basis for first operational meteorological satellite system. On Sept. 3, 1964, during 381st orbit, nimbus i stopped operating. Deterioration of the bearing grease at high temperatures had caused the paddles in the solar array drive system to lock. Final contact with nimbus i occurred Nov. 20, 1964. Data revealed that (1) all batteries were in trickle charge; (2) voltage regulation had failed; (3) both Pcm and command clock subsystems were operable; (4) spacecraft tape recorders were not operating; and (5) controls power supply had failed. (NASA Proj. Off.)
explorer xxix launch with first NASA Improved Thrust-Augmented Delta from Cape Kennedy. 1.1,118.1 km.); period, 120 min.; inclination, 59°. Planned orbit had called for apogee of 920 mi. The 385-lb, satellite, designed ar.d built by Johns Hopkins Univ, Applied Physics Laboratory, contained five geodetic instrumentation systems to provide simultaneous measurements necessary for a more precise model of the earth’s gravitational field and to map a world coordinate system relating points on or near the surface to the common center of the mass: 111 four Hashing light beacons to be photographed against the background of stars to define the arc of orbit and angular data; (2) corner cube quartz reflectors to pinpoint the satellite's position by reflecting laser beams; (3) three radio transmitters for Doppler-shift determination of the precise orbit; (4) radio range transponder to hx the positions of the satellite and interrogating ground stations; and (5) range and range-rate transponder to determine the changing range and radial velocity of the satellite. Simultaneous operation of the five independent and diverse geodetic-tracking systems would permit cross-checking and evaluation of the different techniques and was expected to enhance the accuracy of each system. Other objectives of the Geos program were: (1) to map with a high degree of mathematical exactness the structure of the earth’s irregular gravitational field; and (2) to compare and 'correlate results from different instrumented techniques employed simultaneously so as to assure greater accuracy and reliability. Critical to optimum use of the radio and optical beacons on EXPLORER XXIX was the gravity-gradient attitude stabilization system to keep the satellite antennas, laser reflectors, and optical beacons pointing earthward at all times. In two to three days the attitude control would be initiated, (nasa Release 65-333; nasa Proj. Off.; ap, NYT, 11/7/65, 10; upi, Wash. Post, 11/7/65, A16)
Defense Communications Agency and the U.S. Army had announced that site preparation had begun at Helemano, 20 mi. north of Honolulu on Oahu Island, for installation of the first earth terminal of a planned worldwide military experimental satellite communication system. Southwest Constructors had been awarded the contract for construction expected to begin in mid-October. (J/Armed Forces, 9/18/65, 16)
After almost 7 years, vanguard i appeared to be silenced. Its radio signals had weakened to a point where NASA tracking engineers thought the satellite might never be heard from again, according to NASA announcement. The six-inch, 3.25-lb. sphere was the second U.S. satellite, launched by USN as part of the International Geophysical Year program. For more than six years, it had transmitted radio signals from space with power from only six solar cells. Officially known internationally as 1958 Beta II, vanguard i was circling the globe every 134 min. and had an apogee of 2,442 mi. and a perigee of 402 mi. (nasa Release 65—45)
ComSatCorp requested bids from 12 companies by Nov. 22 for site preparation and construction of buildings and facilities for a fixed earth station at Paumalu, Oahu, Hawaii—a U.S. link for worldwide commercial satellite communications. The Hawaiian station and one at Brewster Flat, Wash., were the only fixed stations planned by ComSatCorp. (ComSatCorp Release)
Group headed by Junkers Flugzeug- und Motorenwerke AG, and including Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., had been selected by the European Space Research Organization (esro) to develop the Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite (Heos). Junkers team was selected from eight international groups competing to build Heos, which would gather interplanetary particle data. Heos would be the first satellite developed in West Germany, but it would include the combined technology of several nations. Value of the over-all contract for satellite development was about $6.5 million. (Av. Wk., 12/13/65, 36)
President Johnson sent to Congress his annual reports on the National Science Foundation, the ComSatCorp, and U.S. participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency. In message accompanying the NSF report. President Johnson said: “Close and understanding accord between science and public affairs is an imperative for free societies today.” Science would be looked to for use in technology and industry, health programs, exploration, and, “most especially for the guidance that will permit us to proceed with greater security and greater confidence toward our goals of peace and justice in a free world.” In a message accompanying the report on the ComSatCorp, the President said the goal of the U.S. was “to provide orbital messengers, not only of word, speech and pictures, but of thought and hope” for the world. “The past year has seen important advances in the program to develop a global communications satellite system. The first launch of a commercial satellite is to take place in the early months of this year. “Through the initiative of the United States an international joint venture has been established. Under the law I have designated the Communications Satellite Corp. as the U.S, participant. The corporation is to be the manager on behalf of all participants. “The corporation has now been financed, has constituted its first board of directors to replace the original incorporators and has moved forward with its program. All agencies of the Government with responsibilities under the act have made important and faithful contributions with the sympathetic assistance of the congressional committees concerned. “The newr and extraordinary satellite telecommunications medium bringing peoples around the globe into closer relationship is nearer to fulfillment, heralding a new day in world communications.” In its second annual report ComSatCorp noted that it had ended 1964 with about $190 million in short-term holdings and more than 137,000 shareholders. It reported it had agreements with 18 countries to join in a single global system with ComSatCorp as manager and said that a satellite was being readied for launching in March. The report on the Nation’s participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency was accompanied by a covering letter which said 1963 “will possibly be marked in I.A.E.A. history as the year in which a firm foundation was laid for its system of safeguards against the diversion of materials to military use.” (Text, CR, 2/15/65, 2605; NYT, 2/16/65, 1; ap, NYT, 2/17/65, 64)
Sen. E. L. Bartlett (D-Alaska) introduced a bill to extend privileges and immunities, including tax and customs granted international organizations, to the European Space Research Organization (esro). ESRO was considering building a satellite telemetry command station near Fairbanks, Alaska, and was seeking the same special treatment afforded NASA with regard to its tracking stations abroad and personnel abroad. (CR, 6/11/65, 12836)
NASA had awarded a contract to Rice Univ. for a new type of Explorer satellite designed to extend studies of near-earth atmosphere phenomena, especially auroral phenomena. Under a cost-reimhursement contract, the university would provide two Owl Explorer spacecraft and a flyable prototype at a total estimated cost of $3,676,100. Earliest launch would be in 1967 from the Western Test Range. Launch vehicle would be a four-stage Scout, (nasa Release 65-266; Wallops Release 65-46)
ComSatCorp asked the FCC for authority to assemble a third Early Birdtype satellite from existing parts for a future launch. A back-up satellite to early bird i was already assembled; components for a third comsat were completed earlier this year. The application before the FCC requested permission to assemble these components. (ComSatCorp Release)
In a brief filed with the Fee, ComSatCorp commented on the problem of direct purchase of communications services:	“. . . Comsat believes that as a general rule it should afford the other carriers the first opportunity to provide satellite services desired by users other than the U.S. Government and foreign communications entities. However, in the event that the other carriers, owning and operating non-satellite facilities in which they have substantial investments, do not provide a satellite service to any customer who desires such service, Comsat should be able to provide such service directly to that customer. . . .” (Text)
Five surcal satellites and one unidentified satellite were orbited by single USAF Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from Western Test Range. The satellites all were in similar orbits of about 735-mi. (1,183-km.) apogee, 677-mi. (1,090-km.) perigee, 108-min. period, 90° inclination. (U.S. Aeron & Space Act., 1965, 150)
COSMOS LIX satellite, containing “scientific apparatus,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 339 km. (210.9 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (129.6 mi.); period, 89.7 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/9/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite payload from Western Test Range. (Z7.S. Aeron & Space Act., 1965, 146)
President Johnson told a group of young foreign journalists at the White House that he envisioned a day when communications satellites would be able to relay telecasts of United Nations’ sessions to the homes of “men everywhere.” He added that “from better communications must surely come better understanding.” (UPI, Houston Chron., 7/23/65)
cosmos lx satellite, containing “scientific apparatus,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 287 km. (177.9 mi.); perigee, 201 km. (124.6 mi.); period, 89.1 min.; inclination 64° 42'. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 3/13/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans)
explorer xxiii and pegasus i meteoroid technology satellites continued to transmit useful information after months of operation in the space environment, reported Milton B. Ames, Jr., NASA Director of Space Vehicles Research and Technology. explorer xxiii, launched by Scout rocket from Wallops Station, Va., Nov. 16, 1964, was last of three S—55 series satellites which were the first spacecraft orbited specifically to measure meteoroid penetrations through spacecraft structures. Performance of explorer xxiii had been entirely satisfactory, and indications were that it would have a useful life of more than a year, Ames said. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 615 mi. (990 km.); perigee, 290 mi. (467 km.); inclination to the equator, 51.95°. pegasus i, launched Feb. 16, 1965, was first of a series of three satellites intended to measure meteoroid penetrations of greater structural thicknesses and contained a meteoroid penetration area of almost 2,300	sq. ft. Ames said that although useful results had been obtained with ,0015-in.-thick panels, the data obtained with .008-in.-thick and .016-in.-thick panels had not been fully satisfactory because of difficulties in the operation of the detection system. Still, PEGASUS I had provided significant information leading to improvement of detection systems on the remaining two Pegasus spacecraft. Orbital parameters for PEGASUS I were: apogee, 451 mi. (726 km.); perigee, 311 mi. (500.7 km.) ; inclination, 31.75°. (NASA Release 65-157)
National Science Foundation reported that three New Mexico State Univ. engineers were studying satellites’ radio signals in an attempt to determine exact shape of the earth. Under an NSF grant, the engineers had set up and were manning a special tracking unit at U.S. McMurdo Station in Antarctica and were tuned in on three spacecraft in polar orbit that passed near McMurdo 42 times daily. Stanford Univ. scientists had established a unit at Byrd Station to receive information from NASA’s Pogo, to be launched later this year, (upi, NYT, 4/11/65, 2)
Launch of Geos A Geodetic Explorer satellite, originally scheduled for Nov. 2 and later postponed to Nov. 5 because of an electric circuit break, had been rescheduled for Nov. 6. Geos A would contain five geodetic instrumentation systems to more accurately map the earth and to serve as a precise space reference point for ground surveyors. (ap, NYT, 11/4/65, 24; Wash. Post, 11/5/65, A16)
Western Union International, Inc., asked fcc for authority to conduct a series of satellite communications tests should NASA and DOD permit live coverage of the Gemini 6 recovery in October. The proposal included testing a portable ground station at Taylor’s Island, Md., and then on a ship at sea. Trials would include live television transmission from the portable ground station to early bird i communications satellite, which would relay the transmission to U.S. and Europe. ComSatCorp approval would also be necessary before tests could begin. {Wash. Post, 9/15/65)
Japan expected to orbit a satellite within the next three years, New York Times reported. Although Japan’s progress in the missile field had been slowed by the limited annual budget allocations of the Defense Forces, scientific advances, particularly in the field of electronics, plus stimulus to Japanese industry provided by the Korean War, had brought marked advances in rocketry and missiles. {NYT, 1/18/65)
ComSatCorp may well face competition from foreign satellite communications systems in the next few years, David Sarnoff, chairman of the Board of Radio Corporation of America predicted at the convention banquet of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “We can expect that ultimately Russia will set up a satellite communications system competitive to our own and offer it to other nations on favorable terms determined more by political than economic considerations.” Mr. Sarnoff advocated creation of “a single, privately owned American company” to handle all international communications currently handled by six private carriers. He argued that, among other benefits, a single “unified carrier” was the only way the U.S. could “deal on equal terms with foreign government [communications] monopolies. The RCA chairman warned that in only five years the interim agreement between ComSatCorp and the 45 participating nations would be up for re-evaluation. The U.S., he said, “will have to negotiate a new contract under different circumstances and possibly vastly altered bargaining conditions.” It was technically feasible, Mr. Sarnoff said, that direct radio/TV broadcasting by satellite could be undertaken by 1975. Three equatorial, synchronous orbit satellites powered by nuclear energy, each equipped with a three-TV-channel capability, would be able, he said, to broadcast programs to the entire United States and parts of Canada. He estimated that the three satellites, exclusive of ground stations, would cost $30 million and compared this with the $50 million annual cost to the three major networks for leasing circuits to transmit programs to their affiliated stations or to the $30 million cost of a single large city television station. {WSJ, 5/27/65, 6; Wash. Eve. Star, 5/27/65)
A 22-nation European Post and Telecommunications Congress ended its 12-day meeting in Lisbon after appointing a coordinating committee to deal rapidly with problems of international radio and television communications by satellite. Discussions in the congress, which was closed to the press and public, centered on improving postal services and satellite-relayed radio and television transmissions, (ap, WSJ, 6/14/65, 24; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, A-ll)
AFCRL experiment proved- that a radio signal transmitted by an orbiting satellite could be trapped between two layers of the ionosphere and, upon emergence, channeled to ground stations half way around the world. Scientists had been aware of the ionospheric ducting capability for a number of years, but it had not been fully explored before the orbiting satellite experiment, (oar Release 4-65-1)
Four nasa Tiros meteorological satellites observing Hurricane Betsy were providing the most extensive picture coverage of a storm ever obtained in space, tiros X had photographed Betsy Aug. 27 before she reached hurricane strength; since then TIROS VII, VIII, and IX had been photographing her about eight times daily, (gsfc Release G—26—65)
NASA postponed indefinitely the launching of a beacon Explorer satellite from Wallops Island. The launching had been scheduled for March 30. (NYT, 3/27/65)
Harro Zimmer, chief of a West Berlin satellite (racking station, said the U.S.5.R. had secretly launched a second spacecraft with proton i July 16. The unannounced spacecraft, said Zimmer, had been brought back to earth, landing near Magnitogorsk. 300 mi. north of (he Aral Sea, between 3 a.m. and 3:25 a.m. iEOT) July 31. (UPl, fWash. Post, 8/6/65.1	'
Dr. C. 0. Bostrom and Dr. D. J. Williams of the Space Research Div. of Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory said danger of radiation damage to satellites from the artificial radiation belt created in July 1962, following the nuclear detonation over Johnston Island, was “now significantly less severe.” Results of measurements by instruments aboard Navy research satellite 1963 38C showed that the number of high-energy electrons in the artificial radiation belt decreased by 50% in from three months to one year in different parts of the belt. The decrease in intensity as time passed would continue until natural levels of intensity were reached. Dr. Bostrom said, “. . . the observed time decay does show that the satellite radiation damage problems have been reduced by a factor of ten from what they were two years ago.” (Balt. Sun, 3/11/65)
Japan’s Ministry of Telecommunications said signals from what they had thought a new Soviet satellite turned out to be Italian-U.S. SAN marco i, launched Dec. 15, 1964. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/2/65; ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 1/3/65)
ComSatCorp announced selection of J. P. Finan General Contractor, Inc., for site preparation and construction of buildings and other facilities for ComSatCorp’s earth station at Paumalu, Oahu, Hawaii, under a contract totaling $948,362. The Paumalu station, when completed, would serve as part of a worldwide commercial satellite communications system. (ComSatCorp Release)
Pravda announced the birth of Russia’s third “space baby”: a son to Cosmonaut Valery F. Bykovsky and his wife Valentina, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 4/13/65) Week of April 12: European Space Research Organization (esro) selected Laboratoire Central de Telecommunications (lct), a wholly-owned French subsidiary of International Telephone and Telegraph Corp., as prime contractor for development of Esro 1 polar ionosphere satellite. The $3-million contract awarded called for development and production of one prototype and two flying satellites—one a backup—to gather information on ionospheric and particle conditions in the northern polar region. (Av. Wk., 4/12/65, 37; Av. Wk., 4/19/65, 30)
A—i, France’s 88-lb. first satellite, continued orbiting, but its radio signals had become weaker. Telemetry analysis indicated part of the difficulty was damage to the antennas at launch Nov. 26 from Hammaguir Range, Algeria, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/27/65, A2; Reuters, Balt. Sun, 12/28/65, 6)
ComSatCorp requested 26 design-engineering companies to submit proposals by July 20 for architectural and engineering services for construction of a ground station site at Brewster Flat, Wash. The proposed station would provide communications services to Hawaii and nations of the Pacific as part of a global commercial satellite system. The RFP’s asked for plans sufficiently detailed to enable interested contractors to bid on construction and to enable the station to be operational by September 1, 1966. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp announced the selection of Vern W. Johnson & Sons, Inc., Spokane, Wash., for site preparation and construction of buildings and other facilities for ComSatCorp’s fixed earth station at Brewster Flat, Wash. The construction contract, totaling $909,382, was filed with fcc. The Brewster Flat station, when completed, would serve as a U.S. link in a worldwide commercial satellite communications system. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
U.S.S.R. transmitted a color television program by satellite to France for the first time. Tass said the transmission, using the French Secam color system, followed a series of technical tryouts through MOLNIYA I, first of the Soviet Union’s two communications satellites now in orbit. (Reuters, NYT, 11/30/65, 49)
Status report on molniya i comsat, launched by the Soviet Union April 23, was given to Tass by I. P. Petrushkin of the U.S.S.R. Ministry of Communication: “Tests have demonstrated that the combinations of the terrestrial and onboard communication equipment of the ‘Mol-niya-1’ satellite assure the possibility of the reliable transmission of black and white TV. Color tv sessions yielded encouraging results. “On Sundays, via the ‘Molniya-1,’ a regular exchange of TV programs is being conducted between Moscow and the Pacific coast. During May and June, tests were also run on the quality of the multichannel telephone system. The systems were simultaneously loaded with phone conversations, tonal telegraphy, phototelegraphy, and radio broadcasting programs. Even under such an ‘optimal’ regime, the communication channels function fairly reliably. “In June, there was put into operation the commercial long-distance phone link between Moscow and Vladivostok, functioning via the ‘Molniya-1.’ ” (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/4/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
cosmos lxxix was orbited by U.S.S.R., Tass announced. The satellite contained instrumentation “to continue space research under the program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962.” Orbital data: apogee, 359 km. (223 mi.); perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.); period, 89.7	min.; inclination, 64.9°. (ap, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 8/26/65; gsfc SSR, 9/1/65; U.N. Registry/inf. 117)
early bird i began commercial operations when President Johnson formally inaugurated telephone service via communications satellite in a 25-min., 6-nation conference call with European officials, including British Prime Minister Harold Wilson, West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard, and Swiss President Tschudi. Participants reported satisfaction with results. (ComSatCorp Release; Robertson, NYT, 6/29/65, 12)
Aerospace Research Satellite was placed in orbit as a pick-a-back satellite on usaf Atlas D missile test from Western Test Range, the satellite entering the first highly retrograde orbit. Orbital data: apogee, 2,141 mi. (3,447 km.); perigee, 255 mi. (410.6 km.); period, 125.7	min.; inclination, 144.3°. Carrying onboard instruments to map and monitor energetic particles, mass spectrometers, detectors imbedded in radiation shield, and instruments measuring dose rates in tissue-equivalent medium, the satellite successfully returned data. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/65)
Funeral services for Sir Winston Churchill were televised live and by delayed transmission from London via telstar ii communications satellite. Churchill died on Jan. 24. Earlier in the week, pictures of Sir Winston’s body lying in state in Westminster Hall had also been transmitted live via telstar ii. (nbc; cbs; Wash. Post, 1/27/65)
David H. Hoffman, aviation editor of the New York Herald Tribune and Arthur C. Clarke, British science writer, were cited by the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association for outstanding articles in 1964. Mr. Hoffman received the James J. Strebig memorial award for his series on air safety. Mr. Clarke was honored for an article published in Life magazine on communications satellites. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/23/65)
Martin Co. had delivered the first pair of prototype nuclear generators for use in space to NASA, it was reported. The units contained no radioactive fuel and would be heated electrically for their qualification tests. Each generator was designed to deliver 30 watts of direct current to the weather satellite Nimbus B, first NASA satellite to use a nuclear power source, (ap, NYT, 2/23/65, 21)
ComSatCorp announced that clear test signals transmitted via EARLY BIRD between Andover, Me., and stations in Goonhilly Downs, England; Pleumeur Bodou, France; and Raisting, W. Germany, had demonstrated that communications satellite’s equipment to receive messages from the European stations was functioning properly, as was its receiver tuned to the Andover station, (ap, Chic. Trib., 4/13/65)
aec said in its Annual Report to Congress that the United States now had four Vela satellites in distant orbits to detect nuclear explosions in space. Two more would be launched this year. U.S. facilities in the Pacific had been brought to a state of instant readiness to resume atmospheric testing should the Soviet Union violate the limited nuclear test ban treaty, (aec Annual Report, 76-77)
ComSatCorp announced it would request proposals from several U.S. manufacturers for a new space exploration communications system that would be associated with “certain space exploration activities, particularly the Apollo program.” Proposals would be for five synchronous-orbit satellites each capable of being launched with a thrust-augmented Delta booster, with options for additional satellites. First delivery would be within eight months. ComSatCorp also established requirements for four transportable satellite earth stations with options for additional stations—first two stations to be delivered in eight months. (ComSatCorp Release)
Establishment of a Joint Meteorological Satellite Program Office (JMSPo), to identify, compile, and coordinate requirements from the military services and the Joint Chiefs of Staff for use of meteorological satellites, was announced by dod. JMSPO would continually review the NASA meteorological satellite program and would define military applications of the national system and the dod technical efforts to support the national program, (dod Release 229-65)
USAF launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from WTR with an unidentified satellite. (17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965,153)
usn would build new stations at Raymondville and Roma, Tex., as part of its SPADATS (Space Detection and Tracking System) surveillance network for detecting satellites passing over the U.S., reported Warren Burkett in the Houston Chronicle. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 5/12/65)
Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc., received the first patent for a satellite communication system with its own orbit pattern. The satellite would linger for a considerable period over each of two widely separated areas; while hovering virtually stationary, it could relay television and radio programs within its range, and also store programs from one area to play later on the other side of the globe. (Jones, NYT, 1/2/65; Chic. Trib., 1/3/65)
Successful simultaneous two-way transmission of television tests via EARLY bird communications satellite between the U.S. ground station at Andover, Me., and European ground stations at Pleumeur-Bodou, France; Goonhilly Downs, England; and Raisting, W. Germany, was announced by ComSatCorp. The pictures were of good quality. (ComSatCorp Release)
Operation of syncom n and syncom hi communications satellites was transferred to DOD by NASA, which had completed its R&D experiments. Telemetry and command stations and range and range-rate equipment operated by NASA for the Syncom program would be transferred to DOD along with the satellites. DOD had furnished the communications ground stations used to relay transmissions via the two Syncoms for the past two years and would provide NASA with certain telemetry and ranging data of continuing scientific and engineering interest, syncom ill was to prove useful in DOD’s Vietnam communications. (nasa Release 65-5)
Viewers in Great Britain and at least 11 Western European nations were able to watch the Gemini 4 lift-off live via early bird i satellite. Picture reception was reportedly clear. ComSatCorp, cooperating with European ground station owners, arranged for free use of EARLY bird I between 8:00 a.m. and 12 noon edt. (Wash. Post, 6/4/65; ComSatCorp Release)
AT&T and ITT asked the FCC to reverse its May 12 decision awarding ComSatCorp temporary control over the initial three U.S. ground stations which would comprise important segments of a global satellite communications system. ITT, in its petition, contended that the ruling supported an “unwarranted monopoly in international communications.” AT&T argued that the licensing policy was not in the public interest. {WSJ, 6/14/65, 24)
Study of approximately 300 photographs taken over the Antarctic by NASA nimbus I meteorological satellite had caused the U.S. Geological Survey to plan three major changes on its relief maps:	(1) Mount Siple, 10,000-ft.-high Antarctic mountain used by pilots as a navigational aid, would be repositioned 45 mi. further west; (2) a mountain group in the Kohler range, positioned by two expeditions in two different locations, would appear as one group rather than two; and (3) ice front information on the Filshner Ice Shelf, Weddell Sea, and Princess Martha Coast areas would be updated with photographs producing better definition of the ice shelfs shape, (csfc Release G-29-65)
tiros lx photograph of ice-covered U.S. Great Lakes area. at 10 rpm, each camera, in turn, would roll into position and snap a picture, triggered by an infrared horizon sensor. The combination of tiros ix’s polar orbit (83.4°) and rolling wheel was expected to provide 100% photographic coverage of the earth’s cloud cover during daylight hours. Primary purpose of the tiros ix launching was to test the new cartwheel concept as a forerunner of a joint NASA-Weather Bureau Tiros Operational System (tos) of weather satellites, (nasa Release 65-7; Goddard News, 1/25/65; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/22/65; UPI, Wash. Daily News, 1/22/65; ap, Ball. Sun, 1/23/65; Appel, NYT, 1/23/65, 9; Hixson, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/23/65)
U.S.S.R. launched its first communications satellite molniya i into orbit: apogee, 39,380 km. (24,459 mi.); perigee, 497 km. (309 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 48 min.; inclination, 65°. Krasnaya Zvezda reported that the “basic purpose of launching the Molniya-1 communications satellite is to accomplish the transmission of TV programs and to perform two-way multichannel telephone, phototelegraphic and telegraphic communication. All the onboard equipment on the satellite and the ground radio network are operating normally, and the first transmission of TV programs between Vladivostok and Moscow were successfully completed.” (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/ 24/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
ComSatCorp invited 20 construction companies to bid on site preparation for the Brewster Flat, Wash., earth station. Expected to cost approximately $6 million, the station would be a U.S. link in a worldwide commercial communications satellite system. (ComSatCorp Release)
Plans for the side-by-side orbiting of Canadian Alouette and U.S. Explorer satellites to study the ionosphere were announced. Previously scheduled for Nov. 23 from Western Test Range, the launch had been postponed until at least Nov. 26 because of telemetry problems with the U.S. satellite. Double-launch project was called Isis-X (International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies), (ap, NYT, 11/21/ 65, 11; Wash. Post, 11/21/65, A14)
Federal Communications Commission approved live television coverage from the aircraft carrier Wasp of Gemini vi recovery in the Altantic Ocean. This would be the first live transmission from a recovery area since the U.S. man-in-space program began. Television signal from the Wasp would be sent to early BIRD I which would relay it to the satellite ground station in Andover, Me., for transmission to the three television networks. (NYT, 10/22/65, 3)
Philco Corp., opposing the bid by the Communications Satellite Corporation to supply dod with communications satellite service, asked the FCC to prevent ComSatCorp from signing a “sole source” contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. Philco, which was already preparing a satellite system for DOD under a contract awarded in July 1963, said ComSatCorp’s proposed contract “is in violation of the letter and spirit of the FCC rules and regulations which require competition in ComSatCorp procurement.” Since ComSatCorp apparently had been negotiating the matter for some time, “its present statement that stringent time requirements impel waiver of the Fee’s rules and regulations is insupportable,” Philco said. Under ComSatCorp’s plan, dod would be supplied 24 satellites built by Hughes Aircraft Co. and would pay for service only if the satellites worked. ComSatCorp would absorb the costs if they did not. DOD had made no decision for or against the offer. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/2/65; upi, NYT, 2/3/65, 54)
Self-organizing flight controller,” featuring device that could cope with unexpected flight conditions of satellites and aircraft, was being developed by afsc Research and Technology Div. Applying “probability state variable devices,” bionics researchers had recreated function of a living nerve cell in a device called “Artron” (artificial neuron). Networks of Artrons in electronic cluster functioned like living neurons: they became self-organizing, achieving problem-solving, and learning new ways to capitalize on their mistakes and find new ways of performing a given task. AFSC stressed that flyable self-organizing flight controller was 5-10 yrs away, (afsc Release 50.65)
cosmos liii, an unmanned satellite containing scientific equipment for outer space research, was orbited by the Soviet Union. Preliminary orbital data: period, 98.7 min.; apogee, 741 mi. (1,192 km.) ; perigee, 141 mi. (227 km.) ; inclination, 48.8°. Equipment on board was operating normally. (Tass, Pravda, 1/31/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
According to official sources, both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had exploded certain of their own satellites in orbit to prevent their falling into other hands, but neither nation was known to have attempted to knock down a spacecraft belonging to the other. (Clark, NYT, 4/4/65, 1)
usaf launched Titan m-c from etr with triple-satellite payload: LCS II radar calibration sphere, Ov2-l radiation sensor satellite, and a metal-ballasted dummy. About the time of the second burn of the transtage engines, the total assemblage exploded into hundreds of fragments and therefore the satellites were not useful beyond the earlier steps of launch vehicle testing. The Titan iii-c transtage was to have ignited its engines 10 times, changed course 4 times, and ejected the satellites. Primary mission of the flight was launch vehicle testing, and USAF officials noted most major objectives were met. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 153; ap, Newport News Daily Press, 10/17/65)
USAF launched Atlas-Agena D from WTR with unidentified satellite payload.	(U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 143)
ComSatCorp filed with the FCC its intent to contract for 24 satellites that could be used by ComSatCorp to provide a global communications service for DOD. The satellites would be made available for three launchings which DOD had slated for the early part of 1966 on either a Titan me or Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. DOD would pay only for service rendered following successful launch, with Com SatCorp assuming the risk if the satellites did not work satisfactorily in orbit. This proposal was separate from the program managed by ComSatCorp to develop an international commercial communications satellite system. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp asked 24 firms to propose earth station construction plans for antenna systems in Brewster, Wash., and Paumalu, Hawaii, by Sept. 17. The rfp specified four 85-ft. parabolic antennas capable of working with satellites at altitudes from 6,000 mi. to 22,300 mi. Requirements were for one operational antenna system at each of the earth stations within a year after the contract award, and the second antenna system at each station two months later. The stations would provide high quality two-way commercial communications, track spacecraft, and send commands and receive data from satellite both during launch and while satellites were in orbit. (ComSatCorp Release; UPI, NYT, 8/20/65, 41)
Hughes Aircraft Co. was the only concern to respond to ComSatCorp’s request for proposals to build four advanced Early Bird-type satellites with options for additional satellites, ComSatCorp announced. Five companies had bid for construction of four transportable ground stations with options for additional stations: Hughes Aircraft Co.; International Telephone and Telegraph Corp.; Page Communications Engineers; and Radio Corp. of America. Delivery of the first satellite and the first two stations would be within eight months. (ComSatCorp Release)
An article published in The New Scientist reported that experts at the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, England, believed that the U.S. communications satellite ECHO II—launched Jan. 25, 1964, and still in orbit—had been pierced by its own launching canister shortly after injection into orbit. According to The New Scientist, the shape of echo ii after launching was flabby and elongated rather than the perfect sphere wanted for some of its communication experiments. Analysis of Malvern’s radar tracks on ECHO II revealed writhing echoes that, according to their theory, arose when the very short radar pulses entered a hole and rebounded from the aluminum-coated interior of the balloon. The Malvern team thought the balloon had a puncture about 18 in. long and 27 in. wide in one side. NASA spokesmen said they did not believe echo II had been punctured by either its launching canister or its launching vehicle and that sightings from more than a dozen radar stations had contradicted the Malvern theory. They added that echo Il’s ability to reflect radio signals had not been seriously impaired and many messages had been bounced off in the last year. (Hillaby, NYT, 1/31/65, 29)
NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives reached two satisfactory understandings in their New York discussions on space cooperation. The first, which reaffirmed the existing agreement for exchange of weather satellite data, provided that satellite data would be available on a continuing basis from both sides within a few months. The second, an agreement for the preparation and publication of a joint review of research in space biology and medicine, provided for a joint editorial board to receive full cooperation from both sides in the preparation of materials available in the two countries, selection of authors, and publication of their work. Barring an objection 'from either side within two months, the agreement would become effective automatically, (nasa Release 65-325)
Soviet-French communique was issued after six days of talks between Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and French Foreign Minister Maurice Couve de Murville in Moscow expressing the desire to sign “an appropriate agreement” on space cooperation. This apparently referred to a Soviet invitation that France join in a communications satellite system which would compete with the U.S.-led ComSatCorp, to which France already belonged. (Rosenfeld, Wash. Post, 11/3/65, A9)
U.S. authorities had considered and rejected the idea of building orbiting nuclear missiles because it would be a clumsy, inaccurate method of waging atomic war, reported the Associated Press. U.S. experts had calculated that a warhead launched from orbit would not come within 50 mi. of its target on earth whereas U.S. ICBMS and submarine-launched Polaris missiles were accurate within one mile. In addition, U.S. had developed antisatellite rockets that could intercept enemy satellites in orbit. Disclosure was made because of a November 7 Tass announcment that one of the missiles paraded through Moscow for the Anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution had warheads that could “deliver their surprise blow on the first or any orbit around the earth.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, H2)
ComSatCorp announced it was negotiating with trw Systems, Inc., for development of at least six and perhaps 24 satellites for use in a global system. ComSatCorp said the global system should be in operation by 1968, relaying telephone, television, and data messages between continents. No estimate of the value of the contract was made. (ComSatCorp Release)
nasa explorer xxiii meteoroid-detection satellite had successfully completed its one-year expected lifetime, NASA announced. The 295-lb. satellite, launched November 6, 1964, from Wallops Station to measure the rate of meteoroid punctures at 300-mi. to 600-mi. altitude, had recorded 122 punctures as of September 30. These results indicated that an exposed area of 10 sq. ft. made of metal one-thousandth of an inch thick would experience penetration by a meteoroid about once a week, (nasa Release 65-351)
A tariff for the use of Early Bird satellites for transmission and reception of voice, record, data, telephoto, facsimile, television, and other signals was filed by ComSatCorp with the FCC. Beginning Sunday, June 27, voice channels would be available between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. edt on a daily basis. Minimum rental period, one month; rent, $4,200. Additional consecutive periods would be rented at $140 per day. Voice channels would be two-way. No refunds would be given for interruptions of less than 30 min. or for those caused by solar eclipse. Interruptions of 30 min. or more not the responsibility of the customer would be refunded at roughly $3 per 30-min. interruption. ComSatCorp could request temporary surrender of a voice channel for TV use and, in that event, would refund charges in amounts proportional to the surrender period if it falls between 5 a.m. and 8 a.m. or between 2 p.m. and 9 p.m., or in amounts twice proportional to the surrender period if it falls between 8 a.m. and 2 p.m. Also beginning June 27, television channels would be available as frequently as feasible. Hours would be 5 a.m. to 8 a.m. and 2 p.m. to 9 p.m. (Schedule i) and 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. (Schedule Ii). Channels would accept standard TV signals. TV channel rentals must be made for at least a 30-min. period. Rent: $2,400 for first 30min., $475 per immediately following 15 min. (Schedule I); $3,825 for first 30 min., $710 per immediately following 15 min. (Schedule n). Regular channels would be on one-way monochrome. Two-way monochrome and one-way color would rent for an additional 50%. Interruptions of more than 30 sec. and not the responsibility of the customer would be refunded in amounts proportional to the interrupted period. If a customer canceled his application for use of a TV channel, he would be billed as though he had not and would be required to pay any additional charges involved in acquiring temporary use of a voice channel if his application had made such acquisition necessary. TV channels would be rented on a first-come-first-serve basis. Rates covered only transmissions between Andover, Me., and the satellite. The arrangement whereby refunds would be made for temporary TV use of voice channels was necessary because early bird i cannot handle both kinds of transmissions simultaneously. (ComSatCorp Release)
France’s newest satellite tracking station, located outside Pretoria, South Africa, was nearing completion and would probably be operational by July 1965. The $840,000 station would be used to track France’s first satellite, scheduled to be orbited around the earth in 1965. (ap, Balt. Sun,1/13/65)
Radio Prague disclosed that at a November meeting in Moscow of Soviet-bloc countries the U.S.S.R. had agreed to launch Communist nations’ artificial satellites, sounding rockets, and probes for scientific research. Countries involved were preparing research programs which would be announced in 1966. (NYT, 12/12/65, 141)
NASA had already received 170 suggested experiments for Voyager—the largest response to any scientific satellite program NASA had conducted, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology. NASA would refine the experiments in consultation with the originators by November 19; preliminary selection would be made by March, and final one by July. (Av. Wk., 8/30/65, 21)
ComSatCorp requested industry proposals for an advanced satellite for a worldwide commercial communications system. The Corporation requested a satellite for use in a phased system at altitudes between 6,000 and 12,000 mi., or in a synchronous system at an altitude of 22,300 mi.; that had 1,000 two-way voice channels; that weighed approximately 240 lbs.; that could be launched alone or in groups of up to six satellites; that measured not more than 56-in.-dia. and 40-in. high; and that had a five-year lifetime. ComSatCorp stipulated the proposal should cover construction of six to 24 satellites, the number depending on the type of system, with the first six to be delivered within 24 months after the contract award. Proposals would be opened on October 25. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp filed with FCC a notice of a proposed $300,000 contract with AT&T for research data and consultant services on ground stations for the global communications satellite network. FCC was notified that ComSatCorp had analyzed and evaluated other proposals and had held subsequent discussions with those making proposals. (ComSatCorp)
All but six of the 170 pieces into which Soviet satellite cosmos LVII had shattered after being orbited Feb. 22 had fallen to earth, according to GSFc’s Satellite Situation Report. Another disclosure of the report was that a U.S. satellite orbited March 9 from wtr was orbiting in eight pieces, four of which were transmitting signals, (gsfc SSR. 3/31/65)
Transfer of control of syncom ii and SYNCOM ill communications satellites from NASA to DOD was completed. Under direction of the Defense Communications Agency, the three telemetry and command stations for maintaining precise control and positioning of the satellites would be operated by usaf at locations in the Seychelles Islands, Hawaii, and Guam. Army would be responsible for earth communications facilities used with the Syncom satellites except for two shipboard terminals owned and operated by USN. Army’s Strategic Communications Command would continue to man and operate all ground terminals. syncom ii—launched by nasa July 26, 1963—would be maintained at a position between 60° and 80° east longitude; syncom III— launched by NASA Aug. 19, 1964—would be positioned between 170° and 174° east longitude. Both satellites were in orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude. NASA would continue to receive reports on the telemetry from the two satellites from DOD and would continuously evaluate their performance in space, (dod Release 451—65)
Soviet communications expert Dr. N. I. Chistiakov, speaking at the UNESCO-sponsored space communications conference in Paris, called for an international convention to govern the use of satellites for broadcasting. He said a draft agreement should be drawn up by the International Telecommunications Union and should make satellite communications available to all countries on a non-discriminatory basis. (Wash. Post, 12/8/65)
In an original report on communications satellites, Soviet Prof. M. Kaplanov said: “The transmitter on the Molniya 1 Comsat had a power of 40 watts, i.e. 10 times that of the Early Bird. In this regard, the Soviet scientists and engineers have solved the most complex technical problems in the development of a sputnik equipped with onboard antennas oriented on the Earth with a strong power system assuring a supply to the transmitter throughout the entire communication session. “The development of a wideband space transmitter of 40 watts power operating continuously is an innovation in world technology. This distinguishing feature of the Molniya-1 Comsat permits a considerable simplification of the onground equipment and a great reduction in the cost of its construction and operation. Evidently the great complexity of servicing and the inadequate reliability of the [ComSatCorp] equipment compelled France, England and West Germany to organize the alternate operating of their ground receiving points of space communication. Each of these points operates only one week out of three, the second week it is in reserve, and the third is spent in repair work. We note that the Soviet onground facilities for space communication in Moscow and Vladivostok have been operating daily since the launching of the Molniya-1. This is quite important for a satellite communication system, since upon the operating cost there depends greatly its ability to compete with other means of communication.” (Izvestia, 10/17/16, 5, atss-t Trans.)
tiros vn meteorological satellite completed two years in orbit without a failure, nasa had orbited tiros vii June 19, 1963, with a Thor-Delta launch vehicle launched from etr (then called amr) . (nasa Proj. Off.)
Fee vetoed a proposed Communications Satellite Corp. contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for the design of satellites to be used by DOD. In a letter to ComSatCorp, the FCC took note of a protest by Philco Corp. (see Feb. 2), that it was as qualified as Hughes to bid on the proposed contract and said ComSatCorp must award the contract only after competitive bidding. ComSatCorp had asked the FCC to approve the proposed contract, waiving requirements for competitive bidding, (fcc Public Notice-C)
A Scout Evaluation Vehicle (Sev) was successfully launched by NASA from Wallops Station. Primary purpose of the mission was to demonstrate in flight the operation of improved vehicle features: (1) use of new second- and fourth-stage rocket motors with improved thrust characteristics; (2) test of Scout’s capability to fly a “dog-leg” course from Wallops Station by yaw torquing, performed during the third-stage coasting period; (3) test of in-flight performance of improved spin motors to stabilize the fourth stage of the vehicle; (4) demonstration of the Scout air transportability concept by launching a vehicle which, after complete assembly at Wallops, had been airlifted from and returned to the launch site in simulation of a transcontinental trip. All flight objectives were met, including injection of Army Corps of Engineers secor v (Sequential Collation of Range) geodetic satellite into an orbit with apogee, 1,504 mi. (2,421 km.); perigee, 702 mi. (1,130 km.); period, 122 min.; inclination, 69.23°. Elliptical orbit should enable SECOR v to transmit measurements of distances up to 2,000	mi.—twice the distance possible with earlier Secor versions which had been launched into 600-mi. circular orbits. The satellite would map the surface of the earth, pinpointing the location of land bodies separated by large expanses of ocean. (Wallops Release 65-49)
TELSTAR II had successfully turned off its tracking beacon as scheduled after two years and nine days of service and 4,736 orbits of the earth, Bell Telephone System engineers announced. This would not affect the comsat’s usefulness, but would conserve energy and permit other satellites to use the channel that was cut off. telstar ii was expected to remain usable for at least three more vears. (UPI, NYT, 5/20/65, 18)	'
Sir Francis Vallat, acting director of McGill Univ.’s Institute of Air and Space Law, told a news conference that if a piece of a satellite were to hit an individual on the head, he could sue the government that launched it and probably win the case, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/65, A8)
U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS XCII unmanned satellite, equipped to continue studies of the infrared and ultraviolet radiation of the earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 329 km. (204 mi.) ; perigee, 199 km. (123 mi.); period, 89.8 min.; inclination, 65.02°. All systems were functioning normally. Soviet Prof. Aleksandr Lebedinskiy told Tass that two spectrophotometers would point vertically part of the time and at the horizon part of the time. One instrument would cover the spectrum from seven to 20 microns and the other from 14 to 38 microns; it would take 20 sec. to obtain one spectrogram. (Tass, 10/16/65)
Use of ComSatCorp’s Early Bird communications satellite was subject of a London meeting between U.S. and European participants in the program. A general understanding was reached that once commercial service started, television networks could use the satellite system outside peak transatlantic telephone hours. The peak traffic hours were generally considered from about 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. EST. Exceptions could be made if major news stories broke in Europe during this period. (Farnsworth, NYT, 2/27/65, 51)
Commenting that contributions to science made by the space probes and satellites had been “interesting, all of it useful, none of ii genuinely', eyepoppingly unexpected,” an editorial in the San Francisco Sunday Chronicle continued:	“Surprisingly enough, space research has produced several by-products with a practical end. “The most significant to the world as a whole are the reconnaissance satellites with which Russia and the U.S. are now mutually inspecting each other’s and everyone else’s military installations with the kind of accuracy that has given Washington excellent pictures of the tower on top of which the Chinese atom bomb was exploded. They can prevent any significant military move from going undetected; a byproduct of them are the weather satellites. “Less is heard about the progress of early warning satellites designed to pick up the flaming tails of enemy missiles; this could be either because they have run into trouble or, like the satellites the Polaris submarines steer by, they are too successful to be mentioned. The possibility of putting H-bombs into satellites is not mentioned either in these days, but this time because the Russians and the Americans seem to have decided by mutual consent to forget it: the risks of an unmanned satellite going wrong were too great, and the risk of a manned one going berserk was even greater.” (5. F. Sun. Chron., 4 /11/65)
COSMOS XCIX unmanned satellite, carrying scientific instruments “for continued space research,” was launched into orbit by the Soviet Union, Tass announced. Initial orbital data: apogee, 320 km. (198.7 mi.); perigee, 199 km. (123.6 mi.); period, 89.6 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 12/10/65)
