nasa would negotiate six-month study contracts totaling $200,000 with General Electric Co. and rca to determine "feasibility of a satellite capable of broadcasting directly to conventional home FM radio and/or short wave radios.” Contracts would be managed by nasa ossa, (nasa Release 66-161)
Global television relayed by U.S. and U.S.S.R. satellites could be used as a political instrument, threatening the independence of some countries and causing far-reaching changes in world relationships, warned Eurospace, organization of 160 European aerospace industries, in a memorandum released in London. When ordinary home television sets began to receive programs from these satellites "the national independence of developed countries without similar means of expression might be threatened by this persuasive new weapon,” memorandum said. Eurospace warning, released three days after an announcement that U.K. and other European nations had joined U.S.-dominated Intelsat consortium to launch system of world-spanning comsats by 1968, urged Europe to play its own major role in space "before it is too late.” Intelsat’s space communications system would utilize Early Bird-type satellites which Eurospace did not consider "powerful enough to have noteworthy political or economic repercussions.” (Reuters, Wash. Post, 3/15/66, A16)
First test transmissions of long-range radio and television communications between Moscow and the Far East via third molniya i comsat, launched April 25, were successful. Pictures were of good quality. Tass said the satellite would be used to "further refine the system of long-range, two-way television and telephone-telegraph radio communications and pilot operations.” (Tass, 4/27/66)
Australian mobile space tracking station soon would begin seven-week, nonstop operation on Thursday Island off Cape York Peninsula, according to Australian News and Information Bureau announcement. Minister of Supply Denham Henty had said mobile station, part of nasa’s Anna geodetic satellite project for measurement of size and shape of the earth, would transmit data to U.S., via a fixed station near Adelaide, for analysis at Johns Hopkins Univ.’s Applied Physics Laboratory. (NYT, 5/1/66, 70)
aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg believed man could modify weather in this century through a global center operating a vast satellite system, AP reported. With international cooperation, he said, a worldwide forecasting system could become operational in 20 yrs.; later it might be possible to actually control the weather. (AP, NYT, 12/2/66)
NASA Convair 990 jet aircraft began ARC-managed, preliminary flights in support of NASA’s Nimbus C weather satellite scheduled for launch from wtr May 13. Four gsfc experiments installed in jet would test new spacecraft sensors for weather measurement and collect data at altitudes over 40,000 ft. for comparison with data obtained by Nimbus spacecraft over the same areas, (nasa Release 66-107)
ComSatCorp asked fcc for authority to construct a $6,500,000 highcapacity earth station in Peach Tree Valley, Calif., to communicate with, and perform tracking, telemetry, and command duties for, orbiting satellites. ComSatCorp would withdraw Oct. 6 application for a second antenna at Andover, Me., station pending fcc action on California application. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp requested fcc authority to build six 250-lb. advanced synchronous satellites, for global commercial communications system. Launches would begin in 1968. (ComSatCorp Release)
Accelerated programs for launching communications satellites had improved prospects of earning profit in 1967, reported ComSatCorp president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk at annual shareholders’ meeting in Washington, D.C. Predicting a 100-fold increase in ComSatCorp’s revenue potential during five-year development plan, Dr. Charyk said: ". . . we have taken firm steps for the development of even larger and more versatile satellites for deployment on a global basis in 1968. These spacecraft will weigh approximately 240 pounds in orbit and will have a capacity for 1,200 two-way telephone circuits or four television channels.” He also noted ComSatCorp had proposed to essa that it conduct joint feasibility study with IBM to develop satellites to collect, process, and disseminate weather data on a global basis. (Vartan, NYT, 5/11/66, 65; Fouquet, Wash. Post, 5/11/66, E6)
Two tape recorders in nasa’s nimbus ii meteorological satellite had failed but spacecraft continued to transmit daytime and nighttime cloud-cover photos. Loss of first recorder, used to store data from Medium Resolution Infrared Radiometer (Mrir), would prevent scientists from receiving information on earth’s heat balance, water vapor, and temperatures in the atmosphere. Failure of second recorder, used in measuring satellite’s engineering performance, would force nimbus ii to transmit information each time it passed a ground station instead of storing it for more convenient playback. Since its launch by nasa May 15, nimbus ii had met all mission objectives and transmitted more than 200,000 weather photos on a global scale, (nasa Release 66-203)
ucla announced plans to build its own satellite to study earth’s magnetic field and interplanetary space. Feasibility studies financed by 155,000 NASA grant were being conducted by Hughes Aircraft Co. and Philco Corp. (dpi, NYT, 10/15/66, 33)
Home-built photo-receiver set of rca electronics engineer Wendell Anderson in Morristown, N.J., received photos of North Atlantic storm taken by essa i meteorological satellite—first known usable pictures ever received from an orbiting satellite on home-made set. Equipment, which included 25-yr.-old ham radio, 20 ft. of copper tubing, television antenna, mast, sheet of chicken wire, wooden laundry hangers, sawed-off rolling pin, and $25 microscope, cost $600—$31,000 less than an essa ground station. Anderson used antenna to pick up signals on ham radio, taped signals on recorder, reducing them to series of electrical impulses that could be changed into light signals, then beamed light through reverse end of a microscope onto spinning sheet of film to record photos. (O’Toole, NYT, 3/3/66, 31)
Summarizing two years of negotiations between France and U.S.S.R. on cooperative satellite communications program in Astronautics & Aeronautics, Andrew G. Haley said questions of (1) access of French scientists and technicians to Soviet launch sites, and (2) size of orbit for French satellite to be launched with Soviet vehicle were still unsettled. (Haley, A&A, 8/66, 15-6)
nasa explorer xxix (Geos-A) geodetic satellite, orbited Nov. 6, 1965, had developed problems which affected planned investigations: accurate measurement of spacecraft’s attitude had become difficult; had precise attitude information could not be included in Mutual Visibility Program for observing stations. Failure of one of four flashing lights had reduced utility of some observing cameras, and interference had occurred between secor transponder and Doppler beacons, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Government of Pakistan announced plans to use comsats to relay telephone communications between East and West Pakistan. Two satellite tracking stations would be built—one in each province—and would be operative by 1968. (Reuters, NYT, 8/18/66, 38)
Fee’s Oct. 1 deadline for filing comments on whether or not private entities should be allowed to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use was extended to Nov. 3. Initially fcc had requested that comments and proposals be submitted by Aug. 1. Complexity of proposals submitted by ComSatCorp and the Ford Foundation on that date and resulting questions and discussion had necessitated two extensions of the deadline. (Adams, NYT, 9/9/66, 77)
ComSatCorp would conduct communications test in which U.S. and European computers would "talk with each other” for a month in fall 1966 via early bird i comsat, reported New York Times. Test could lead to daily exchange by satellite of business, scientific, and technical information, and to establishment of U.N. "voice of peace” agency—a world bank of medical, technical, and educational knowledge—proposed at November 1965 White House conference on international cooperation. (Clark, NYT, 7/10/66, 43)
Third year in space began for two experimental Vela nuclear detection satellites launched by dod Oct. 16, 1963, into near-circular orbit at 52,174-mi. (84,000-km.) altitude. Satellites had demonstrated successful R&D program and had provided effective capability to detect nuclear explosions in space, dod had overall responsibility for Vela program; arpa had overall direction with support of aec. (afsc Release
fcc adopted a Notice of Inquiry inviting comments by interested parties to be submitted by Aug. 1, 1966, on five specific questions concerning legality, compatibility with the Communications Satellite Act of 1962, and economic and technical feasibility of proposed fcc authorization of nongovernmental communications satellite facilities. (Text)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xii, launched into lunar orbit Oct. 22, had completed 220 orbits, taken "unique photographs,” and was continuing its mission, Tass reported. Satellite had transmitted data on lunar x-ray and gamma radiation and micrometeoroids. (Tass, 11/26/66)
U.N. World Meteorological Organization—in report on plan for World Weather Watch to be initiated between 1968 ana 1970—warned it would be "foolhardy” for man to attempt to modify weather on large scale with current limited knowledge of atmospheric forces. Plan called for use of satellites; a relatively dense network of land and ocean weather stations, manned and unmanned; drifting sea buoys; balloons; and other instruments to probe the world’s atmosphere. High-speed telecommunications systems would centralize findings for analysis and relay latest detailed information to meteorologists everywhere. This would enable them to forecast the weather "both with improved accuracy and for a longer time ahead.” (NYT, 10/22/66,,12)
Thailand and Malaysia joined Intelsat-—International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium headed by ComSatCorp—bringing total number of member nations to 50. ComSatCorp said it "warmly welcomes this aspect of the development of the consortium and the intention of other countries to increase Intelsat membership even further in the near future.” Yugoslavia and Romania had also shown interest in Intelsat and were considering joining. (ComSatCorp Release; Clark, NYT, 5/3/66, 9)
Edgar G. Bush, senior technician at gsfc since 1959 and designer of first micro-electronic circuitry used for flight computers, died of a heart ailment. Bush had designed computers for vanguard hi, Explorer satellites, and Lunar Orbiters. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/66, B5)
170 usable terrain photographs from Gemini v mission flown by Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., Aug. 21-29, 1965, included pictures of South Africa which would provide valuable information about continental drift, gsfc geologist Dr. Paul D. Lowman said in interim report at NASA Hq. on 13 scientific and technological experiments carried aboard gemini v. Color photos of South Africa’s Namib Desert revealed 7-million to 8-million-year-old rock formations. Presence of similar formations along east coast of South America could indicate two continents had once been closer together, Lowman explained. Photos also pinpointed "a major diamond area” between rock formations and the sand dunes. Kenneth Nagler, U.S. Weather Bureau, told the meeting that gemini V pictures, some in color, had provided meteorologists with more detail of cloud systems than had orbiting Tiros satellites. (Text)
lunar orbiter ii executed plane change—possibly the first ever accomplished by satellite in lunar orbit—to obtain information about moon’s gravity field and gain experience in flight operations at high inclinations, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-316)
ComSatCorp asked fcc for authority to build six advanced synchronous satellites—four to be launched and two as backups for development of global commercial communications system. Proposed satellites would weigh 250 lbs., and have 1,200 voice-quality telephone channels and five-year operational life compared with 85-lb. early bird i’s 240 voice-lity channels and 18-mo. planned life. (ComSatCorp Release;
Communist sources speculated that U.S.S.R. would launch "a large satellite carrying several men . . . just before the Nov. 7 anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution,” and another, the world’s largest satellite and carrying eight men, by the end of 1966, AP reported. (AP, NYT, 10/16/66, 28)
ddr&e Deputy Director (Strategic & Space Systems) Daniel J. Fink, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., said: "We in the Department of Defense have always looked upon space less as a matter of adventure and more as a matter of necessity; we explore its potential not because it is 'there’ but because we have needs that are 'here.’ It is not that wre have identified fundamentally new missions since the early days of our space effort. We have, however, begun to recognize new applications for space-based systems, particularly in the tactical field. The opportunities are tremendous—and sometimes so are the problems. We are no longer as enamored with the 'how’ of developing a satellite system. We now take a hard look at the 'why’ of choosing one approach to solving a military need over another—and this most assuredly includes competing earth-based systems as well. We have come to recognize that our launch vehicle capability coupled with better sensors permits us to do more missions from synchronous orbit. We also are beginning to sense that there is a high potential for combining operational functions in a multiple-purpose satellite where common sensor packages and orbital parameters exist.” (dod Release 341-66)
ComSatCorp petitioned fcc to deny itt’s request to construct a fourth satellite earth station in Puerto Rico. ComSatCorp said "public interest would best be served” if it, rather than itt, owned the station, and revealed plans to seek permission to construct and begin operating the facility by mid-1968. (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/1/66, Ell; NYT, 3/12/66, 22)
fcc ruled that users of satellite communications must operate through common carriers instead of dealing directly with ComSatCorp to prevent "serious adverse effects upon the well-being of the commercial telecommunications industry and the general public it serves.” Ruling, which resolved controversy between ComSatCorp and common carriers, would protect carriers from reduced traffic volume resulting from direct user-ComSatCorp relations, (fcc; WSJ, 6/24/66, 6)
European conference on satellite communication, meeting at The Hague, Netherlands, requested ESRO to study feasibility and desirability of European comsat. (NYT, 11/25/66, 4)
nasa would negotiate $800,000 contract with rca for design sludy of imp oved Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) for national operational weather satellite program. Proposed 500-lb., cylindrical satellite would be 5 ft. high and 4li ft. in diameter—compared with current 300-lb. satellites 2 ft. high, 3H ft. in diameter—and would incorporate camera system now carried in two operational spacecraft. Stabilized by flywheel and magnetic attitude control system, satellite would always point to earth, and its infrared radiometers would scan entire world’s cloud cover at night, (nasa Release 66-115)
ComSatCorp filed with fcc a $31,985,000 fixed-price contract with trw Systems, Inc., for research, development, and production of six advanced synchronous satellites for global commercial satellite service. Cylindrical, 240-lb. satellites would have 1,200 two-way voice channels and five-year operational life and would handle all types of communications. (ComSatCorp Release)
White House announced agreement for establishment of an esro station near Fairbanks, Alaska, to receive telemetry from and send commands to esro scientific satellites. This would be first foreign ground station on U.S. soil. (Pres. Doc., 12/5/66, 1740)
Dr. Clifford A. Spohn (Col., usaf, Ret.) had been appointed director of operations at essa’s National Satellite Center, succeeding Arthur W. Johnson, who had been appointed deputy director of the facility, (essa Release 66-8)
nasa selected Westinghouse Electric Corp. for an $8-million contract to install semiautomatic systems in tracking stations to speed compilation of satellite data. The data acquisition system would be used in nasa’s Applications Technology Satellite (Ats) program; it would make possible reduction of data within 90 days of satellite launch. Systems would be installed at Rosman, N.C., Goldstone facility, and Toowoomba, Australia, tracking stations. (WSJ, 12/1/66, 8)
Industry bids to AFSC for study of new integrated satellite system as followon to the Midas early warning satellite would be due June 24, Aviation Week reported. Proposal request included studies for sensor payload and spacecraft. Primary sensors would be optical, covering the infrared, ultraviolet, and visible spectra. (Av. Wk., 5/9/66, 23)
France’s report for the Register of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of her successful Nov. 26, 1965, launch of A-l scientific satellite from Hammaguir Range, marked first such report by nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. (Text)
ComSatCorp Chairman of the Board James McCormack said ComSatCorp was contacting communications and broadcasting companies to get largest possible consensus on costs and technological feasibility of domestic multipurpose communications satellite system, and would present plans to fcc by Aug. 1. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/23/66, E7; Bishop, WSJ, 4/25/66, 32)
msfc awarded Univ. of Michigan two-month, $29,930 study contract to develop 20-channel "infrared sensing technique to survey the earth’s natural resources.” Operating on orbiting satellite, system would survey possible mineral deposits, analyze soil for growth potential, diagnose "health” of crops, and predict bountiful fishing areas, (msfc Release 66-167)
dod awarded General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. $4-million contract to refurbish and update 23 retired Atlas icbm’s to launch upper-stage vehicles for Abres (Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems), Nike target, and scientific satellite programs. (General Dynamics Release)
U.S.S.R. announced that cosmos cxxii, launched June 25, was collecting meteorological data which would be sent to other nations in accordance with 1962 agreement with U.S. Satellite carried "instruments for taking TV pictures of the clouds, cameras to photograph clouds by infrared rays on the day and night sides of the earth, and instruments to measure radiation in the earth’s atmosphere.” (Tass, 8/17/66)
Patent for system with direction finder that would assure ground stations continuous and efficient communication with orbiting satellites was granted electronics engineers Henry P. Hutchingson, Applied Research Lab., Sylvania Electronic Systems, and Dr. Paul R. Arendt, Army Electronic Command Labs., Fort Monmouth, NJ. Equipment could also correct "Doppler frequency effect” caused by relative movement of satellite and station. (Jones, NYT, 7/23/66, 29)
A laser to function as a ground-based device to recharge an orbiting satellite’s batteries was suggested by Dr. Charles H. Townes, MIT, and Dr. Arthur L. Schawlow, Stanford Univ., co-inventors of the laser, in a paper before the Optical Society of America’s meeting in Washington, D.G. Report predicted exploitation of the laser would grow into a billion-dollar industry by 1970. (Clark, NYT, 3/16/66, 45M)
U.S.S.R. launched spacecraft, possibly from Cosmos series, which exploded into 32 pieces detectable by radar, gsfc Satellite Situation Report would later reveal that 12 pieces of debris remained in orbit Nov. 15; 20 had reentered. Spacecraft was second Soviet satellite to explode in six weeks [see Sept. 17]. (gsfc SSR, 11/15/66)
usaf had launched reconnaissance satellite over U.S.S.R. that could photograph Soviet military bases and return film packages on command from ground control, Dick Lyons reported in Washington Post. Key components were high-powered camera that could photograph objects several feet in diameter from 100-mi. altitude; cluster of film packages— cassettes—that could be dropped from satellite at random and picked up by recovery aircraft; and an Agena vehicle which could be maneuvered from ground. A new version of Samos spacecraft, satellite could remain in orbit for weeks or months—until its supply of film packages was exhausted—and might also be able to transmit TV pictures to U.S. ground stations. (Lyons, Wash. Post, 9/12/66)
NASA awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and RCA $90,000, six-month contracts to study characteristics for proposed Orbiting Data Relay System (Odrs) which would eliminate gaps in communications and provide continuous contact with spacecraft. Studies would probe kind of synchronous satellite and ground facilities required to relay data from spacecraft in earth orbit to NASA’s mission control centers at GSFC, JPL, and msc. (nasa Release 66-119)
Soviet Foreign Minister Audrey Gromyko and French Foreign Minister Maurice Couve de Murville signed agreement in Moscow providing basic framework for space cooperation during next ten years. Major objectives of compact—which initially scheduled several common experiments, including an astronomy test to be conducted from Archangel, U.S.S.R., and Kerguelen, French islands in the Indian Ocean —were missions with Imp-type satellites and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft. (SBD, 6/28/66, 344)
ComSatCorp proposed to faa an aeronautics satellite to handle complex communications for airlines and aid in faa’s air traffic control. Two-channel, 210-lb. satellite would be launched in late 1967—two or three years earlier than previous proposals—into 22,300-mi.-altitude synchronous orbit to provide more reliable very-high-frequency radio communications over North Atlantic area currently served by high-frequency radio system affected by had weather and sunspot activity. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/11/66, D6; Cooke, WSJ, 3/10/66, 32; Clark, NYT, 3/10/66, 19; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/66, A8)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara and U.K. Minister of Defence Denis Healey signed memorandum providing for cooperation in r&d for U.S. Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project—system of up to 22 comsats in near-synchronous, equatorial orbit. U.K. would provide, operate, and fund several ground terminals for communications tests and experiments using dod comsats free of charge, (dod Release 87-66)
Planned expansion of the global communications satellite network of the 50-nation Intelsat was being postponed two years as a result of pressure by the fcc on ComSatCorp. ComSatCorp was majority shareholder and served as manager for Intelsat. Basic question raised by fcc was whether the expansion was too ambitious for the traffic that would be available. Threatened with fcc veto or modification of its application to construct six 1,500-channel satellites for launch in 1968, ComSatCorp notified fcc that deployment of the follow-on 6,000-channel multipurpose satellite had been postponed from 1969-70 to 1972 or later. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 31)
U.K.’s Cable & Wireless, Ltd., would build three ground stations—at Hong Kong, Bahrein Island, and an undisclosed site—for satellite communications, reported the Wall Street Journal. Hong Kong station would cost $7 million and would be operational by 1968. Seventeen firms—including seven U.S. companies—had been asked to bid on the project. {WSJ, 6/17/66, 12)
New Soviet launch site near Archangel was discovered by British schoolboys after they had tracked several Cosmos satellites and fed information, including data on orbital intersections, into a computer. U.S. later confirmed U.S.S.R. had been launching satellites from large military base south of Archangel. Only two Soviet launch sites—Baikonur and Kapustin Yar—had previously been publicized. Schoolboys’ information, which appeared in Flight International, represented important break in secrecy surrounding Soviet reconnaissance satellites. (Wash. Post, 12/13/66; 12/19/66, Al, A8; NYT, 12/21/66, 25; Time, 12/ 30/66)
Synchronous-orbit television relay satellite capable of providing direct service to home receivers for an area equivalent to one sixth of continental U.S. could be launched before 1970, according to preliminary company-funded design studies conducted by rca and ge and presented to NASA Hq. officials, Aviation Week reported. Both companies conceded the existence of technical problem areas, including the design of solar cell arrays 15 to 30 times larger than any previously attempted and the lack of a suitable launch vehicle for orbiting 6,000-lb. to 8,000-lb. satellite, but believed solutions could be devised within the existing state-of-the-art. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 115)
U.S.S.R. planned to build two additional satellite tracking stations in Cuba and had sited one near Santiago, Aviation Week reported. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 23)
President Johnson issued Executive Order 11277 designating International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) as an organization "entitled to enjoy, from and after August 20, 1964, all of the privileges, exemptions, and immunities provided by Section 4(a)” of the International Organizations Immunities Act. (Text, Pres. Doc., 5/9/66, 600)
Gamma-ray spectrum of the lunar surface obtained by luna x indicated that the moon’s crust was similar to the earth’s, Tass announced. The satellite had detected lunar gamma rays from two sources: one was "an increased intensity of gamma radiation caused chiefly by interaction of cosmic rays with the surface layer of lunar material”; the other was "natural radioactivity from the lunar rocks associated with uranium, thorium, and potassium. "Compared with the analogous radioactivity of earth rocks, the observed spectrum comes close to the radioactivity of basic rocks— basalts.” (Sullivan, NYT, 4/14/66, 1, 21)
ComSatCorp’s Intelsat ii-a ("lani bird”) comsat, launched by NASA from etr Oct. 27, began commercial service under temporary fcc authorization which would expire Feb. 2, 1967. Satellite, which had failed to achieve planned synchronous equatorial orbit Oct. 30, had been moved into modified 12-hr. orbit Dec. 1, to provide maximum visibility: eight to nine hours daily between U.S. mainland and Hawaii; over seven hours between U.S. and Japan; and about four hours between U.S. and Carnarvon, Australia. Authorized communications carriers could use satellite for television and telephone communications about eight hours daily. (ComSatCorp Release; Wash. Post, 12/2/66, FI; AP, WSJ, 12/5/66, 15; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/66, A3)
Dr. Wallace J. Eckert, Columbia Univ. prof, of celestial mechanics and director of ibm’s Watson Laboratory, received National Academy of Sciences’ 19th James Craig Watson Medal "for his pioneering contributions to the scientific application of electronic computers and to the theory of the motion of the moon.” (nas Release, 3/29/66) Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, examined management role of scientifically trained people and invited their participation in the "governmental decision-making process.” Brown, a former physicist, attributed rising influence of technocrats "to the increasing technical content of modern life” and to "the less narrowly technical orientation of the technically trained.” He noted transition from parttime to full-time scientific advisers in the late 1950’s as "one of the major lasting consequences of the Soviet Sputnik achievement.” (Text) nasa’s ogo i, launched Sept. 4, 1964, and explorer xxviii (imp-c), launched May 29, 1965, had yielded data essential to evolution of an accurate physical description of the universe, according to paper on low-energy cosmic rays presented at aps meeting by Dr. Donald E. Hagge of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Hagge noted satellite measurements and recent "quiet sun year” had given physicists "an unprecedented opportunity . . . for meaningful cosmic ray research.” High-apogee satellites permitted measurement of low-energy particles "not directly observable on the surface of the earth” due to protective atmosphere and influence of earth’s magnetic field. Minimum of "solar modulation”—suppression of galactic particles by sun’s magnetic field upon attempted penetration of solar system—meant that "particles observed during 1965 most nearly represent the true situation outside the solar system.” (gsfc Release, 3/27/66) J. A. Simpson of Enrico Fermi Institute, Univ. of Chicago, reported these satellite experiments had revealed "new features in the cosmic radiation regarding the energy distribution, the chemical and isotopic composition of the cosmic rays at hitherto unattainable energies.” Origin of "ultra-low-energy nuclei,” which reached vicinity of earth during 1965 period of minimum solar modulation, may be supernovae, Simpson suggested. (Fermi Institute Release, 4/27/66) Simpson and J. J. O’Gallagher, also of Fermi Institute, presented results of study of solar flare particle propagation based on simultaneous observations by mariner iv space probe and Imp satellites. Evidence showed that "protons are confined by interplanetary magnetic fields to narrow channels extending outward from the sun” and "particles in these channels are carried around the sun by magnetic fields which co-rotate with the sun.” (Fermi Institute Release, 4/29/66) Paul J. Coleman, Jr., of ucla, presented results of "a recently completed statistical analysis of records of the magnetic field and plasma velocity, obtained in late 1962 with instruments aboard the spacecraft mariner ii,” including "experimental evidence that [hydromagnetic] waves do exist in interplanetary space.” Discussing properties of solar wind, Coleman said mariner ii’s measurements had indicated average temperature of positive ions in plasma was about 200,000°K. He,noted that its high temperature and low density "suggest that the plasma is completely ionized.” (aps Release, 4/26/66) Discussing importance of their NASA-sponsored stellar wind study, S. H. Lam of Princeton Univ. and G. Sandri of Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, Inc., said: "The cosmic radiation that reached the Earth, or any satellite that has been sent into space by man, has been attenuated, or as the specialists say 'modulated,’ by the solar wind. Therefore, we cannot measure directly the constitution of the cosmic radiation as it exists in interstellar space unaffected by the solar wind. Yet, to be able to understand the origin of the cosmic radiation, we must know its true constitution in interstellar space. A proper understanding of the solar wind will greatly facilitate this difficult task.” Lam and Sandri presented electrostatic model for stellar winds at APS meeting, (aps Release, 4/29/66) Discovery of first celestial body, "Cygnus GR-1,” identifiable as a "point source of high energy gamma radiation,” was announced to aps by Univ. of Rochester physicists J. G. M. Duthie, Roland W. Cobb, and Joseph Stewart. Discovery of source, which coincided with a region already identified as an x-ray source known as "Cygnus XR-1,” climaxed five years of research sponsored by NASA and nsf. (Univ. of Rochester Release, 4/29/66) Describing the Alfven Propulsion Engine (Ape) in a paper on hydromagnetic propulsion and drag in space vehicles, M. A. Ruderman, New York Univ., said: "A source of electrical power (nuclear, or solar panels) sufficient to power one hundred common light bulbs could raise the altitude of a 5-ton satellite about 100 miles in a week of operation. By allowing the motor to act as a generator the orbital energy of this same satellite can be converted into electrical energy, contributing sufficient drag to lower the satellite altitude by almost 15 miles per day.” (aps Release, 4/26/66) Cal Tech physicist H. Victor Neher described latitude survey of cosmic rays: "Once we satisfied ourselves that instruments sent by balloons up to altitudes of 140,000 feet, near the earth’s magnetic poles, gave answers directly comparable to those found by Mariners II and IV, it became less important to depend on spacecraft for our data. This was good news because we have a flexibility and control of balloon flights that are not possible with spacecraft.” (aps Release, 4/28/66)
ComSatCorp denied ITT World Communications, Inc.’s accusation of "unjustly and unreasonably” discriminating against ITT in quoting charges to Defense Communications Agency (dca) for 30 satellite circuits between Hawaii and Japan, the Philippines and Thailand: "The rate quoted to the dca for each of the... circuits is, in fact, higher than the rate quoted to the carriers, as it takes into account the additional service costs by Comsat to carry out a responsibility to provide end-to-end service to dca. . . . itt Worldcom may have been confused by advance knowledge as to the Corporation’s planned tariff for satellite channels to be furnished to authorized common carriers, in which the $48,000 charge to the carriers would be revised downward to $45,000 [and] erroneously assumed that this lower charge, which would apply only to authorized common carriers, had been quoted by Comsat to the dca.” (ComSatCorp Release)
Nationalist China would build $10-million ground communications station by early 1969 to participate in Intelsat’s planned worldwide satellite communications system, Reuters reported. (Reuters, NYT, 12/25/66, 40)
nimbus ii meteorological satellite was reported "working beautifully” by gsfc. Among the thousands of photographs transmitted were those of the Gemini IX recovery area. The 912-lb. spacecraft had been launched May 15. (upi, NYT, 5/17/66, 77)
Plan for 500-mph, 80-passenger Vtol air-bus service, developed by mit’s Flight Transportation Laboratory to ease transportation congestion on the East Coast in the 1970’s, was announced By the Commerce Dept. (dpi, NYT, 10/18/66, 76) During week of October 17: House Committee on Government Operations, in report based on August hearings by Subcommittee on Military Operations, urged a ten- to twenty-fold expansion of DOD’s initial comsat system by increasing number and improving performance of both satellites and ground terminals. "Neither the Communications Satellite Corporation nor the other commercial carriers need fear they will lose the Defense Department as a good customer” as a result of this expansion, the report said. (Av. Wk., 10/24/66, 29)
NASA’s Blossom Point, Md., tracking station, prototype station for Project Vanguard, was closed "because of technical progress in space communications.” Blossom Point Station, which had tracked every unmanned earth-orbiting NASA satellite since explorer i was launched Jan. 31, 1958, would become part of stadan Network Test and Training Facility at gsfc. Facility, to be operational by Jan. 1, 1967, would test equipment, modes, and procedures and train personnel for stadan stations, (nasa Release 66-117)
U.K.’s Associated Electrical Industries, Ltd., General Electric Co., Ltd., and Plessey Co., Ltd., had joined forces to sell ground terminals at $4 million each to countries that wanted to pick up and relay telephone, telegraph, and television signals from communications satellites, reported Clyde H. Farnsworth in the New York Times. The British companies believed there would be market for about 30 terminals in the next two to three years and about 70 to 80 in the next ten years, and said that at least seven nations were already interested in purchasing terminals. (Farnsworth, NYT, 4/1/66, 57)
U.S. Committee on Extension to the Standard Atmosphere (coesa) announced plans to publish new volume, U.S. Standard Atmosphere Supplements, 1966, which would tabulate and detail properties of earth’s atmosphere at all altitudes up to 600 mi.—information necessary to investigate atmosphere’s effect on aerospace vehicle operation and design. Sponsored by NASA, essa, and usaf Cambridge Research Lab., publication would be based on data gathered through tracking of artificial earth satellites and instrumented rockets and satellites, (nasa Release 66-72)
usn "Southern Cross” program, attempt to convert fleet communications to secure, long-range over-the-horizon communications using techniques such as satellite relay or troposcatter, was undergoing reevaluation because of competitive pressure for funds for Vietnam war, Aviation Week reported. "Southern Cross” was sponsored by usn Bureau of Ships and administered by Naval Electronics Laboratory. (.Av. Wk„ 1/10/66, 36)
Reported that the European Space Research Organization (esro), which met in Paris Nov. 24-26, had agreed that the TD-2 satellite, scheduled for launch in 1969 by Douglas Thor-Delta booster purchased from NASA, would carry nine solar-ionospheric experiments: (1) topside counter to measure radio waves; (2) solar Lyman-alpha radiation experiment; (3) a far ultraviolet spectroheliograph experiment; (4) x-ray crystal spectrometer; (5) solar particle flux experiments; measurements of (6) low energy electron fluxes; (7) energy and particle distribution of charged ionospheric particles; (8) oxygen and nitrogen light emissions; and (9) neutral ionospheric constituents. The 880-lb. satellite would he launched' into near-polar orbit with 620-mi. apogee and 218-mi. perigee, esro planned to launch TD-1 stellar astronomy satellite in 1968. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 33)
usaf would make electronic portraits of satellite shapes to develop catalog of radar images of possible space vehicle shapes, AFSC announced. Measurements on some 24 satellite models would be taken by afsc Electronic Systems Div. at Holloman afb in 2,000 hrs. of tests extending through December, (afsc Release 156.66)
Radio Corp. of America was being awarded a $4,450,000 usaf definitive contract to supersede previously awarded letter contract for production of communication and electronic components- for unspecified space satellites. Contract would be managed by asfc’s Space Systems Div. (dod Release 652-66)
NASA turned essa ii (Environmental Survey Satellite) over to essa for operation in accordance with June 30, 1964, agreement between NASA and Dept, of Commerce. NASA had supervised design and construction of the satellite, conducted launch operations (Feb. 28), and tracked spacecraft after orbit was achieved; Dept, of Commerce had handled mangement and funding, (nasa Release 66-62)
International conference on outer space to mark 10th anniversary of first artificial satellite (1967) was proposed by U.S.S.R. Academician A. A. Blagonravov to working group of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. European site was suggested for conference, which "would provide information for peoples in all countries and training for the developing countries.” (Rossi, CSM, 1/26/66)
Series of small balloons was launched from Christchurch, New Zealand, in joint U.S.-New Zealand pilot project to examine feasibility of Global Horizontal Sounding Technique (Ghost)—plan for using satellite to locate and read out information from large number of balloons floating around earth at constant altitudes. Balloons, circling hemisphere at 20,000-ft., 40,000-ft., and 80,000-ft. altitudes, would be tracked by six stations equipped with high-frequency receivers, stop watches, and sun tables. Program would determine whether small superpressure balloons could fly for extended periods; test temperature, humidity, pressure, and radiation sensors which might be used in operational Ghost system; learn whether balloons would cluster in certain areas; and acquire data on planetary circulation in Southern Hemisphere at various altitudes. Called Southern Hemisphere balloon experiment, project was sponsored by essa and nsf and had the endorsement of U.N. World Meteorological Organization. Data would be analyzed by National Center for Atmospheric Research and Information and shared with all participants and interested nations, (essa Release 66-17)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos cxi unmanned satellite with scientific equipment to continue space investigations, Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 226 km. (140 mi.); perigee, 191 km. (119 mi.); period, 88.6 min.; inclination, 51°. (Tass, 3/1/66)
Satellite to be launched by U.S.S.R. in near future would carry French instrumentation, French Minister of Research Alain Peyrefitte announced in Caen. France and U.S.S.R. had signed an agreement for joint scientific cooperation June 30. (Reuters, NYT, 11/13/66, 45)
ComSatCorp had negotiated $441,412 contract—largest ever negotiated by ComSatCorp with a foreign country—with Nippon Electric Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, for multiplex subsystem equipment for earth stations at Oahu, Hawaii, and Brewster Flat, Wash., which would be completed by 1967. System would modulate signals received from communications carriers for transmission over satellite links, demodulate signals received from satellite for relay to land distribution systems, and provide continuous monitoring for quality of all signals being passed through the system. (ComSatCorp Release)
RCA received $2,500,000 fixed-price usn contract for fabrication, testing, and delivery of six navigation satellites, (dod Release 933-66)
NASA had selected Fairchild Hiller, General Electric Co., and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for negotiation of contracts totaling $450,000 for parallel six-month feasibility studies of missions for five possible second-generation Applications Technology Satellites (Ats). Spacecraft would contribute information useful for orbiting data-relay satellites, deep-space tracking, navigation satellites, data collection, galactic probes, and communication with aircraft, other satellites, ships and ground vehicles, and broadcast satellites. (NASA Release 66-45)
Luna x was continuing in circumlunar orbit with 1,017-km. (632mi.) apolune, 350-km. (217-mi.) perilune, 2-hr. 58-min. period, and 71° inclination, Tass reported. Eighteen radio communications had been held with the satellite "during which a large volume of scientific data had been received.” Scientific equipment onboard included: (1) recorder of meteoric particles for investigating meteor showers along earth-moon route, for seeking dust cloud around the moon, and for registering the micrometeorites in circumlunar space; (2) gamma-spectrometer for studying the gamma-radiation of the lunar surface; (3) magnetometer for refining the value for the strength of the moon’s magnetic field; (4) equipment for studying solar plasma in circumlunar space; (5) equipment for recording the infrared radiation of the lunar surface; and (6) instrumentation for studying the radiation conditions in the moon’s environs. Variations in the satellite’s orbital parameters would be used to investigate the moon’s gravitational field. (Tass, Pravda, 4/6/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
gsfc awarded Hughes Aircraft Co. a $4.275-million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for reconfiguration of three gravity-gradient Applications Technology Satellites scheduled for launch in 1967 and 1968. (nasa Release 66-299)
Photos and temperature data gathered by satellites could be used to study ice movements on Canada’s lakes and rivers, G. P. Williams, Canadian National Research Council, suggested to Canadian Press. Williams said predictions of the formation and breakup of ice would be valuable to forestry workers who used the waters to float logs, and aviators who landed on northern lakes. (Can. Press, NYT, 11/13/66, 46)
NASA’s ats i satellite took first U.S. high-quality photos of the earth from synchronous orbit altitudes. Photos showed changing cloud-cover pattern over 40 per cent of the earth’s surface, (nasa Proj. Off.)
U.S.S.R. had constructed two stations in the United Arab Republic and Mali to photograph artificial earth satellites, Tass reported. Stations had been equipped by U.S.S.R. and were being operated by Soviet, U.A.R., and Mali specialists. (Reuters, NYT, 4/16/66, 13)
dod was successfully using syncom ii comsat 12 hrs. daily and syncom iii comsat 22 hrs. daily for military communications across the Pacific, Technology Week reported, dod had assumed control of both satellites —launched by NASA July 26, 1963, and Aug. 19, 1964, respectively— July 8, 1965. (Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 9)
Eighth anniversary of launching of vanguard i, second U.S. earth satellite. (nasa Historian)
Versatility of ats 1 satellite, launched by nasa from etr Dec. 6, was demonstrated in program at GSFC. In first test, satellite relayed color TV show from Goldstone, Calif., to gsfc via Rosman, N.C., ground station. In second test, voice signals transmitted from gsfc to Goldstone and beamed by dish antenna to satellite were successfully relayed to three aircraft in flight, demonstrating publicly for the first time that 50,000-mi. earth-to-space circuit could be used with existing airline radio equipment in vhf range. Concurrent with these tests, satellite transmitted high-quality photos of weather over eastern Asia, Pacific Ocean, and western U.S. It had begun relaying photos Dec. 9. nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the press ats I was "a major step forward” toward practical satellites and would have "an impact on everyone in the world.” (Clark, NYT, 12/14/66, 38; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/14/66, A4; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 12/14/66, A12)
Fourth earth-orbiting object [see Sept. 30] not identified "with any launching or country of origin” was reported by GSFC in Satellite Situation Report. Object apparently decayed Dec. 30. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/66) During December: nrc’s Space Science Board was studying possible harmful effects to astronomy and other sciences of proposed NASA project to orbit large reflecting mirror that could illuminate land masses at night, NAS announced. NASA’s support for the study was expressed by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell in a letter to Dr. Harry H. Hess, Chairman of nas Space Science Board: "I am gratified that the committee has promptly undertaken work on this task and am looking forward to their review for guidance with regard to the possible adverse effects of such a project.” (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 12/66, 7)
msfc had selected Boeing Co. and Westinghouse Electric Corp. for parallel feasibility studies of reflector satellite to provide illumination over land masses at night, Technology Week reported. Studies, which would be worth about $120,000 each for 90-day effort, would be made for nasa and dod. (msfc pao; Tech. Wk., 7/25/66, 16)
NASA was negotiating with RCA for $13-million cost-plus-award-fee renewal of previous contract to operate and maintain three data acquisition facilities. Renewal called for engineering and operations services for NASA’s unmanned Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), operation of weather satellite control centers at GSFC, and operation and maintenance of tracking stations at Rosman, N. C., and Fairbanks, Alaska, (nasa Release 66-202)
Prerecorded pictures of dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, transmitted from Soviet satellite cosmos CX launched Feb. 22, were shown on Moscow television. Announcement described the dogs as subjects of biological studies and said such studies "will precede every new and important step of man in space.” Tass said "the condition of the space dogs is quite excellent.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/27/66, uss-t Trans.; Pravda, 2/21/66, 6, uss-t Trans.)
Ford Foundation President McGeorge Bundy announced $ 10-million grant to show potential of educational television through a series of national programs. Series would be carried by Nation’s 125 noncommercial educational TV stations joined by coaxial cable and microwave relay for the demonstration. In a brief to be filed with fcc, Bundy defended Foundation’s Aug. 1 request for formation of nonprofit nationwide satellite system that would carry extensive schedule of educational programs financed by transmission of commercial programs. {NYT,, 12/12/66, 1, 95; Wash. Post, 12/12/66, Al, A4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/12/66, A3)
U.S.S.R.’s launch of two satellites was observed by leaders of eight Communist nations visiting U.S.S.R. for summit talks on Vietnam and Communist China. COSMOS cxxx, for continued space research, entered earth orbit with 340-km. (211-mi.) apogee; 211-km. (131-mi.) perigee; 89.9-min. period; and 65° inclination. Equipment was functioning normally. Fourth MOLNIYA i comsat, for "further testing of . . . long range twoway television and telephonic-telegraphic radio communication,” had orbital parameters of apogee, 39,700 km. (24,658 mi.); perigee, 485 km. (301 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 53 min.; and inclination, 64.9°. Equipment, including broadcasting system, orientation system, orbital correction devices, and power supply, was functioning normally. (Tass, 10/20/66)
Eighth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Despite predictions of a lifespan that would not exceed five years, satellite continued to orbit the earth every 103.9 min. Other orbital parameters, as of Jan. 15, were: apogee, 956.9 mi. (15,406 km.); perigee, 211.9 mi. (341 km.), (msfc Release 66-26)
ComSatCorp awarded a $60,000 study contract to France’s Centre National d’Etudes des Telecommunications for engineering analysis of a system of phased communications satellites operating in 12-hr. 30°-inclined orbits. It would include analysis of a 12-satellite or 15-satellite system, amount of coverage, orbit stability, launch conditions, types of communications, and other factors required to maintain a given quality of service over a five-year period. Work would be performed within 180 days. (ComSatCorp Release)
Inter-American Development Bank awarded Page Communications, Inc., $250,000 contract to "determine the most economic locations for ground stations in South America which would be linked to the satellite system, and the means of connection with local telecommunications systems.” Study would be carried out with ComSatCorp cooperation. (idb Release; Wash. Post, 4/16/66, C6)
Four sounding rockets—an Aerobee 150A, two Nike-Tomahawks, and a Nike-Apache—were launched by nasa from Wallops Station at predetermined intervals between 2:13 p.m. edt and 3:11 p.m. edt in conjunction with passage of explorer xxxii satellite. Objective of series was to correlate measurements of properties, characteristics, and conditions of upper atmosphere obtained by rocket-borne experiments with similar measurements made by EXPLORER xxxii, second U.S. Atmosphere Explorer, launched May 25. Project was conducted by gsfc under overall direction of ossa. (Wallops Release 66-45; NASA Rpt. srl)
cosmos cxv scientific satellite was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. "to continue space research,” Tass reported. Satellite was said to have an apogee of 294 km. (183 mi.); perigee of 190 km. (118 mi.); period, 89.3 min.; and inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 4/20/66)
In a press conference, nimbus ii project officials at GSFC said the meteorological satellite was "exceeding all expectations” with the amount and quality of data it was returning to earth. Launched into nearly circular orbit May 15, satellite could "produce in 12 hrs. as much refined weather data as took six months to get out of earlier satellites.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/20/66, A24)
First nuclear power generator in space marked fifth anniversary. Developed by aec to supplement solar power on usn’s 175-lb. experimental navigational satellite transit iv-a, 5-lb. Snap-3 generator had traveled 724,000,000 mi. (over 25,000 times around earth). transit iv-a, launched June 29, 1961, from Cape Canaveral, became oldest operating U.S. satellite in May 1964. (aec Release J-159)
Two meteorologists from U.S. National Environmental Satellite Center were in Geneva to discuss with their Soviet counterparts a cooperative approach on gathering weather information by satellite, including information exchange about meteorological satellite design and operation, Aviation Week reported. Full review of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement was scheduled for May. (Av. Wk., 3/14/66, 25)
France was planning to build rockets bigger than the missiles now being developed for her nuclear strike force, reported an article in Air et Cosmos. One purpose was to enable France to orbit a European comsat without the help of an American-built launch vehicle. A second goal would be to provide France with advanced, solid-fuel boosters that could carry one-ton thermonuclear warheads over intercontinental distances or orbit military surveillance satellites. (Air et Cosmos, 1/21/66)
Human voice was successfully relayed via DOD’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (Idcsp) from terminal in Nhatrang, South Vietnam, to Camp Roberts, Calif. U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam would probably use military system to talk to President Johnson in times of crisis. (Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, M7)
Third molniya i communications satellite, launched into elliptical orbit by U.S.S.R. April 25, transmitted television broadcast from Vladivostok. Transmission of televised May Day celebration from Moscow to Vladivostok via satellite had been scheduled for May 1. All equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 4/28/66, 4, uss-t Trans.)
Western Union International, Inc., announced receipt of dod order for 10 Pacific satellite communications channels, permitting company to file with FCC for rate reductions on all its cable and satellite service in the Pacific area. Order and rate reductions were dependent on Fee’s approving Western Union’s previously announced request to lease and operate up to 65 satellite channels in the Pacific area, (djns, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/66, A13) E.	Anderson at Institute of Navigation meeting at U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, Kings Point, N.Y. Ships could be equipped for $2,000 to automatically obtain position fixes anywhere in the world, Anderson estimated. He believed operational system could be designed and built within two years. (NYT, 10/17/66, 60)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. signed agreement with Junkers of Munich, Germany, to "provide technical consultation, perform design work . . . and provide components” for esro’s Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite (Heos)—first to be designed and developed in Germany—to investigate charged particles in space and the effects of magnetic fields on them. Overall contract for satellite, which would be launched by nasa into elliptical orbit in late 1968, was $5.5 million, with Lockheed’s services valued at $500,000. (Lockheed Release)
U.S.S.R. had orbited an atomic clock of the ammonia type in COSMOS xcvn, launched Nov. 26,1965, a brief article in Pravda disclosed. Soviet Academician N. G. Basov, explaining possible uses of an ammonia frequency standard in a satellite, said it "permits carrying on communications with space devices, control over them, and transmission of telemetric information for very great distances. In addition, there is in this case a considerable increase in the operating precision of program timer devices and systems for determining the trajectory of the satellite’s movement.” (Av. Wk., 11/21/66, 36)
cosmos cxvi scientific satellite was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. "to continue outer space research,” Tass announced. Satellite was said to have an apogee of 478 km. (297 mi.); perigee of 294 km. (183 mi.); period, 92 min.; and inclination, 48° 25 min. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/28/66, 1, uss-t Trans.)
NASA tracking station at East Grand Forks, Minn., ceased operation after five years of space tracking. Advances in tracking technology and orbit determination had made site no longer essential for support of scientific satellites; some equipment would be sent to other stations, (nasa Release 66-117)
Validity of satellite measurements of micrometeoroid fluxes in which piezoelectric microphones had been used as detectors was challenged in Science by Carl Nilsson, Australian scientist working at Gsfc. Although these measurements had given rise to theory that earth was surrounded by dust cloud, analysis of 100 hrs. of data from NASA’s ogo II satellite revealed: (1) there had been no detectable signals from sensors that could have been caused by micrometeoroid impact; and (2) the microphone systems had been emitting noise. Nilsson concluded that in past satellite measurements, microphone noises had not been caused by micrometeoroid impact but by reaction of microphone crystals to temperature changes. (Nilsson, Science, 10/9/66, 1242-6)
tiros vii meteorological satellite had operated successfully in orbit three years, traveled more than 445,000,000 mi., and had taken 123,000 pictures of cloud formations, storms, hurricanes, and typhoons with two wide-angle vidicon TV cameras. Orbited from AMR (now etr) June 19, 1963, it tracked major hurricanes and provided information aiding Ranger, Mariner, and Gemini missions. (AP, Balt. Sun, 6/19/66
New "self-healing” solar cell believed at least 50 times more radiation resistant than conventional power supply cells had been developed by rca for gsfc. Unlike previous cells which were made of silicon and protected by transparent shields of quartz or sapphire, new cells contained small lithium additive which sealed gaps produced by bombardment of high-energy radioactive particles and reduced weight of shielding by up to 90%. gsfc physicist Milton Schach described the new cell as a "major accomplishment” and predicted its use would permit flights of over 1,000 days through center of Van Allen radiation belts. Applications were also foreseen for communications satellites, high-altitude military reconnaissance spacecraft, and missions to Jupiter, surrounded by high-energy electron radiation belt. (Wilford, NYT, 8/7/66, 40)
ComSatCorp confirmed it was developing a plan which would have all commercial users of a domestic satellite communications system— telephone and telegraph companies as well as commercial television networks—underwrite educational TV. Funds would come from a portion of anticipated savings to communications users after a domestic satellite system was established. Details of plan would be submitted to Carnegie Commission on Educational Television—a private group making study on needs of educational TV. Carnegie study—to be released in late 1966 or early 1967—was expected to be relied on when Congress considered renewal of Educational Facilities Act—due to expire in 1967-—which concerned educational TV. (WSJ, 8/30/66, 10; AP, Wash. Post, 8/30/66, D8)
nasa had extended operational lifetimes of its three Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites 12 additional months because of their successful operation. Satellites would continue to provide meteoroid data, but researchers would concentrate on studying durability of spacecraft systems and components, pegasus I was launched Feb. 16, 1965; pegasus ii, May 27, 1965; and pegasus ill, July 30, 1965. All had been scheduled to operate 18 mos. (msfc Release 66-264)
First program to provide pilots with current satellite photos adapted for their use in flight planning began at Kennedy International Airport under essa direction. Photos transmitted by essa ii and ill and nimbus ii were composited by computer into a single picture showing cloud patterns over eastern North America and the North Atlantic and analyzed by meteorologists, (essa Release)
Ufo was sighted by hundreds of people in Ohio and Pennsylvania, including two deputy sheriffs who followed it for 85 mi. usaf later attributed sightings to combination of a satellite and the planet Venus, (upi, NYT, 4/18/66, 4; Wash. Post, 4/18/66, A7; upi, NYT, 4/24/66, 95; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/23/66, A2)
ComSatCorp, on behalf of Intelsat—the international telecommunications satellite consortium—issued requests for proposals (rfp’s) for 210-lb. synchronous satellite capable of providing "airplane-to-ground-to-airplane” communications with two-way channels. Satellite would supplement high-density North Atlantic communications and "permit orderly expansion of the aeronautical service on a global basis.” (ComSatCorp Release)
At dedication of Sherman Fairchild Technology Center, Germantown, Md., plans to use Nimbus B meteorological satellite—scheduled for launch late in 1966—in elephant-tracking experiment were revealed in speech prepared for delivery by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and read in his absence by msfc pao Director, Bart J. Slattery, Jr. Satellite would home in on 25-lb. portable transponder strapped to back of an elephant. Experiment would test use of satellites to monitor wildlife, learn more about animal migration, and develop means of protecting species threatened with extinction. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/18/66, A14; Wash. Post, 10/18/66; Balt. Sun, 10/18/66)
Control of essa in meteorological satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 3 from wtr, was turned over to essa. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Columbia Univ. oceanographic research ship Vema was fixing position off the coast of Iceland by means of three usn Transit navigational satellites. This marked first civilian use of space navigation systems for oceanographic research. Primary function of satellites, launched in July 1964, was to help guide usn ships and Polaris submarines. (Wilford, NYT, 9/26/66, 41)
Proposal to produce first worldwide live telecast in June 1967 was outlined at Geneva meeting of European Broadcasting Union. ABC, CBS, and nbc news executives expressed interest in proposal but would not commit themselves until details of program, under supervision of British Broadcasting Corp., were resolved. Live television transmission around the world would be possible after ComSatCorp’s planned launching of two communications satellites in fall 1966—one over the Atlantic, the other over the Pacific. (Adams, NYT, 9/7/66)
Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div., speaking at the Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, summarized the history and development of electricity in space exploration and predicted it would play an increasingly important role in the future of the space program: "It is important to remember that the program of space exploration is still young and there is still a vast sea and many space objectives to explore and to learn about. The highest power levels used in space so far have been only a few kilowatts.. . .” Orbital research laboratories, lunar bases, broadcast satellites, and interplanetary spacecraft, he said, would require increasing levels of electric power. (Text)
In reply to March 2 invitation by fcc to submit comments on whether or not private entities should be allowed to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use, 18 organizations filed responses. Ford Foundation proposed that consideration be given to formation of a nonprofit nationwide television system—operating under Broadcasters Nonprofit Satellite Service (bns)—which would carry an extensive schedule of educational programs financed by transmission of commercial TV programs. Foundation contended fcc had power to authorize such a satellite system and that the act creating ComSatCorp had anticipated additional systems to meet unique national needs. ComSatCorp filed brief saying there was no legal basis for authorizing private organizations to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use and that it would be in the public interest to assign ComSatCorp a monopoly on all such systems. Opinion was accompanied by full technical proposal for multi-use, high-capacity, four-satellite system for domestic distribution of TV, voice, and data signals that would be operational by 1970 at estimated cost of between $110 and $126 million. at&t argued it would be against "expressed national policy” to authorize satellite systems outside the framework of commercial communications carriers and urged fcc "to conclude in this finding that there can be no authorization of private satellite systems.” Carnegie Commission on Educational Television said it was encouraging a study of a comsat system that would be specifically designed for noncommercial television. While conceding that national satellites might be advantageous in some cases, Carnegie Commission warned that such a system presented problems of "educational monopoly and centralized control of instructional and other material.” fcc was requested to take no definitive action until Carnegie’s forthcoming report on educational television was published in late 1966 or early i967. Briefs of broadcasting industry cited urgency for domestic satellite service to cut costs of distributing television and radio programs. This cost reduction for the three networks—cbs, abc, and nbc—was estimated at approximately $50 million a year, nbc said a determination as to how this satellite service should be obtained could not be made in the abstract but "would depend on ... a comparison of the respective merits of specific proposals.” National Assn, of Manufacturers told fcc that manufacturing community should have full freedom of choice either to lease channels from ComSatCorp directly or establish private systems. (CR, 8/2/66, 17131-3; Gould, NYT, 8/2/66, 1, 18; Av. Wk„ 8/8/66, 27-8)
Skin from three Soviet researchers had been orbited in special sterilized bottles onboard lambda satellite Aug. 19, 1960, and successfully grafted back three days later to test effects of space travel, Trud reported. Experiment had convinced Soviet scientists that human organisms would not be dangerously affected by cosmic rays. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/15/66, El) First of three spacecraft in NASA’s Biosatellite program, 936.5-lb. biosatellite I carried 13 biological experiments to study physiological effects of weightlessness at three different levels: (1) growth and form of entire plants and animals; (2) structure and growth of cells and tissues; and (3) basic biochemistry of the cell. Mission also studied effects of radiation on organisms in weightless environment. Biosatellite program was managed by arc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-312; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, A3; AP, NYT, 12/18/66, 86; upi, NYT, 12/19/66, 66)
Tass reported that detailed chart of earth’s magnetic field which would enable cosmonauts to determine radiation conditions in earth’s environs had been compiled by scientists using data from Cosmos satellites. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/25/66, A3)
President Johnson announced U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached agreement on space law treaty under consideration by U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space since May 7. Calling agreement "the most important arms control development since the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963,” the President said he would seek fast Senate approval so U.S. would be first nation to ratify it. Primary provisions: (1) moon and other celestial bodies should be free for exploration, use, and scientific research to all countries and international organizations exclusively for peaceful purposes; (2) no country should be permitted a claim of sovereignty or appropriation; (3) no country should be permitted to place weapons of mass destruction, establish military bases, or conduct military activities on moon and celestial bodies; (4) all outer space activities would be subject to international law and should be reported to U.N. Secretary General; (5) cooperative efforts should be made to avoid harmful contamination, conduct scientific research, and assist all astronauts in need of aid; and (6) all stations, installations, and space vehicles on moon and other celestial bodies should be open to other countries on reciprocity basis. Use of icbm’s, reconnaissance satellites, and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) were not affected. Treaty would be considered by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19. (Frankel, NYT, 12/9/66, 1,18C; Gwertzman, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/66, Al; Pres. Doc., 12/12/66, 1781-2; Roberts, Wash. Post, 12/9/66, Al, A8, A10; NYT, 12/20/66, 6)
Reliable sources said France would build her own "Saros” comsat system to avoid U.S. domination in the field, upi reported. Decision stemmed from realization that if France did not act soon, the Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde would have to be flight-controlled by U.S. satellite when it entered service within the next decade, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/6/66)
Small semi-pressure weather balloon designed to drift indefinitely entered its fourth orbit of the earth, establishing world’s record for flight duration, reported Walter Sullivan in the New York Times. Balloon was one of a series launched March 30 from Christchurch, New Zealand, as part of Southern Hemisphere experiment to examine feasibility of Global Horizontal Sounding Technique (Ghost). Ghost—plan to use satellites to locate and read out information from approximately 10,000 balloons floating around earth at constant altitudes—would express state of entire earth’s atmosphere in numbers which would then be processed by computer to achieve reliable forecasts for two weeks ahead. Participants in Ghost project were National Center of Atmospheric Research, essa, and New Zealand Weather Service. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/5/66, 16)
nimbus ii meteorological satellite, launched by nasa May 15, completed primary test objective of two months (800 orbits) continuous operation; all subsystems were operating according to plan. The 912-lb., lO-ft.-tall satellite had traveled more than 20 million mi., taken more than 150,000 pictures, and received more than 23,000 commands from ground controllers. nimbus ii was now being readied for extensive infrared photo coverage of hurricane breeding areas in Atlantic Ocean, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-187; Marshall Star, 7/27/66, 3)
