U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CLXIV. Orbital parameters: apogee, 320 km (199 mi); perigee, 202 km (126 mi) ; period, 89.5 min; and inclination, 65.7°. Satellite reentered June 14. (AP, NYT, 6/9/67,3; gsfc SSR, 6/15/67)
Development of an advanced direct sensing system for the Nimbus-D Meteorological Satellite, scheduled for launching in 1970, was subject of NASA contract awarded to Radiation Inc., Melbourne, Fla. Interrogation Recording and Location System (irls) would involve development of a satellite-borne device and remote platform electronics to obtain measurements of atmospheric and other data from fixed and free floating sensory platforms, including balloons and buoys. Work would be performed under the direction of gsfc. (nasa Release 67—247)
The likelihood of aircraft collisions and ship collisions would be reduced considerably by an advanced navigation satellite, NASA’s Eugene Ehrlich, chief of NASA’s Navigation and Traffic Control program, explained. By providing accurate position fixes, a system of such satellites also could reduce the separation distances between aircraft; automatically steer ships across oceans; warn high-flying supersonic jets of radiation dangers; guide craft around bad weather; monitor airplane systems for possible trouble; and pinpoint ditched planes or ships in distress. “The navigation satellite of 1970-1980 will be an entirely different spacecraft from the presently operational navigation satellites of the United States Navy.” The Navy orbited its first Transit navigation satellite in 1960. Attention had focused on the Navy system recently when the U.S. announced that the previously classified network would be made available to America’s civilian ships. The Navy satellites orbit at 700 miles. NASA envisioned a network of evenly spaced synchronous satellites 22,300 miles above the earth. A ground craft could he in touch with as many as six of them simultaneously for extremely accurate positioning. Mr. Ehrlich said advanced satellites “will contain a position determination capability, communications service, weather relay service and scientific sensors.” He said the Maritime Administration and advanced thinkers in the shipping field had been looking to the day of the automated ship. “The satellite-derived position information would be fed directly into the ship’s computer to keep the ship on a preset path.” Mr. Ehrlich also had said that the reduction of the present widely spaced separation standards for aircraft was estimated to be capable of saving some $46.5 million annually for the North Atlantic region alone. (B Sun, 9/18/67)	_
Two- to 12-day delivery time for letters between U.S. and Vietnam could be appreciably shortened with Satellite Mail (S-Mail) system, National Environmental Satellite Center’s J. Gordon Vaeth suggested in letter to New York Times editor. S-Mail letters would be electronically scanned and converted to radio signals that would be sent by mid-Pacific comsat relay to Vietnam where they would be reconverted and reproduced on a recorder. (NYT, 3/5/67, E9)	•
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLVII into orbit with 296-km (184-mi) apogee, 202-km (126-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.3° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered May 20. (upi, NYT, 5/14/67; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Cosmos CL was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 373-km (232-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Mar. 30. (AP, NYT, 3/24/67; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
Large antennas on satellites, missiles, aircraft, and household rooftops might soon be replaced by a tiny two- or three-ounce microcircuit device called Subminiature Integrated Antenna (sia) being developed by usaf. Broad-banded sia would have several octaves of bandwidth to cover entire VHF and uhf range; allow 50-100 times as much inflow of electrical current for sharper TV pictures; replace larger antennas that sometimes revealed presence of combat troops to the enemy; and reduce weight of future air and space vehicles by 10-500 lbs. (afsc Release 40.67)
New York Times questioned Fee’s ability to investigate adequately the organization of a domestic comsat system. “The questions faced by the Federal Communications Commission and Congress ... go far beyond the obvious ones of whether Comsat’s present monopoly in the international satellite field should be extended to the new area or whether private corporations should be empowered to launch separate systems for television or press transmission. . . . “Perhaps the most worrisome aspect of the tangle ... is the incapacity of the F.c.c. to grapple with such problems in total terms. . . . [It] has neither the research staff nor the funds to discharge its planning responsibilities with anything approaching adequacy. The country must now look to it for decisions it is ill-equipped to give on the organization of a new satellite system and on the future of noncommercial TV.” {NYT, 1/8/67, 12E)
ITT had signed contract “involving several million dollars” with Indonesian Government to build Indonesia’s first satellite communications earth station near Djakarta. Project was subject to obtaining financing under investment guarantees requested from Agency for International Development (aid), itt predicted that station would be operational within 16 mos. after finances were arranged, (djns, W Star, 6/13/67, A21)
usaf had awarded letter contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to begin Program 612, a new reconnaissance satellite system, Aerospace Technology reported. It was estimated that program would cost $350 million. (Aero Tech, 8/28/67,3)
ComSatCorp Chairman James McCormack, welcoming President Johnson’s message to Congress on communications policy, offered full cooperation “in forwarding the President’s objective of bringing high quality, dependable satellite communications to users throughout the world.” He reaffirmed support of a “global system, and the continuation and expansion of [Intelsat] as the foundation on which to build a permanent structure for this system.” (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp awarded two four-month study contracts-—one to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. for $272,000 and one to Hughes Aircraft Co. for $299,484—for research on advanced high-capacity synchronous satellites. Lockheed had proposed an inertia-wheel stabilization concept and Hughes a spin-stabilized approach for stabilizing a spacecraft in synchronous orbit. ComSatCorp had advised fcc Jan. 19 of plans to award contracts. (ComSatCorp Release)
U.S. scientists, during the next decade, would gain enough experience with meteorological satellites, sensors, and surface station networks, to complete global network for gathering and forecasting weather data, Space/ Aeronautics reported. This would require a real marriage of “the potential of the meteorological satellite and the computer. . . .” (S/A, 10/67, 76)	_	.	<
Compania Telefonica Nacionale de Espana (ctne), Spanish national telephone company, had completed 86.7-million communications satellite ground station at Buitrago (45 mi from Madrid) and would increase its capacity from 36 to 156 channels by 1972. Station had remote-control 82-ft parabolic antenna with klystron amplifier and two 10-kw transmitters to operate in 6,000-megahertz (mhz) band. Station could handle TV relays and could track satellites. (Interavia, 11/21/67, 3)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXXXVIII into earth orbit with 293-km (182-mi) apogee; 193-km (119-mi) perigee; 89.2-min period; and 65° inclination. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Jan. 27. {SBD, 1/20/67, 98; gsfc SSR, 1/31/67)
Explorer XXXII (Atmosphere Explorer B) aeronomy satellite, launched
Nearly 100,000 mourners filed past the bier of Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov in Moscow. Premier Aleksey Kosygin and President Nikolay V. Podgomy briefly joined an honor guard of soldiers near the bier. (Anderson, NYT, 4/26/67, 3; upi, W Post, 4/26/67, A16) April 26: Italy’s San Marco II (San Marco B) scientific satellite was successfully launched from Mobile Launcher in the Indian Ocean off coast of Kenya, Africa. Four-stage NASA Scout launch vehicle boosted satellite
NASA turned on the last of 11 experiments onboard Explorer XXXIV satellite, launched from wtr May 24. Data from experiments, designed to measure solar and galactic rays, were being transmitted, and equipment continued to operate satisfactorily, (nasa Release 67-144)
Cosmos CLXVII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 286-km (178-mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite reentered June 25. (SBD, 6/20/ 67, 280; gsfc SSR, 6/30/67)
Advanced Defense Satellite Communications Project (adscp) currently being revised by dod was expected to reach capacity of 100-200 voice grade circuits, according to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Aviation Week reported. In letter to Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) McNamara said that capacity expansion was being made in accordance with recommendations by House Government Operations Committee’s Subcommittee on Military Operations. (Committee Off.; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 12)
In its fourth year of full operation ESRO was entering a more expensive and ambitious phase and consequently was encountering financial, political, and organizational difficulties, John Walsh reported in Science. esro was currently appraising its eight-year program and seeking ways to coordinate its activities with ELDO, European Conference on Communications Satellites (gets), and new European Space Conference. According to 1962 convention which became effective in 1964, esro was to have launched 300 sounding rockets and 10-12 satellites within eight years under $300-million budget. Although esro council was empowered to adjust budget authorization in response to major scientific and technical developments, it lacked unanimity necessary for change. As a result, Walsh noted, scheduled number of satellites—including $170-million Large Astronomical Satellite (las)—would probably not be launched. Expenditures for buildings and equipment for esro’s new four-station satellite tracking, telemetry, and telecommand network, and its five main research installations had been particularly heavy. European Space Technology Center (estec), for example, responsible for applied research and payload development, had a 456-man staff—nearly half of total esro staff—which was expected to reach 1,000 by the end of 1967.	In addition to financial problems caused by expansion, Walsh said, esro had to overcome a sensitivity to what national aerospace industries would get back in relation to national contributions, differences over selection of projects, and lack of unity and coordinated effort. Differences of opinion between larger countries such as U.K., Germany, and France, which contributed 23.13%, 24.31%, and 20.17%, respectively, to esro budget, and smaller countries such as Denmark, which contributed 2.15%, had to be resolved before a real sense of purpose could be acquired, Walsh said, “esro until now has been primarily an agency providing technical services and support for university scientists who prepare actual experiments. As experiments grow more complex, more work will be done in esro labs and by industry,” and new dimensions would be added to its tasks. (Walsh, Science, 10/13/67, 242-4)
NASA selected RCA to negotiate $38-million contract to maintain and operate portions of the Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (ST ad an) at Rosman, N.C., and Fairbanks, Alaska, stadan sites, and at gsfc control centers for individual spacecraft. Effective Oct. 1 for three-year period with NASA options for two one-year extensions, contract covered actual cost-plus-incentive award based on performance, (nasa Release 67—142)
U.S. and Australia were engaged in a joint program to build a highly technical installation in the Australian desert to intercept information transmitted by Soviet reconnaissance satellites, UPl reported. On Aug. 11, DOD statement said only that U.S. was “cooperating with the Australian government in a space defense research project.” U.S. officials admitted privately, however, that project was a “ferret” installation to detect radar, electromagnetic radiation, and other electronic impulses emanating from Soviet satellites, (upi, W Star, 8/12/67)
The possibility of using communications satellites to help expedite bordercrossing formalities on international flights was considered by Air Transport Assn.’s Facilitation Committee meeting in Ponce, Puerto Rico. It was suggested that computers, working with numerical codes and aided by comsats, could file necessary papers on an aircraft’s cargo and passengers from point of departure, thereby facilitating clearances on arrival in the U.S. (NYT, 3/15/67,78M)
nasa selected Bendix Field Engineering Co. for negotiations on 121million contract to provide maintenance and operations services at two U.S. and four foreign Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan) sites, and at nasa Communications Center and Network Test and Training Facility, both at GSFC. Effective Oct. 1 for three-year period with nasa options for two one-year extensions, contract covered actual cost-plus-incentive award based on performance. It completed maintenance and operations arrangements for stadan. (nasa Release 67-148)
Cosmos CLX111 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 593-km (368-mi) apogee, 255-km (158-mi) perigee, 93.1-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Instruments performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Oct. 11.	(upi, NYT, 6/6/67,3; gsfc SSR, 10/15/67)
Seven communications companies signed agreement for joint ownership of three existing ComSatCorp-owned earth stations and three new high-capacity stations for expanded international commercial satellite communications. The companies: ComSatCorp; at&t; Hawaiian Telephone Co., itt World Communications, Inc.; ITT Cable and Radio, Inc.-Puerto Rico; rca Communications, Inc.; and Western Union International, Inc. Agreement established a policy-making committee composed of company representatives, provided for sharing of operating costs and capital, and described ComSatCorp’s role as manager. It was filed with FCC in accordance with Dec. 7, 1966, order for joint ownership. (ComSatCorp Release)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXLVII into orbit with 317-km (197-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 21 (upi, NYT, 3/14/67,3; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
President Johnson transmitted his annual Report to the Congress on United States Aeronautics and Space Activities. He wrote in covering letter: “America’s space and aeronautics programs made brilliant progress in 1966. We developed our equipment and refined our knowledge to bring travel and exploration beyond earth’s atmosphere measurably closer. And we played a major part in preparing for the peaceful use of outer space. . . .” The President cited accomplishments of nasa’s Gemini, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor programs and noted that during 1966 U.S. had put into earth orbit or escape missions 100 spacecraft—“a record number of successful launches for the period. We launched weather satellites, communications satellites and orbiting observatories. . . . “These accomplishments—and the promise of more to come—are the fruits of the greatest concerted effort ever undertaken by any nation to advance human knowledge and activity. Space, so recently a mystery, now affects and benefits the lives of all Americans. . . In separate chapter, National Aeronautics and Space Council (nasc) said that although U.S. continued to lead space technology competition in number and variety of successful missions, “USSR maintains its lead in weight of payloads orbited. . . . Certainly the hiatus in Soviet manned space activity during 1966 is no basis for complacency on our part as their preparations for future flights appear to be ambitious and the resources being devoted to space competence and performance are absolutely and relatively impressive.” Dept, of State said it was pleased to be able to forward Surveyor I and Lunar Orbiter I photos to missions abroad for appraisal by foreign scientists. It also said foreign reaction to receiving cloud-cover photos from U.S. satellites in Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) system had been “encouraging.” (Text)
Milwaukee Journal editorial on space law treaty signed Jan. 27: “What’s left unsaid in the new space treaty may be as important to world peace as what the treaty says. The treaty . . . prohibits stationing nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction in space ... [but] -makes no reference to use of spacecraft for military reconnaissance. “Spy satellites already in orbit can detect activity on earth in unbelieving detail. Even more sophisticated satellites are 'being developed. . . . Ground inspection, a barrier to nuclear control agreements, is therefore less important and airplane reconnaissance, which has strained Soviet-American relations, is unnecessary__ “Reconnaissance satellites orbiting above may thus reduce the chance of war below.” (MI, 3/6/67,10)
ComSatCorp’s annual report to its shareholders summarized accomplishments of 1966: “Satellite service brought a new era of communications to the Pacific area. Live transpacific television and other traffic was transmitted by the first of the intelsat n series of satellites even though the satellite did not achieve synchronous orbit as intended. A second intelsat ii satellite was successfully emplaced in synchronous orbit and began regular, 24-hour commercial service over the Pacific, handling telephone, teletype, data, facsimile and television. . . .” Report also revealed that Intelsat’s Interim Committee had selected synchronous orbit configuration for basic global system, substantially reducing the number of satellites necessary for global coverage and the complexity of earth stations. Selection was made “after high-quality capability of synchronous satellites was established by the performance of Early Bird.” (Text)
France announced plans to launch her fourth satellite from Hammaguir Range Feb. 3 to test tracking device based on the use of laser beams. (upi, WJT, 1/23/67,10; upi, P EB, 1/23/67)
Editorial comment on domestic satellite system controversy [see April 1,3]. New York Times: “The Ford Foundation and Communications Satellite Corporation are at odds about how best to set up a domestic satellite system that would carry educational television. Neither side, it appears, has all the answers. Ford is right to question Comsat’s demand to run a domestic satellite system . . . [but] Ford’s own plan for creating a new educational network is also unsatisfactory. It wants to give the job on a trial basis to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which has enough problems with its present over-ambitious objectives and should not have its energies diverted or its resources increased for anything new. Ford’s suggestion that savings in communications charges made by the commercial networks should be used to finance educational TV has an inherent disadvantage in that the amount of savings would be inadequate to do a worthwhile job. . . . These differences in approach should not be allowed to hold up development of noncommercial network. The thing to do is to choose what is best from both plans.” {NYT, 4/6/67, 36) Washington Post: “The issue is more than just a squabble over Comsat’s request. The Ford Foundation has proposed that the Nation establish more than one domestic satellite system, with one system reserved exclusively for television, both commercial and public. Comsat maintains that one system can do the entire job of communications adequately and will save large sums of money. . . . Given the complexities of the problem, and the need that it be solved, hand-in-hand with the general question of how public television is to be financed, we think Ford’s alternative is advisable. . . . nasa has the capabilities to do the job and would be involved, anyway, in putting Comsat’s satellite into orbit. This solution would leave all avenues open, for nasa is highly unlikely to become the permanent operator and could recoup its expenditures by selling the equipment and stations to the eventual operator.” (W Post, 4/6/67)
Hughes Aircraft Co. had completed negotiations with the government of Brazil on a $3.8-million contract for construction of a comsat earth station at Itaborai, near Rio de Janeiro. Brazilian Telecommunications Co. (embratel) would spend an additional $1 million or more for site preparation and buildings. Station, which would initially handle TV and 120 two-way telephone conversations via Intelsat satellites over the Atlantic, would be completed within one year. (Hughes Release; Montgomery, NYT, 12/22/67,63)
Reduced television and telephone rates between U.S. and Europe became effective when Intelsat II-C comsat entered commercial service. New rates, which covered only the leasing of channels to authorized communications common carriers operating in the Atlantic, applied to both Early Bird I and Intelsat II-C. Monthly charge for one leased voice channel was reduced from $4,200 for 16-hr daily service to $3,800 for 24-hr service. Rates for one-way black-and-white television in the Atlantic area were $1,100 for first 10 min and $30 for each additional minute per half channel. New rates for color TV reduced existing 150% of black-and-white charge to 125% of black-and-white rate. All rates were based on providing voice-grade or TV half-channel service from a U.S. earth station to an appropriate satellite and did not cover charges for communication links from satellite to an overseas earth station. (Com-SatCorp Release)
Report that Communist China would launch a “space vessel” in 1967 appeared in Red Flag, newspaper of the Red Guard of the Peking Aeronautical Institute. U.S. experts had been crediting Communist China with capability to launch a satellite since her successful guided missile nuclear weapon test Oct. 27,1966. (NYT, 1/22/67, A4)
President Johnson submitted his FY 1968 Budget Request to Congress. Total space budget recommended was $7,242 billion. Of this sum, nasa would receive $5,050 billion; dod, $1,998 billion; AEC, $151.6 million; essa, $34.8 million; U.S. Geological Survey, $4.8 million; Agricultural Research Service, $.4 million; and nsf, $2.8 million. NASA FY 1968 budget would keep Project Apollo on schedule and provide major hardware funding for several new programs: (1) $454.7 million for Apollo Applications (aa) ; (2) $71.5 million for Voyager; (3)	$68.9 million for Mariner to provide for Mariner/Mars 1971 program; (4) $2 million for five Sunblazer missions to study solar corona; (5)	$35.5 million for Applications Technology Satellite (ats) to provide new configuration with large directable antenna; and (6) $2.3 million for Voice Broadcast Satellite. Funding for aeronautics research almost doubled from $35.9 million in FY 1967 to $66.8 million with most of increase attributable to increased study of X-15 and XB-70 aircraft, hypersonic ramjet, aircraft noise reduction, delta X-15 aircraft, and sst. Programs terminated or deferred by FY 1968 budget included Jupiter probe, Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter (no follow-on funds), large solid motor project, Atlas-Agena combination, and new launch vehicle development. $b0-$100 million were placed in President’s Contingency Fund pending decision on development of Nerva nuclear propulsion system. Major portions of dod’s space budget would be spent on: (1) Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol)—$430 million; (2) Titan III—C launch vehicle; and (3) military comsats. Most of essa’s funds would support increased activity on satellite sensors'and systems in support of World Weather Watch and improved techniques for weather forecasts, river and flood prediction, and other warning services. (Text, NYT, 1/25/67, 20-23; Tech Wk, 1/30/67, 14-33; Av Wk, 1/30/67, 23-38)
RCA announced it had received $38-million NASA contract [see June 2] to maintain and operate portions of the Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan). {WSJ, 1/11/61, 3)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at colloquium on “Urban Government in the Decade Ahead,” at Fels Institute of Local and State Government, Pennsylvania Univ., discussed urban American goals and the urban society: “What can one say about the use of new scientific approaches for governing such a complex [society] ?” Referring to earth-orbiting spacecraft achieving dynamic equilibrium in their mastery of space, he asked if the “ability of the human mind” could translate this concept of dynamic equilibrium into an entirely new way of thinking. Webb stated: “Here I believe we do have something to learn from the perspective the earth satellite gives us [and] if we continue to expose this kind of overview to the largest possible number of able minds, there can be little doubt that new knowledge, new capability, new perception of worthwhile and quite specific goals will emerge.” He added: “. . . I believe that what the space frontier opened up in 1957 is the kind of frontier on which pioneers can experiment and learn to use many facets of modern technology here on earth—here in America’s cities. In urban America, as elsewhere, men need the constant development of new concepts of reality and the inspiration that comes from a chance to better know this city and this universe in which we live.” (Text)
ComSatCorp announcement summarized commercial satellite communications in operation around the world: Early Bird I (intelsat i series) launched April 6, 1965, and Atlantic II (intelsat ii series) launched March 22, 1967, linking North America and Europe; and Lani Bird II (intelsat ii series) launched Jan. 11, 1967, linking U.S. and Hawaii, Japan, and Australia. Fabrication had been started in 1966 on advanced satellites in intelsat m series that would have five times the communications capability of Early Bird I. ComSatCorp reported that these latest satellites would be launched beginning in 1968 to expand communications system to global capability. As to ground facilities, 14 earth stations were now operating in countries with more than 40 planned for by the end of 1969. (ComSatCorp Release)
President Johnson signed Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 (P.L. 90-129) which would provide new funds for broadcast facilities to give “a wider and . . . stronger voice to educational radio and TV; launch major study of TV’s use in Nation’s classrooms and potential use throughout the world; and create Corporation of Public Broadcasting to assist stations and producers who airn for the best in broadcasting good music, . . . exciting plays, and . . . reports on the whole fascinating range of human activity.” He indicated that he had asked Dr. Milton Eisenhower, Johns Hopkins Univ., and Dr. James Killian, mit, to serve as members of Corporation’s board of directors. He explained that the Corporation would get partial support from Government but “it will be carefully guarded from . . . control.” The President said: “I believe the time has come to stake another claim in the name of all the people, stake a claim based upon the combined resources of communications. I believe the time has come to enlist the computer and the satellite, as well as television and radio and to enlist them in the cause of education. So I think we must consider new ways to build a great network for knowledge—not just a broadcast system, but one that employs every means of sending and of storing information that the individual can use.” {PD, 11/13/67,1530-2)
Soviet satellites were studying solar x-ray sources in an effort to protect cosmonauts from deadly radiation storms, according to Pravda. Cosmos CLXVI (launched July 17) and Electron II (launched Jan. 30, 1964) had gathered “extensive information” about x-ray sources and had discovered that “in principle, by recording an x-ray flare, it is possible to warn cosmonauts of die approach of radiation danger . . . [and] enable spaceship crews to' take necessary protective measures.” (upi, NYT, 10/3/67, 2)
Explorer XXVII and Vanguard II had been among the 30-40 artificial satellites to be photographed on a typical night by the three-ton light-gatherer camera at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Debre Zeit tracking station in Ethiopia. Robert Citron, station manager, described the operation as an “extremely accurate way of measuring distances with the use of geodetic satellites,” in a planned program extending into 1972. Debre Zeit, functioning as hub of 12 similar stations in India, Japan, Patagonia, Sj>ain, Brazil, and South Africa, measured earth’s size and shape, gravitational pull variations, and atmospheric density changes. Planned progress would include measuring shape of world “down to 33 feet,” according to Citron. He explained: “There is a widely accepted theory that the earth’s land masses are drifting. In particular, the African continent is said to be drifting away from the Asian land masses.” By using planned measuring methods with geodetic satellites, Citron hoped to explore the truth of the theory and measure the drift should the theory be true. (Reuters, NYT, 11/7/67, 36)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXXIII into orbit with 212-km (132-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 49° inclination. Equipment and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered same day. (upi, NYT, 10/20/67,40; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
Cosmos CLXXV I was launched into orbit with 1,581-km (982-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.9° inclination. Soviet Union had successfully launched its second unmanned satellite in three days, according to Tass. (NYT, 9/14/67; gsfc SSR, 9/15/67) to get the plane in the air before the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution on Nov. 7. A visiting British aviation delegation saw the incomplete Tu-144 prototype on Sept. 12 and was told by its builders that it would fly in the first quarter of next year at the earliest. Soviet Deputy Minister of Civil Aviation, Leonid Zheludev, said “we need to test it very well, and we cannot say when it will be put into operation on civilian passenger flights.” The British-French supersonic Concorde, similar in delta-wing shape and in projected performance to the Tu-144, was scheduled to make its first flight by February 28,1968, and go into passenger service in 1971. (AP, W Star, 9/13/67; AP, W Post, 9/16/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLIII into orbit with 291-km (181-mi) apogee; 202-km (126-mi) perigee; 89.3-min period; and 64.6° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Apr. 12. {Tech Wk, 4/10/67; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
U.S. public and communications users would be deprived of “early attainable benefits” if ComSatCorp’s proposed pilot program for domestic satellite services were delayed, ComSatCorp stated. “In the end, a pilot-scale demonstration is essential, and nothing is gained by postponing for over a year the planning and building of the demonstration model,” James McCormack, ComSatCorp’s chairman said. Comments had been filed before the fcc in the pending domestic satellite case, in reply to the Ford Foundation, which had asked fcc on Sept. 18 to withhold approval of ComSatCorp’s pilot program. ComSatCorp argued that valuable experience could be gained by implementation of the pilot program, that this would supplement, not hinder, the work of the Task Force appointed recently by President Johnson to develop national telecommunications policy. Mr. McCormack had said the pilot program would provide vital experience for voice, broadcast, data, and the press in the economical utilization of high-capacity satellite and earth station facilities. (ComSatCorp Release 67-47)
Second phase of nato’s proposed comsat project (NATo/Satcom) [see July 9] was being delayed by dispute over which countries would develop satellite systems, Aviation Week reported. Several member countries reportedly opposed use of U.S.-supplied, Philco-Ford Co. Skynet satellites because it would eliminate participation by European avionics industry and give U.S. dominant role. Satcom officials were considering alternate plans in the event that agreement on original Phase II proposal could not be reached: (1) delaying satellite development until Phase III to allow sufficient time to reach agreement on the work-sharing formula; or (2) dropping satellite development from Phase II and constructing a ground station network compatible with dod’s idcsp satellites which were being used temporarily during initial . test phase. (Av Wk, 8/7/67,28)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXVIII into orbit with 310-km (193-mi) apogee, 137-km (85-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 50° inclination. Satellite, announced as part of a program of space research, reentered on same day it was launched, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67)
Cosmos CXLIII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 302km (188-mi) apogee, 204-km (127-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65° inclination. All equipment was functioning normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 7. (Tech Wk, 3/6/67, 15; gsfc SSR, 3/15/67)
First contract for purchase from NASA of launch services for a foreign satellite was signed by nasa and esro in accordance with Dec. 30, 1966, Memorandum of Understanding on reimbursable launchings. Under contract, esro would purchase a Delta launch vehicle from NASA to launch its Heos-A interplanetary physics satellite from etr in late 1968. The
AT&T’s letter respondipg to Fee inquiry on need for future communication facilities in Atlantic basin area urged construction of $70.4-million underwater communication cable to southern Europe by 1970’s end. It said completion of cable would accommodate rapid growth in transatlantic calls and provide balance between satellite and cable links [see Oct. 4]. ComSatCorp and international telegraph carriers also had received Oct. 4 fcc inquiry, (upi, NYT, 10/31/67,65)
GSFC engineers had successfully used an electric “screwdriver” to restore power to Explorer XXXIII satellite, in orbit 252,900 mi from earth, saving the spacecraft from an almost certain power blackout. Emergency repair—believed to be the most distant satellite “fix” ever accomplished—was conducted via Rosman, N.C., tracking station. Engineers turned off the spacecraft transmitter so that an increased power surge through the other electronic systems eliminated the suspected short circuit, (nasa Release 67-5)
Japanese defense specialists had expected the first Red Chinese test of an intercontinental missile by the end of this year, reported Washington Star. Before they would test a full-scale missile, Chinese would test-fire the first stage of missile. This could come at any time. However, Prof. Tetsushi Okamoto of Tokyo Institute of Technology believed that Peking regime would first launch a satellite, probably on Oct. 1. Fear of China’s progress toward a system that could deliver a nuclear bomb lay behind Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s Sept. 18 announcement that U.S. would begin production of a limited antiballistic missile system designed to guard against a Chinese attack. China’s icbm was expected to be fired from a site at Shwangchengtse, north of Chiuchuan in Lan-chow, central China. (Axelbank, W Star, 9/20/67)
Cosmos CLXXX was launched into orbit with 350-km (218-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 72.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 4. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 9/28/67, 3; gsfc SSR, 10/15/67)
First color photos of the full earth (full disc) had been taken by DOD satellite Dodge, launched July 1 and designed to use 10 extendable booms for stabilizing satellite by earth’s gravitational force. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, under contract to Navy’s Air Systems Command, used a gravity gradient stabilization method and nearsynchronous orbit to point Dodge always in right direction and to keep it within line of sight of northeastern U.S. 5 days out of every 12. Slow-scan TV systems aboard Dodge obtained TV images which were transmitted to earth station; color images were obtained by successive exposure of vidicon tube through blue, green, and red filters. The two TV cameras also observed fluctuations of satellite from vertical and studied solar pressure effect on satellite’s booms, (dod Fact Sheet)
U.S.S.R.’s intensified study of near-earth environment indicated their scientists planned long-duration manned orbital flights, reported Aviation Week. Two investigations were cited: Cosmos CLXVI, launched June 16, in near-earth radiation study for protection of future cosmonauts in orbit during high sunspot activity; and “vertical cosmic probe,” reaching altitude of 2,734 mi on study of upper atmospheric layers, ionosphere, and near-earth space. The “vertical cosmic probe,” launched Oct. 12, provided Soviets with information on electron and positive ion concentrations, general intensity of cosmic rays, and radiation doses through various types of protection during flight within radiation belts. Cosmos CLXVI satellite provided solar flare data for continuous three months. Similar to these Soviet studies were those conducted using NASA’s Oso IV (launched Oct. 18), which would monitor sun so scientists could better determine how phenomena such as radio “blackout” and weather on earth were affected by solar activity. (Av Wk, 10/23/67, 27-8; NASA Release 67-273)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXVI into orbit with 578-km (359-mi) apogee; 283-km (175-mi) perigee; 92.9-min period; and 48.4° inclination. Instruments performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Oct. 25. (upi, W News, 6/16/67; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
nasa’s Mariner IV (launched Nov. 28, 1964) and Mariner V (launched June 14) satellites drew into a unique “solar system lineup” which would enable Jpl scientists to obtain their first three-point measurements of solar plasma and space magnetism. Orbiting about 70 million mi apart on a direct line from the sun, with earth approximately in the middle, satellites were expected to remain in about the same position relative to each other until Oct. 10. Positions would enable JPL to compare the densities and velocities of solar rays simultaneously from three points in space—two satellites and earth, (jpl Release; Wilford, NYT, 8/13/67,54)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CLXXXI into orbit with 863-km (536-mi) apogee, 668-km (415-mi) perigee, 101.1-min period, and 99.16° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 18. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C comsat successfully relayed test signals over the Atlantic between ground stations at Andover, Me., and the Canary and Ascension Islands. Satellite was scheduled to enter commercial service April 6. (AP, NYT, 3/29/67, 30)
Recent experiments by usaf scientists had proved that satellites could communicate directly—unaided by relay stations—from opposite sides of earth, AFSC announced. Experiment, in which HF and VHF signals were transmitted between two satellites launched Nov. 3, 1966, confirmed theory that ionosphere resembled a “whispering gallery” in which sound waves traveled along a curved area with only minor volume loss, (afsc Release 116.67)
Fred Friendly, Columbia University professor and consultant to Ford Foundation, delivering Granada Lecture in London, warned that communications satellites’ promise of international “common market” of high-quality TV was threatened by commercial and government avarice. In U.S., he said, TV “can make so much'money doing its worst, it cannot afford to do its best.” Consequence had been that early promise of quality programs had been lost while educational TV, which could fill breach, had been “under-funded, undernourished and under-observed.” But even in nations where TV was nationalized, tendency would be for governments to seek profits from it to offset other communications deficits, he said. Thus, he argued, “a promising world village, linked by satellites,” could be turned into “an electronic slum,” because ambitious corporations and separate governments insisted on going their own ways, concerned more with earnings, national appetites, and images than with what their satellite systems carried. What was required, he suggested, was “an electronic Magna Charta” guaranteeing rights of public to quality TV. (Friendly, W Post, 10/25/67, D14)
Launch of esro’s scientific satellite Esro II from wtr was postponed from
At nasa request, nas would conduct Space Applications Summer Study at Woods Hole, Mass., during summer 1967 and 1968 to determine how orbiting satellites could best be used for practical benefits on earth. Participants would review present U.S. programs and plans for peaceful applications of earth satellites; consider and evaluate probable future uses of satellites in a variety of areas; and provide advice on nature and scope of r&d programs necessary to achieve the possibilities. The 1967 session would “provide first judgment on . . . most immediately useful applications of satellites.” The 1968 session would reach final recommendations on future satellite uses. Lehigh Univ. President W. Deming Lewis was named chairman of the Central Review Committee, which would oversee the study. Work would be conducted within nrc’s Engineering Div. with Laser Inc., vice-president Eugene T. Booth serving as study’s executive director. (nas-NRC Release)
Cosmos CXLI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 345-km (214-mi) apogee; 210-km (130-mi) perigee; 89.8-min period; and 72.9° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Feb. 16. (upi, NYT, 2/9/67; gsfc SSR, 2/28/67)
50-lb. radio backpack that could fix a soldier’s position precisely by signals from a satellite had been developed by Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory under sponsorship of usn Air Systems Command. Backpack would represent first dry land application of usn navigation satellites to military problems. In most cases, packs would be used in pairs: a forward fire controller would receive satellite signal and relay it to another soldier equipped with a backpack at an artillery base who also would have read satellite signal. Two readings would be transmitted to computer which would instantly tell each man his precise position. Navy sources predicted mass production models of backpack, working with existing satellites, could Be in combat use in Vietnam soon. (Clark, AIT, 3/22/67,16)
Examples of air, sea, and space technology “working together as partners for the better understanding of our total environment” were cited by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, in a speech to the 2nd International Buoy Technology Symposium, Marine Technology Society, Washington, D.C. The Interrogation, Recording and Location System (irls) , developed by Goddard Space Flight Center, would demonstrate the use of a satellite to locate and determine the position of sensors, receive data from the sensor, record that data on the spacecraft, and later relay the data to ground stations. Possible terrestrial sensors are meteorological stations or buoys, oceanographic buoys, gauges for measuring the strains in the earth’s crust, drifting balloons, ice islands, or any of a wide variety of data platforms located on the surface of the earth or in its atmosphere. Seamans said, “It is quite easy to conceive how such a system could begin to solve many of the problems hindering world-wide fixed or free buoy systems for the study of currents and ocean-depth profile data.” He also noted that “photographs and images returned by such satellites as Nimbus, Tiros, and Gemini are being analyzed to assess their oceanographic value.” (Text)
Informed sources said U.S.S.R. had launched Cosmos CLXX (July 31) and Cosmos CLXXI (Aug. 8) to test new parachute system designed to avoid the malfunction blamed for the death of Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. U.S.S.R. attributed the April 24 crash-landing of Soyuz I to a tangled parachute that failed to decrease spacecraft’s speed during reentry. Both satellites had gone into orbit but had reentered the same day as launched. (AP, B Sun, 8/10/67; AP, C Sun-Times, 8/11/67)
The New York Times commented on the task force appointed by President Johnson to formulate a national communications policy [see Aug. 19]: “The . . . task force . . . has an unprecedented opportunity to break internal governmental deadlocks that stand in the way of a domestic satellite system and other needed forward steps in communications. It can do much to advance public television and to give all TV, both commercial and noncommercial, a firmer root in public service. Perhaps most important of all, it can point a path for the interconnection of international satellites so that all countries can be encouraged to see and speak to one another across the heavens. ...	' “The major challenge is to clear channels through which revolutionary new developments in communications can be used with maximum effectiveness for total human service and enlightenment. The last thing that should happen is for Congress to postpone action on President Johnson’s proposal for a Corporation of Public Broadcasting. Such a planning body should be in existence to move speedily on any sound recommendations the task force makes.” {NYT, 8/23/61,40M)
ComSatCorp would issue rfp’s in 1968 to build a 10,000-channel satellite— Intelsat IV, Electronics reported. Procurement of four or more of the satellites would have to be approved by INTELSAT, but “chances of a go-ahead look good.” ComSatCorp’s plan was based on design studies recently completed by Hughes Aircraft Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for a high-capacity, multipurpose satellite [see March 23], (Electronics, 8/21/67)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR on Scout launch vehicle. (Pres Rep 1967)
Photo of the earth in the near full phase transmitted by Lunar Orbiter V [see Aug. 5-27] was a “fraud, a fake, a piece of trickery or deceit,” Samuel Shenton, Secretary of the International Flat Earth Research Society, told newsmen in London. “Look at the photograph the satellite supposedly took. Notice those lines across the bottom of the picture. They show it’s a composite, a mock-up.” Asked why U.S. should seek to perpetrate such a deception, Shenton replied: “It’s all part of the great global earth conspiracy, and it’s a shame.” Members of the International Flat Earth Research Society believed that the earth is not only flat, but static in space. They also maintained that the theory of gravity was advanced only to support the belief that the earth spins. (AP, B Sun, 8/18/67)
U.S. bombers were being guided to targets in North Vietnam by daily meteorological photos received from Essa and Nimbus satellites, usaf announced. Detailed photos, monitored by USAf’s weather stations in Saigon and Ugon, Thailand, permitted usaf to divert aircraft to areas that were unexpectedly free from clouds. Since equipment for reception was relatively inexpensive, usaf officials speculated that North Vietnamese might also be receiving the photos and using them for defense planning. (AP, NYT, 4/14/67, 3)
Full size dynamic model of Canadian Defence Research Board’s ISIS—A— third ionosphere satellite for Canada—had successfully completed series of vibration tests at gsfc. Joint Canadian/U.S. program of International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies would include isis-b and isis-c during the 1960s as solar activity would pass through its intensity, causing a variety of changes in ionosphere and outer space. Launch of ISIS—A was planned for early 1968 [see Mar. 23], Like its predecessors (Alouettes I and II), ISIS—A would be spheroid and have 11,000 solar cells on its outer surface to power internal batteries. (S/F, 6/67, 197-8)
NASA had completed post-launch evaluation of Essa V meteorological satellite and adjudged the mission a success. Launched by NASA from WTR April 20, satellite had been turned over to essa for operation May 8. (nasa Proj Off)
Cosmos CXLV1 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 310-km (193-mi) apogee, 190-km (118-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.5° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 18. (Tech Wk, 3/20/67,13; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
NATO had begun to modernize its communications network by using comsats, Clyde H. Farnsworth reported in the New York Times. Initial $900,000 test phase of project had been inaugurated by Supreme Allied ■Commander in Europe Gen. Lyman L. Lemnitzer in a transmission from his headquarters in Casteau, Belgium, to Naples, Italy, via one of dod’s 15 Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (idcsp) satellites. U.S., which had proposed the NATO project, was permitting NATO to use the idcsp satellites temporarily. Following approval of the second phase of the project, $45 million—of which U.S. would pay 25%—would be spent to link 12 alliance countries via two 100-lb comsats owned by NATO and launched by usaf into synchronous orbits over the Atlantic. Two ground stations would be in U.S. and one in each NATO country except France (who had not been invited to participate in the project), Luxembourg, and Iceland. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/9/67, 17)
NASA’s Ats III, launched Nov. 5, now in 22,300-mi-altitude synchronous orbit, transmitted to NASA’s Rosman, N.C., ground station a color photograph of earth which officials described as excellent in quality. The photograph, processed at GSFC, showed entire earth’s disk and details of features as small as two or three miles in size. Ats III, third of a series of five satellites managed by OSSA, carried communication, meteorology, navigation, and spacecraft technology experiments. From its location over the equator at 47° west longitude, the spacecraft had a view of North and South America, part of Africa and Europe, and the southern part of Greenland icecap. Spacecraft’s multicolor spin-scan cloud camera obtained color contrast as well as brightness contrast, according to chief experimenter Wisconsin Univ.’s Dr. Verner E. Suomi. He gave this analysis of Ats Ill’s meteorological operations: “From a time series of pictures such as these the United States has, in effect, given South America a means to track their weather far beyond what they are able to do by conventional means. In one single photograph, the equatorial cloud-free band which was seen from Ats I [launched Dec. 6,1966] pictures in the Pacific is also evident in the Atlantic. These pictures are ideal for continuing studies from the heat budget and convective systems. The additional meteorological information in a color photograph is more subtle, but it is there. Low clouds tend to be bluer than high clouds. This has been possible even though adjustments to color balance on the ground are still underway. There are suggestions that the muddy outflow from the Amazon River in Brazil can be seen. We have not yet been able to determine whether or not the Gulf Stream water will be visible. Also, we do not have an example of the colors in the Terminator Zone (sunrise and sunset) to determine if cloud heights can be accurately positioned.” (nasa Release 67-286)
Variety of ion engines could be used in satellite stationkeeping and attitude control, and solar-powered ion engines for primary propulsion would be feasible for Voyager-class missions of early 1970s, Space/Aeronautics reported. Nuclear-powered ion propulsion was still about a decade off. (S/A, 6/67, 92)
President Johnson, in a message to Congress on communications policy, announced that he was appointing a 15-man task force headed by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Eugene V. Rostow to formulate “a national communications policy.” Among questions the group would examine were: (1) how soon would a domestic satellite system be economically feasible? (2) should a domestic system be general purpose or specialized? and (3) should there be more than one system? Task force’s report was due in one year. The President also: (1) reaffirmed U.S. commitments made in 1962 and 1964 in support of the development of a global system of comsats “to make modern communications available to all nations”; (2) pledged U.S. support to the continuation of the intelsat consortium, saying, “We seek no domination of satellite communications to the exclusion of any other nation—or group of nations”; (3) stated that U.S. “should take no action in the establishment of a domestic [comsat] system which is incompatible with our support for a global system”; and (4) urged U.S.S.R. and the nations of Eastern Europe to join intelsat. “Here is a rare opportunity to join in an activity to bring benefits to all nations and loss to none.” He suggested there might be an eventual linkage between Soviet Molniya system and intelsat system. The President concluded: “Historians may write that the human race survived or faltered because of how well it mastered the technology of this age. “Communications satellites now permit man’s greatest gifts—sight, expression, human thoughts and ideas—to travel unfettered to any portion of our globe. The opportunity is within our grasp. We must be prepared to act.” {PD, 8/21/67, 1146-54; WSJ, 8/15/67)
Soviet northern cosmodrome, whose existence was first publicly announced at British Interplanetary Society’s November 1966 meeting following radio-tracking activities at Kettering Grammar School [see Dec. 12, 1966], had maintained steady rate of satellite launches since beginning with Cosmos satellite in March 1966. New launch site, about 100 mi south of Archangel and between towns of Yarnema and Tarasova, still had not been acknowledged by Soviet authorities. (Perry, S/F, 8/67, 274)
U.S.S.R . successfully launched two Cosmos satellites: Cosmos CLIX entered orbit with 60,600-km (37,655-mi) apogee, 380-km (236-mi) perigee, 19-hr 33-min period, and 51° inclination; Cosmos CLX entered orbit with 205-km (127-mi) apogee, 142-km (88-mi) perigee, and 49.6° inclination. Equipment on both satellites functioned normally. Cosmos CLX reentered May 18. (upi, W Star, 5/18/67, C18; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Weather photos taken by NASA’s Ats I satellite in near-synchronous orbit over the Pacific would be relayed to World Meteorological Organization (wmo) conference in Geneva April 3-28 to demonstrate new meteorological capabilities. Transmitted by satellite to Mojave, Calif., photos were traveling by land line to National Environmental Satellite Center in Suitand, Md., where they were being recorded for later transmission by ESSA surface facilities to Geneva, (nasa Release 67-77)
Cosmos CLXI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 343-km (213-mi) apogee, 205-km (127-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered May 30. (AP, W Post, 5/23/67, A9; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Patent for a method of determining whether life exists on other planets had been granted to aeronautical engineer Albin M. Nowitzky, Stacy V. Jones reported in the New York Times. Unlike previous proposals involving distant observations, Nowitzky’s concept called for an automated spacecraft landing on a planet’s surface to make tests free from earthly contamination and influence. A soil sample would be taken, mixed with distilled water, and sterilized. Part of the resulting “nutrient” would be transferred to a test chamber, exposed to the planet’s atmosphere, and sealed, while the remaining part would be used as a “control.” Sensors in the test chamber would register any metabolic reaction, and these data would be telemetered to earth or to an orbiting satellite. (Jones, NYT, 1/1/61, 34)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites by Atlas-Agena D boosters from wtr. One satellite reentered on May 27; other reentered May 30. (upi, W Post, 5/23/67, A9; Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXX into orbit with 208-km (129-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, and 50° inclination. All equipment functioned normally, but satellite reentered later in the day. (SBD, 8/10/67, 202)
Ninth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, Explorer I. In defiance of the original predicted lifespan that should have ended six years ago, the satellite was circling the earth 14 times daily and had completed 43,000 orbits, (msfc Release 67-17)
usaf announced it was sending teletype messages between two aircraft flying 10,000 mi apart via a satellite in 20,000-mi-altitude earth orbit. Scheduled over six-month period, communications tests were being conducted over Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, North and South America, the polar regions, and Europe, (afsc Release 144.67)
Cosmos CLXXIX was launched into orbit with 157-km (98-mi) apogee, 141-km (88-mi) perigee, 87.3-min period, and 49° inclination. The satellite was announced as part of a program of space research; like CLXXVIII, it reentered on the same day it was orbited, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67; Pravda, 9/23/67)
Feb. 15 launch of third satellite in ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II series was postponed by NASA until mid-March to study recent failure in a Scout launch vehicle’s FW-4S motor, intelsat-ii comsats were launched by Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta boosters which used motors similar to FW-4S. (nasaRelease 67-24)
nasa’s Nimbus II meteorological satellite successfully completed one year of operation and was still transmitting useful data. Spacecraft had taken more than one million weather photos since its launch from WTR May 15, 1966. (AP, B Sun, 5/15/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXII into orbit with 280-km (174mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered June 9. (AP, W Star, 6/1/67,1; gsfc SSR, 6/15/67)
Wilbur L. Pritchard, Group Director, Communications Satellite Systems, Aerospace Corp., was appointed director of ComSatCorp’s new laboratories, scheduled for completion in Montgomery County, Md., by 1969. (ComSatCorp Release 67-35)
Luna- XII, first Soviet satellite to successfully transmit photos to earth from lunar orbit, had completed its mission and broken radio contact with ground stations, Tass announced. Satellite had been launched Oct. 22,1966. {W Post, 1/22/67, A23; upi, NYT, 1/23/67, 7)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXII into orbit with 301-km (187mi) apogee, 202-km (125-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Aug. 17. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67, 13; gsfc SSR, 8/31/67)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched two Cosmos satellites with two boosters: Cosmos CLXXXV entered orbit with 888-km (552-mi) apogee, 522-km (324-mi) perigee, 98.7-min period, and 64.1° inclination. Cosmos CLXXXV I, launched into orbit with 235-km (146-mi) apogee, 209-km (130-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.7° inclination, later docked with Cosmos CLXXXVIII. Both spacecraft performed satisfactorily. (W Post, 10/29/67, A16; SBD, 10/30/67, 320; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
ERC awarded MIT a three-year, $7.9-million contract for R&D of highperformance gyroscopes and accelerometers “to guide and control the vehicles planned for the complex aeronautical and space missions of the 1970s and 1980s.” It was anticipated that instruments would make possible systems which would navigate advanced supersonic aircraft to intercept runway landing beams without present runway aids; provide highly precise pointing references for satellites; and guide interplanetary vehicles on missions lasting one year or more, (nasa Release 67—155) 324-801 0—69-----13
NASA’s Ats II mission had been adjudged a failure “based upon review of the [spacecraft’s] assessed performance ... in its unplanned elliptical orbit,” NASA announced. Satellite, launched from etr April 5 on mission to evaluate gravity-gradient system for spacecraft stabilization, had remained in transfer orbit, tumbling uncontrollably, after Agena engines failed to ignite for second bum. All experiments were functioning, but possibility of obtaining useful data was poor, (nasa Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CXCIII. Orbital parameters: apogee, 354 km (220 mi); perigee, 203 km (127 mi); period, 89.9 min; inclination, 65.7°. Satellite reentered Dec. 3. (AP, NYT, 11/26/67, 46; gsfc SSR, 12/15/67)
In spite of unleased capacity in two commercial communications satellites now in orbit, optimism prevailed, and ComSatCorp’s entry into “global marketplace has led carriers to slash transoceanic rates,” Space/Aeronautics reported. As technical manager of intelsat, ComSatCorp had been establishing operational position in “aeronautical and domestic communications market.” (S/A, 1/67, 80)
In the year 2000, space satellites would be identifying soil, assessing crop yield, and determining the extent of disease, drought, or insects, Secretary of Agriculture Orville L. Freeman predicted at National Assn, of Science Teachers’ convention in Detroit. “While the farmers of tomorrow study reports in their air-conditioned offices, relieved at last of the physical drudgery and occupational anxiety so traditionally theirs . . . these shining space satellites, equipped with the most sophisticated remote sensing instruments will be supplying the information needed to make key decisions. “Through information gathered by the satellites, the Government will be able to make accurate predictions to guide marketing and distribution of farm products to avoid waste and local shortages and surpluses.” (Text; AP, NYT, 3/21/67,34)
Contract to develop esro’s TD-1 and TD-2, largest satellites to be designed in Europe, had been awarded to MESH consortium. European members of mesh-—Engins Matra of France, E.R.N.O. of West Germany, S.A.A.B. of Sweden, Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Limited of Great Britain—would get £8-million contract to develop the two satellites; Engins Matra would be prime contractor. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Limited and Engins Matra had jointly designed, developed, and manufactured Esro II satellite. TD-1 and TD—2 would be launched in 1970 and 1971 and would perform astrophysics missions. (S/F, 6/67, 198)
U.S.S.R. launched the meteorological satellite Cosmos CLVI into orbit with 640-km (398-mi) apogee, 586-km (364-mi) perigee, 96.9min period, and 81.19° inclination. Initial plane of orbit was shifted relative to plane of meteorological satellite Cosmos CXLIV (launched Feb. 28) by 95°. These two satellites would form experimental system called “Meteor.” Mutual positions of orbits for satellites had been chosen to permit meteorological observations at intervals of about six hours; system would obtain data on half of the earth’s surface during 24-hr period, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/67; Ten Years of Space Research in the U.S.S.R., uss-t Trans, vol. 5, no. 5, 1967)
NASA turned over Essa V meteorological satellite to ESSA for operation in accordance with NASA—Dept, of Commerce agreement. Essa V was launched from wtr by NASA April 20. (NASA Release 67-114)
Navy contract award had been made to Radio Corporation of America in letter contract for $2.0 million, for six navigation satellites. The Special Projects Office, usn would be contracting activity, (dod Release . 846-67) Performance of the spacecraft was satisfactory except for some difficulty with completely reliable response to command transmission from the ground stations and out-of-spec accelerations during the first few orbits. The spacecraft’s temperature, attitude control, and atmospheric pressure readings were normal, and few additional anomalies were experienced. Mid-air recovery of NASA’s Biosatellite II experiment capsule, by aircraft at 3:15 pm edt Sept. 9, within 15 mi of predicted impact location of 7°15'N and 162°1'W, marked a new first. Biosatellite /, which had remained in orbit for two months after the retrorocket failed, landed in the ocean near Australia following reentry Feb. 15, but was not recovered. The most important single question for Biosatellite II was whether the changes produced in organisms by radiation are slowed or hastened under weightless conditions. Biosatellite scientists had noted that early recovery had resulted in less risk to the experiments than if recovery had been delayed beyond the planned three days. Despite the delayed launch and early recovery, scientists reported only a small decrease in the expected data return from the experiments. Indications were that all programmed events in orbit, such as fixation of frog eggs, fixation and 324-801 0—60-----18	263 Before launch. 4 hours and 40 minutes of weightlessness. 12 hours and 29 minutes of weightlessness. '.4& 4*4&i<5.17 hours and 40 minutes of weightlessness. feeding of amoeba, fixation of wheat seeds, and pepper plant camera shutter opening, had worked as planned. Successful recovery of plant and animal life carried on a 45-hr journey through space by Biosatellite II was expected to provide important clues to how life forms would develop in a weightless environment or how radiation might affect future generations. Biosatellite II was under management of arc and under direction of ossa. The Delta launch vehicle was managed by gsfc. Communications and tracking were handled by NASA’s Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network, operated by gsfc. BiosateUite II was huilt by the General Electric Reentry Systems Dept. The Delta launch vehicle was built by Douglas Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-239; Av Wk, 9/18/67; AP, W Post, 9/11/67; Myler, upi, W Post, 9/15/67, 9/18/67; B Sun, 9/8/67; Yuenger, C Trib, 9/15/67)
erc awarded $99,151 to TRW Systems, Inc., and $99,370 to RCA for research on a satellite system to provide more efficient navigation and air traffic control for aircraft and ships in North Atlantic area in 1975. Both companies would conduct eight-month studies to determine best technical approach, identifying related problems and requirements. (frc Release 67-47)
Early Bird I communications satellite passed its test as a device for expediting clearance of passengers and cargo through airports when jet aircraft would be put in service in 1970. Moments after an airline flight took off from Frankfurt, Germany, for Dulles International Airport, data on passengers and cargo were sent via satellite to Government officials at Dulles so they could process the data in advance of the plane’s arrival. Officials in Frankfurt relayed facsimiles of the cargo manifest, health certificates, and Customs declaration forms of the 120 passengers. (NYT, 9/7/67)
Tiros VII, oldest U.S. meteorological satellite in operation, completed its fourth year in orbit. Designed with a three- to six-month operational lifetime, satellite had traveled 594,000,000 mi, completed 21,600 earth orbits, and taken over 124,500 photos of 50,000,000,000 sq mi of earth and its cloud cover, nasa said Tiros VII, which had tracked the major hurricanes of 1963, 1964, and 1965, was now commanded to transmit photos only occasionally. (AP, NYT, 6/18/67)
All-weather landing capability would be a requirement for sst operations because long-range sst used fuel too quickly to permit prolonged holding in airport traffic patterns, Dr. Richard M. Head, erc, told nasa Hq. press briefing on aeronautics research. He predicted that landings under zero visibility could be practical within a decade. Dr. Head also noted that, because of sun’s influence on the ionosphere, ssts with vhf radios might be subject to communications blackouts during the 1,200	mi of a transatlantic flight when they were too far from land for line-of-sight vhf reception. Use of satellites to relay communications might be a possible solution to the problem, he suggested. (Schmeck, NYT, 6/22/67, 6)
National Aeronautics and Space Council was accumulating data on various approaches to earth resources satellites with the goal of forcing competing agencies to agree on a single coordinated program for FY 1969, Aerospace Technology reported. A decision was expected by mid-September. The Depts. of Interior and Agriculture favored an operational program, but NASA believed current technology justified only an R&D approach at this time. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67,3)
U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc countries—including Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia—had agreed to conduct “a program of joint launchings of sputniks and rockets,” Evert Clark reported in the New York Times. Yugoslavia had declined admission to the group, choosing instead to join intelsat. U.S.S.R. reportedly had constructed or would construct tracking stations in Cuba, U.A.R., Mali, and “some other countries of Asia and Africa.” Since U.S.S.R.’s land mass stretched over % of earth’s circumference, U.S.S.R. had less need for tracking stations in other countries than U.S., and assigned little or no responsibility to nation where station was located. NASA, however, had bilateral agreements with more than 70 nations covering joint activities from student exchanges to satellite launches. (Clark, NYT, 12/14/67,26C)
Cosmos CLXXXVII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 210-km (131-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, 87.8 min period, and 50° inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily and reentered same day. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
Cosmos CLXXXII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Orbital parameters: apogee, 355 km (221 mi); perigee, 210 km (131 mi); period, 89.9 min; and inclination, 65°. Satellite reentered Oct. 24. (NYT, 10/17/67,12; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
nasa approved Phase II of a Dec. 14, 1966, contract and awarded Goodyear Aerospace Corp. $650,000 to design, fabricate, and test a full-scale model of a 30-ft-dia parabolic antenna. Antenna, planned as part of experimental package on proposed second-generation Applications Technology Satellites (ATS F and G), would be used for advanced communications research, (gsfc Release G—32-67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXVIII into orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 199-km (124-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered July 12. (SBD, 7/6/67,12; gsfc SSR, 7/15/67)
Cosmos CXLVIII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Orbital parameters: apogee, 436 km (271 mi); perigee, 275 km (171 mi); period, 91.3 min; and inclination, 71°. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered May 7. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/28/67; GSFC SSR, 5/15/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLII, its eighth Cosmos satellite during March, to achieve record month of space launchings. Orbital parameters: apogee, 512 km (318 mi); perigee, 283 km (176 mi); period, 92.2 min; inclination, 71°. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Aug. 5. (upi, W Post, 3/26J67, A3; GSFC SSR, 8/15/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXXXIX into earth orbit with 210-km (130-mi) apogee; 144-km (89-mi) perigee; 87.5-min period; and 50° inclination. Equipment functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered same day. (W Post, 1/26/67, El; gsfc SSR, 1/31/67)
ComSatCorp announced NASA would launch fourth satellite in the Intelsat ii series Sept. 20. Plans called for satellite to be launched from etr into synchronous orbit over the Pacific to increase communications capability and serve as a backup against interruption of satellite communications service. (ComSatCorp Release)
Cosmos CLXXV was launched into orbit with 386-km (240-mi) apogee, 210-km (130-mi) perigee, 92.0-min period, and 72.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 19. (W Post, 9/12/67; gsfc SSR, 9/30/67)
Cosmos CLXXIII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 528km (328-mi) apogee, 280-km (174-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 71° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Dec. 17. (upi, NYT, 8/25/67, 5; gsfc SSR, 12/31/67)
NASA and Centre National d’fitudes Spatiales (cnes) were conducting series of laser tests with five orbiting satellites—three U.S. and two French— to make precise geodetic measurements, NASA reported. In experiments, a laser beam was fired at a satellite equipped with a reflector designed to return beam to the transmitting station. Time elapsed from transmission to reception was measure of the distance between station and satellite. If satellite’s position was known by independent means or if several stations fired lasers simultaneously, it was then possible to determine distance between observing ground stations. NASA said initial tests, which began in April from stations in U.S., Europe, and North Africa, had been so successful that it might soon be possible to prove or disprove the theory of continental drift by determining the movements of continents relative to one another, (nasa Release 67-197)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXL1X into orbit with 297-km (185mi) apogee, 248-km (154-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered April 7. {Tech Wk, 3/27/67,28; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
Cosmos CLIV was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 232-km (144-mi) apogee, 186-km (116-mi) perigee, 88.5-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Apr. 10. {Tech Wk, 4/10/67; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
Ford Foundation and AT&T submitted briefs to fcc on domestic comsat system. Ford Foundation brief sharply criticized ComSatCorp’s plan for a domestic comsat system and asked that ComSatCorp’s April 1 request for permission to develop an experimental system be denied. “To add to Comsat’s authority the exclusive francise for a domestic communications satellite system . . . would give the corporation a world monopoly. One entity would provide all communications satellite services. One company would be responsible for developing all satellite technology. One customer would procure all satellite equipment. A monopoly of this sort would be unprecedented. . . .” Ford suggested instead that the system be developed and initially operated by NASA so that technological knowledge could be gleaned without controversy over ultimate management or ownership. NASA could later be reimbursed by the entity finally chosen to operate the system. at&t supported ComSatCorp’s proposal, suggesting the system be linked to and integrated with present ground systems. Rejecting Ford Foundation’s proposal for a separate nonprofit satellite TV broadcast corporation whose income would support noncommercial TV, at&t said that such proposals reflected “a parochial disregard for their effects on other satellite systems and terrestrial (land) microwave systems. . . . Installation of such limited systems would . . . jeopardize the existing public communications systems, both domestic and overseas, and would severely inhibit their necessary continued growth.” (Text; Gould, NYT, 4/3/67, 1; W Star, 4/4/67)
Earth resource evaluation satellites could give “. . . greatest immediate return of all space expenditures,” Space/Aeronautics reported. Applications were listed: spotting indications of petroleum and mineral deposits; providing land use maps for urban renewal, agricultural and industrial development; monitoring underground streams; checking crop and forest vigor; and monitoring pollution dynamics. (S/A, 1/67, 85)
Chairman James McCormack of ComSatCorp, speaking at annual meeting of National Assn, of Broadcasters, in Chicago, made these predictions: “With new satellites, having flexibility to permit working with several earth stations simultaneously and having increased transmission capabilities, and with improved earth stations, we are coming on better days. For a year or so, we will continue to be handicapped by a lack of ground facilities to enable the United States to work efficiently and simultaneously with more than one satellite in either the Atlantic or the Pacific [and] we will continue for a while to be embarrassed by lack of system capacity there, primarily in the earth stations, to handle occasional TV transmissions without buying back other circuits then under annual or monthly lease.” He continued: “. . . in a very few years, you will have the potential of continuous, live, world-wide TV transmission at well under one percent of your total costs.” He went on to explain: “Given the geographic coverage of the satellite, capable of being used directly from a number of points' simultaneously, and the rapid growth of all kinds of requirements for service, a single world-wide communications organization was deemed essential from the beginning. The same set of considerations would seem to indicate at least a broadly based international forum for broadcasting, an important and rather unique use of those communications.” Turning to potential world-wide benefits, he said: “The establishment of a world-wide broadcast capability, in being and operating continuously, will enable the almost casual accomplishment of some of the greatest purposes of the United States and many other nations seeking better understanding as one basis for a reasonable peaceful world. I refer in particular of course to cultural exchanges, information and education.” (Text)
ComSatCorp’s plans to launch a satellite by 1970 for relaying vhf communications from transoceanic airliners might be delayed by high costs, Electronics reported. “As far as the faa is concerned, the only issue is cost. The agency is still reeling from a Comsat proposal earlier this year pricing such communications services at $5 million per channel per year; the FAA told Comsat it was not interested at that price. To make matters worse, one faa official says current estimates from hardware makers are even higher.” (Electronics, 8/7/67)
Australia might agree to operate first joint tracking station with U.S.S.R. in Western Australia if U.S. approved, Newsweek speculated. U.S. currently operated three stations in Australia, and two more were under construction; U.S.S.R. had to maintain contact with its satellites via picket ships in the Pacific. (Newsweek, 3/6/67,18)
gsfc selected Radiation, Inc., for negotiations on a $l-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to develop Versatile Information Processor (vip) , an advanced telemetry system for the Nimbus D meteorological satellite. System would process, format, and store in the spacecraft scientific data obtained from experiments and monitor temperatures, pressures, power supply, and control system, (nasa Release 67-34)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXLII into orbit with 1,362-km (846-mi) apogee, 214-km (113-mi) perigee, 100.3-min period, and 48.4° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Jul. 6. (Tech Wk, 2/20/67,13; gsfc SSR, 7/15/67)
Soviet launch rate for recoverable Cosmos reconnaissance satellites had leveled after six-year increase, Aviation Week reported. Number launched as of mid-July 1967 was same as number launched during same period in 1966, and annual 1967 total was expected to be similar to annual 1966 total of 21. “The Russians now are launching recoverable reconnaissance satellites on the average of one every 16-17 days, each of which remains in orbit for approximately eight days. When the program began in 1962, the launch rate averaged one every 73 days and the following year the pace accelerated to an average of one every 46 days. In 1964 the figure was every 28 days, in 1965 the frequency had increased to an average of one every 19 days and last year it began to taper to one every 17 days.. . .” (Av Wk, 7/24/67, 26)
Cosmos CLXXVII was launched into orbit with 267-km (166-mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite, announced as part of a program of space research, reentered Sept. 24. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67; Krasnaya Zvezda, 9/19/67, 1)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXL into orbit with 241-km (150-mi) apogee, 170-km (106-mi) perigee, 88.48-min period, and 51.7° inclination. All equipment functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Feb. 9. {Tech Wk, 2/13/67,10; gsfc SSR, 2/15/67)
nasa turned Essa IV meteorological satellite over to essa for operation in accordance with NASA—Dept, of Commerce agreement. Essa IV was launched by NASA Jan. 26 from wtr. (nasa Release 67-10)
First experimental tactical communications by satellite among USN, usaf, and USA units had been successful, dod announced. Messages had been exchanged among airborne aircraft, a submarine, a ship, and fixed and mobile terminals via Lincoln Experimental Satellite (Les V), one of six satellites launched by usaf July 1. (dod Release 661-67; AP, NYT, 7/21/67,6)	#
A 180-man crew working a 10-hr day six days a week had completed 14week construction job of 15-building installation in the Australian desert, which would be used to intercept information transmitted by Soviet reconnaissance satellites [see Aug. 12]. (AP, NYT, 8/29/67, 24)
Dr. Herbert Friedman, Superintendent of Naval Research Laboratory’s Atmospheric and Astrophysics Div., announced at news conference in Washington, D.C. Rocket experiment, he said: (1) provided first evidence that x rays were produced as far away as the “rim” of the universe; (2) detected quasars, previously detectable only by their radio waves or by visible light seen through high-power telescopes; (3) lent support to theory that universe is saturated with background radiation from explosion of universe 10 billion yrs ago; and (4) detected three new x-ray sources, apparently outside our galaxy and not traceable to any known object. These findings, Dr. Friedman said, indicated that x-ray astronomy had “come of age” as a tool to explore the universe. To explore x-ray sources further, he suggested installing x-ray detection equipment on proposed satellites such as NASA’s orbital workshop and launching larger equipment for longer periods of time to map the whole sky for x-ray sources. (Text; Reistrup, W Post, 7/7/67)
Press briefing on Esro II satellite and NASA International Cooperative Programs was held at NASA Hq. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, discussed the areas of cooperation between NASA and ESRO, emphasizing the “unprecedented data exchange agreement. ... I don’t think there is anything quite as sophisticated or as extensive in the international field. Under this agreement... ESRO assumes responsibility to collect all of the European technical report literature relevant to space activities, indexes and abstracts it, reduces it to a standard microfiche or microcard format which is compatible with our own system, and provides that material to us. We incorporate it in a single combined publication every two weeks, listing all of the U.S. and European literature in the field so that it is available to both sides. . ..” Brian M. Walker, ESRO Project Coordinator for Esro II, announced that next ESRO satellite—Esro I—would be launched in late 1967 to study the ionosphere. Esro II was scheduled for launch from WTR May 29. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. launched the meteorological satellite Cosmos CXLIV into orbit with 635-km (395-mi) apogee, 585-km (364-mi) perigee, 96.9min period, and 81.20° inclination. All equipment was functioning normally. (Tech Wk, 3/6/67, 15; Ten Years of Space Research in the U.S.S.R., uss—T Trans, vol. 5, No. 5,1967)
usaf launched two satellites: EGRS—9 and Aurora /. Thor-Burner II boosters were used in wtr launchings. EGRS-9, a Secor satellite, would provide an aid to geodetic survey of the earth sphere. Aurora I would study charged particles that precipitate in the upper atmosphere. (Pres Rep 1967)
Harold W. Yates, former chief engineer of Barnes Engineering Co.’s Field Research and Systems Dept., became Director of the National Environmental Satellite Center’s Satellite Experiment Laboratory, (essa Release 67-17)
OGO “handlers” were hoping that Ogo IV (launched July 28) might be economical enough with its gas supply to permit it to continue for one year at the peak of its investigative capabilities. Achievement of one-year performance would enable satellite to gather data on earth, its upper atmosphere, and its near-space environment during period of peak solar activity, which occurs every 11 yrs. Ogo IV’s gas system, used to supply thrust to series of small attitude-stabilized jets, had been improved by installation of gas bottle filled with krypton instead of argon. This increased gas pressure from 3,000 psi to 4,000 psi and doubled available impulse from 900 to 1,800 pound-seconds, nasa reported that if present gas expenditure rate were maintained they were assured the minimum 50 days of three-axis stabilized operation that would permit mission success, (nasa Release 67-210)
