Landsat 2, launched 22 Jan. 1975, developed a noise problem with one of its two image tape recorders, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The satellite’s mission was not in danger because the backup recorder was functioning properly. (Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 13)
NASA’s flying laboratory Galileo II, an instrumented Convair 990, participated in a month-long cooperative investigation of the Arctic seas. Researchers from NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Army, U.S. Navy, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and several Canadian agencies hoped to find methods of measuring critical changes in the Arctic environment that would help environmentalists find out how best to manage Arctic resources. A major objective of the program was an experiment—called the AIDJEX, the Arctic Ice Dynamics Joint Experiment—to investigate the relationship among ice motion, weather, and ocean conditions. Combined data from aircraft- and ground-based investigations would be used to interpret satellite data obtained at the same time. BESMEX, the Bering Sea Marine Mammal Experiment, would study the migration patterns of marine mammals and the relationship between mammal population, migration, and sea-ice conditions. In a third experiment, scientists would measure microwave emission characteristics of polar ice, hoping to find a key to global monitoring of ice distribution by climate and size. This information would aid in predicting the survival rate of offshore drilling rigs. (ARC Release 75-11)
Funding in the FY 1976 budget for a third Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS) was in doubt, Walter Sullivan said in a New York Times article. Despite worldwide enthusiasm for continuing the program, which was developing remote-sensing techniques for monitoring and managing earth’s resources, doubts about funding approval were appearing within the Office of Management and Budget. Factors that would influence OMB’s decision included the reported existence of far more detailed information from secretly launched intelligence satellites. Although scientists would probably prefer a system free from intelligence links, some argued that the information needed by agencies such as the Bureau of Census and Dept, of Agriculture could be extracted from imagery from these satellites. Another reason to delay immediate funding was that a more effective system would eventually become feasible. Scientists argued against this reasoning, saying that the lack of fine detail in ERTS images was not a serious impediment but that lack of continuity would be. (Sullivan, NYT, 4 Jan 75, 17)
Some “very heavy” influential politicians had been rallying around NASA’s “little known and unglamorous” Earth Resources Technology Satellite [renamed Landsat 14 Jan.] program, inducing President Ford to overrule his budget advisers and provide money for a third spacecraft in 1977, Arlen J. Large said in the Wall Street Journal. It wasn’t only NASA but “the ERTS community—geographers, foresters, pollution fighters and land-use planners” that lobbied for a third satellite to continue the work of Landsat 1 and 2 (launched 23 July 1972 and 22 Jan. 1975). The Office of Management and Budget had wanted to delay funding until NASA developed cameras with better resolution, but the “lobbying blitz” convinced President Ford to overrule OMB; money for the satellite was included in the FY 1976 budget. (Large, WSJ, 20 Feb 75, 44)
The Soviet Union for the first time had discovered atoms of “natrium”— sodium, as it is known in the U.S.—at an altitude of nearly 100 km, in the lower ionosphere. The experiment was difficult, said Tass, because at that altitude only 1 atom of natrium exists per 1000 million molecules of nitrogen and oxygen. A laser unit had established a relationship between natrium content in the upper atmosphere and meteor showers; the announcement said the discovery would be significant because of the effect of natrium on longdistance television and radio communications. (Tass, in FBIS No. 248, 18 Dec 75) 22 December. A new domestic communications-satellite partnership named Satellite Business Systems filed applications with the Federal Communications Commission seeking authorization to establish an all-digital system to serve large industrial, government, and other users beginning in 1979. The new partnership had been formed by subsidiaries of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General, and IBM, each of which intended to own one-third. The proposed system, using higher frequencies at 12 and 14 gigahertz and advanced technology, would permit customers in geographically dispersed locations to combine voice, data, and image communications into a single integrated private-line network; small automated ground stations would be located at customers’ premises and connected where possible to existing terminals to minimize terrestrial communications costs. The system would use two satellites in geostationary orbit at about 36 000 km altitude, one serving as a backup, to provide coverage of the 48 contiguous states. (Comsat Release 75 —63)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s board of governors had authorized issuance of a request for firm fixed-price proposals for design, development, manufacture, and test of seven Intelsat V satellites, with options for up to eight additional satellites. In 1979 Intelsat V satellites would replace the Intelsat IV—A series to be deployed in September 1975. Intelsat V satellites would have increased capacity by a fourfold use of the 6/4 ghz frequency band, use of both antenna-beam separation and dual-polarization concepts; introduction of the 14/11 ghz band for limited coverage in high-traffic regions; and a maximum effective bandwidth of 2280 mhz. A single satellite design would be used in all three ocean regions of the Intelsat global systems. Intelsat V satellites were expected to have a capacity of 12 000 two-way voice circuits plus one color TV channel. (INTELSAT Release 75—8)
Fifteen years ago the launch of two U.S. satellites on the same day would have “blasted the top off of Page One,” Ernest B. Furguson said in a Washington Star article. But when it happened 7 May—Explorer 53 and Anik 3—it “drew less coverage than two swallows returning to Capistrano.” At a total cost of $44 million, to be shared by NASA and foreign friends, Explorer 53 Small Astronomy Satellite would study x-ray sources within and beyond the Milky Way, and Anik 3 would transmit communications back and forth across Canada. The NASA space budget for FY 1975 was nearly $3 billion. “Considering inflation, that seems a bargain.” The current space budget was “not quite 12 times what the President has asked to handle the Vietnamese refugee effort for each of two years. You are free to say for yourself where the two programs stand on the relative scale of things.” (Furguson, W Star, 14 May 75, A17)
Establishment of manufacturing facilities in space might be feasible within this century, Dr. Gerard K. O’Neill wrote in the December issue of Science magazine. Construction of satellite solar power stations (SSPSs) from lunar materials, for example, could be shown more economical than building such stations on earth and lifting them into orbit. The space manufacturing facility (SMF) that had been envisioned by Dr. O’Neill and others would be a self-sustaining habitat for a large number of people whose energy needs could be met by solar power used directly for agriculture, as process heat for industry when concentrated by mirrors, or indirectly as electricity. Dr. O’Neill had assembled tables and figures from the literature to accompany his argument for the SSPS as a means of meeting increased demands for electricity on earth in a time of shortage of fuels and concern about use of nuclear energy. (,Science, Vol 190, 4218)
When commercial communications via satellite began with the 6 April 1965 launch of Early Bird 1, the U.S. was expected to be the prime user of the new global communications system, a New York Times article said. Experts assumed the system would be used chiefly for occasional live events such as sports, state affairs, space missions, etc. However, these uses had actually accounted for only a fifth of transglobal comsat TV volume. A number of poor and developing countries had come to depend heavily on the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s seven Intelsat comsats. Although major events were still the subject of much global TV traffic, the most extensive and consistent use of commercial comsats was for daily news. News packages were sent from one country to another. U.S. networks used almost daily satellite news reports from correspondents in various parts of the world. Spain and Mexico were linked full time by satellite. Madrid also transmitted 15 min of daily news to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Venezuela. When events warranted, these countries transmitted news to Spanish TV. France transmitted daily news to Israel, Iran, Jordan, and Martinique as well as several North African countries. News from London was transmitted daily to Australia. The ATT quoted officials of Communications Satellite Corp., U.S. manager of the Intelsat system, as saying that in 1965 the comsats carried about six TV transmissions a month for a total of less than 6 hours of programming; in 1975, the Intelsat system was handling 400 transmissions a month, more than 200 hrs of programming not including the 200 hrs a month carried on the Spain—Mexico channel. (Brown, ATT, 28 June 75, 43)
The Soviet Union launched Intercosmos 14 into an orbit with 1707-km apogee, 345-km perigee, 105.3-min period, and 74° inclination. The satellite had been equipped to study low-frequency electromagnetic fluctuations in the magnetosphere, the structure of the ionosphere, and the intensity of micrometeorite fluxes. Tass reported that flags of nine socialist countries had waved over “one of the Soviet cosmodromes” where the launching took place; mentioned as participating in this particular mission were scientists from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary, as well as the U.S.S.R. Satellites of the Intercosmos series were considered “closest to purely earth problems” in that they had been connected with specific orders placed by geophysicists, physicians, meteorologists, and radiocommunications experts. Academician Boris Petrov, head of the Soviet Intercosmos, said the launch ended the first decade of cooperation between scientists and engineers of the socialist countries, who had made significant discoveries regarding sun and earth climate, influence of solar activity on magnetic weather, and dispersal of radio waves. Collectives of experts in all nine member countries of Intercosmos would take part “as usual” in processing information received from the satellite, working at the scientific flight headquarters near Norilsk, beyond the polar circle, where parallel ground observations would be conducted. (Tass, in FBIS 240 and 243, 12 Dec 75)
NASA had awarded a $45.8-million contract to Radio Corporation of America Astro-Electronics Div. to design and build eight Tiros-N third generation meteorological satellites. The 635-kg Tiros-N (Television InfraRed Operational Satellite) would have 4 times the payload capacity of the previous generation of metsats, and was expected to be able to forecast weather 2 days in advance with accuracy equal to the 1-day predictions. In addition to providing day and night imagery, the Tiros-N spacecraft would take atmospheric and sea-surface temperature readings; measure proton, electron, and alpha-particle activity surrounding the earth; and collect data from weather platforms on balloons and from ocean buoys. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 1)
Photographs from Landsat 1 (launched 23 July 1972 as Erts 1, Earth Resources Technology Satellite) indicated that a continental collision had been in progress between India and Eurasia, pushing China eastward at the rate of 2.54 centimeters a year, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientists reported in Science. This eastward movement could account for China’s unusual pattern of earthquakes—widespread instead of along narrow fault lines, the MIT geologists suggested. Despite the current theory that the Indian subcontinent was sliding under Eurasia, the MIT scientists had concluded that rigid Indian plates of rock were causing China to be pushed into the Pacific. (Molnar et al., Science, 8 Aug 75, 419 —425; NYT, 10 Aug 75, 49)
Westar communications satellites would soon be used for communications to and from offshore oil drilling platforms and exploratory vessels in waters adjacent to the continental U.S., Western Union Telegraph Co. announced. The offshore facilities previously had depended for communication on microwave relay networks and cabling, methods that had become increasingly expensive and impractical as the facilities were moved farther and farther off shore. (Westar news release, 4 Aug 75)
The Bangui Anomaly—a massive magnetic disturbance in the earth along the equator in Africa, suggesting rich deposits of heavy metals like iron and uranium—had been accidentally discovered by Ogo 1, launched in 1964 with magnetometers that were still measuring the earth’s magnetic field in 1970 when the Geological Survey decided to use them for other purposes. Attempting to measure the ionosphere for traces of a jetstream above the equator, Survey scientists noticed a “kink” in the data and had checked their findings by scanning the region with magnetometers in aircraft. Results showed a magnetic difference so great that it could be caused only by an ore body larger than the Mesabi range in Minn., largest in the U.S. Scientists had deemed the find so important that NASA had suggested putting a satellite in orbit to do nothing but chart the earth’s magnetic field. The anomaly was named for the capital of the Central African Republic, an extremely poor nation almost as big as Texas with a population of about 2 million. The deposits had been localized in hilly regions away from the Ubangi River, so that a railroad or highway would be needed to carry ores to the river for shipping. State Dept, sources said that interest in the region among foreign mineral-extraction companies had risen. (O’Toole, LA Times, 15 Nov 75, 1)
The Space and Missile Systems Organization had announced award of a $2 059 000 contract to Raytheon Co. Equipment Div. for a selfrepairing onboard satellite computer system. The 11-kg computer would carry two or more spares for each of its basic subunits, and a configuration-control unit (CCU) to monitor the computer’s operating subunits and diagnose problems; if a subunit failed, the CCU would diagnose the problem and switch to a spare. The computer would also perform satellite housekeeping including power control, antenna positioning, temperature control, attitude control, and navigation, jobs normally performed by a computer on the ground. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75)
The Indonesian government concluded a $120.6-million (4.6 billion Belgian francs) agreement with the General Bank of Belgium to finance construction of two communications satellites, a satellite control station in Jakarta, and 39 comsat network stations throughout the Indonesian islands. (Jakarta Domestic Service, FBIS—Indonesia, 19 Feb 75, Nl)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) awarded a $145 000 contract to RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div. for a first-phase design study of the Tiros-N data-acquisition and control system (DACS). DACS would provide operational control of Tiros-N in orbit, and would collect and transmit telemetry and weather information to NOAA facilities in Md. RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div., which had been developing the new generation of weather satellites for NASA had scheduled the first flight for 1978. As part of the design study, RCA would provide descriptions of materials and procedures needed to implement the DACS, a network of ground stations including the Md. center and the command and data-acquisition stations (CDA) in Alaska and Va. (Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 149)
Comsat General Corp. of the Communications Satellite Corp. announced its intent to pay MCI Communications Corp. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. $1.5 million each for their common stock in the CML Satellite Corp. Restructured in 1972 by Comsat General Corp. and with thirds owned by Comsat, Lockheed, and MCI, CML was to have entered the domestic-communications-satellite business but had stopped short because of the financial difficulties of MCI and Lockheed. On 3 July 1974, Comsat and International Business Machines Corp. had announced plans to buy out the shares in CML owned by Lockheed and MCI, subject to approval by the Federal Communications Commission. Restrictions imposed in a 23 January 1975 ruling by the FCC—concerned that the combination of the two companies would create a monopoly—required that no one partner own less than 10% or more than 49% of the stock. Under this “balanced CML” ruling, Comsat and IBM were seeking a third partner; to that end, Comsat was acquiring all of the stock so that it could be reapportioned in the proposed new structure. (Comsat General Release 75—45)
The People’s Republic of China had confirmed that its three satellites— China 1, launched 24 April 1970; China 2, launched 3 March 1971; and China 3, launched 26 July 1975—had earth-observation capability, Defense Space Business Daily reported. Although the PRC’s People’s Daily had published cloud photos taken by one of the satellites, and the implication was that the satellites were forerunners of meteorological satellites, their performance suggested the development of higher resolution observation-reconnaissance satellites. All three satellites had been placed into orbits with perigees at reconnaissance altitudes sufficient to cover all targets of interest to the PRC. (SBD, 25 Aug 75, 290]
Under a decision of the Federal Communications Commission, the Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) had been making too much money and would have to reduce its rates on international communications services by up to 35%. The order followed a 10-yr FCC investigation of the entire range of ComSat services. Essentially a wholesaler of communications, ComSat had been selling satellite circuits to telephone and telegraph firms that retailed the services to consumers. The FCC order could substantially reduce overseas telephone and telegraph charges; an accompanying order required the international firms that had been dealing with ComSat to pass the reduced rates on to their customers. FCC ruled that ComSat was entitled to a return ranging from 10.8 to 11.8%, but ComSat’s rate of return in 1974 was about 34.6%. (IF Star, 27 Nov 75, A2)
Two Boeing Co. scientists had proposed construction of a 64-million-kg solar power satellite, with 57 sq km of mirrors, to collect and concentrate solar energy, together with thermal engines to convert solar power into electricity, the Christian Science Monitor reported. A microwave transmission system would convert the electricity to a form suitable for transmission to earth. CSM quoted Boeing as saying that within 2 decades “Powersat” could provide up to 10 000 mw of useful power, twice the hydroelectric capacity of Grand Coulee Dam. (AP, CSM, 6 Aug 75, 7)
Western Union Telegraph Co. announced that after Westar 1 and 2 (launched 13 April 1974 and 10 Oct. 1974) began video transmission, users would save up to 66% of the cost of land-based transmissions. Rates of the new system, filed with the Federal Communications Commission, were scheduled to go into effect 14 July. The multipoint reception capability of the Westar system would attract a variety of broadcast applications, including independent networks and links to cable systems. Savings by users of the satellite system would depend on the type of service and the route selected: Westar offpeak video service between Los Angeles and New York would cost $715 for the first hour, a savings of 61% over the $1832 charged for a landline transmission. For each additional hour the Westar rate drops to $620, a reduction of 66% over landline transmissions. Initially, cities with earth stations—New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Dallas—would receive the service, which could be extended beyond those cities via connecting carrier. (WU release, 16 June 75)
NASA’s Small Astronomy Satellite (Sas 2, launched as Explorer 48 16 Nov. 1972) had observed a pulsar in the Vela constellation that generated two bursts of gamma rays for each burst of radio waves, theAstrophysical Journal reported. No other pulsar had been found to exhibit such properties. The new observation indicated that pulsars— small, dense, rapidly spinning stars thought to be remains of a huge stellar explosion or supernova—were much more complex than had been believed. Detection of gamma rays from Vela meant that pulsars were a likely source of cosmic rays. Many astrophysicists had believed that only very young pulsars could produce cosmic energies, but the Sas 2 observations cast doubt on this conclusion: Scientists believed that the Vela pulsar was more than 10 000 yrs old. (D.J. Thompson et al., Astrophysical Journal, 1 Sept 75; GSFC Release G—75—20)
The People’s Republic of China successfully launched an earth-orbiting satellite into an orbit with 483 km apogee, 173 km perigee, 63° inclination, and 91-min period, the New China News Agency announced. (FBIS No. 230, 26 Nov 75; IF Star, 27 Nov 75, A2)
NASA successfully launched Intelsat IV F—l for the Communications Satellite Corp., as agent for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, from Eastern Test Range at 6:04 pm EDT. The 1400-kg satellite entered the desired synchronous transfer orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 534-km perigee, 10-hr 40-min period, and 26? inclination. ComSatCorp successfully fired the apogee motor at 6:45 pm EDT on 24 May, placing the satellite in synchronous orbit over the Indian Ocean (36 184-km apogee, 35 704-km perigee, 24-hr 4-min period, and 0.5° inclination) with a final operational position to be at 61° east longitude. When it became operational in June, it would replace Intelsat IV F—5 as the primary operating satellite in the Indian Ocean area in the global 6-active-satellite Intelsat network; it would be able to transmit 3500 two-way telephone conversations or 12 TV channels. The launch was the second recent attempt to place an Intelsat IV satellite over the Indian Ocean; on 20 Feb., the first attempt failed and Intelsat IV F-6 had to be destroyed when the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle tumbled out ctf control. INTELSAT launched its first comsat, Intelsat I F—l {Early Bird), on 6 April 1965. Between 1967 and 1970 12 Intelsat II and III satellites were launched before the Intelsat IV launches began in 1971. (NASA MORs, 16 May 75, 25 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—125; NASA Audio News, 23 May 75; GSFC WklySSR, 25—28 May 75; Salmanson, Atlas mgr., NASA Hq., interview, 25 May 77)
Cosmos 775, believed to be third of a series in the Soviet Union’s Statsionar communications-satellite program, was launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome into a very low near-circular earth orbit. Its predecessors, Cosmos 637 and Molniya IS, had been launched 26 March and 29 July 1974. The satellites were to supply communications, including telephone, telegraph, TV, and phototelegraph transmissions, between the Soviet Union and Europe and between the capital and extreme eastern portions of the U.S.S.R. Once the Statsionar communications system was established, the U.S.S.R. was expected to undertake implementation of a synchronous meteorological satellite system as early as the 1976—77 period. (SBD, 16 Oct 75, 232)
Preparatory work was nearing completion on the Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE), a joint India— NASA program to broadcast educational TV via the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974. Installation of 400 TV sets had been completed, and the buildings to house them had been wired for electricity. (Delhi Domestic Service, FBIS—India, 18 July 75, U2)
The Commerce Dept, had awarded Aeronutronic Ford, Inc., a contract for $5 581 824 to design and build a space environment monitor for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which had commissioned it to make constant measurements of energetic solar particles when Tiros-N would be launched in 1978. Tiros-N, a joint mission of NOAA and NASA, would be first of a new series of polar-orbiting satellites to be operated by the National Environmental Satellite Service as “a major improvement in our capability of monitoring environmental phenomena,” according to Dr. George H. Ludwig, director of NESS’s Office of Operations. Detecting changes in the space environment and learning how they affect conditions on earth would help scientists to predict and prepare for these effects. The NOAA space-environment monitor, the only set of sensors facing away from the earth, would provide much of the needed data. (DOC Release G 75—180)
A Baltimore Sun editorial discussed “Distorted Priorities in the R&D Budget.” The President’s R&D budget for FY 1976 had little chance of passage in its existing form because of the hostility of much of the 98th Congress to some of its proposals. Defense-related R&D would be reduced, the energy proposals would be juggled to give more to solar and geothermal energy, and the proposed large cuts in biomedical research would be restored. Congress might be more sympathetic to NASA. Once seen by congressional critics as a quasi-military organization or at least “a space circus that siphoned dollars away from more pressing needs,” NASA was “beginning to prove itself a valuable scientific tool” in such valuable areas as environmental monitoring. That the Office of Management and Budget had not, as once threatened, scrapped funds for the Landsat— C satellite “may reflect an effort to make NASA more attractive by further pushing the agency into the areas that have gained humanist and environmentalist approval.” (BSure, 1 March 75, A18)
NASA closed its tracking station on Madagascar after the agency was unable to reach agreement with the government of the Malagasy Republic for continued operation of the station. Functions of the station would be taken over by the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974. The Madagascar station had opened in 1964 under an agreement that called for station operation by NASA and Malagasy personnel. Data collected by the station were made available to the Malagasy Republic. The agreement had not called for an exchange of funds between the cooperating governments. The agreement expired in December 1973, and a new one could not be reached when Madagascar claimed rent for the station retroactive to 1964. (AP, NYT, 15 July 75; NASA Release 63— 279; NASA Contracts Div., Phillips, interview, 2 Aug 77) .
The Soviet Union launched a communications satellite called Raduga (Rainbow) into a stationary circular orbit at 35 000 km, with a 23 hr 54 min period and a 0.3°inclination. The satellite had been instrumented to provide continuous round-the-clock telephone and telegraph radio communications with simultaneous transmission of color and black-and-white central- TV programs to the network of Orbita stations. (Tass, on FBIS No. 248, 23 Dec 75)
Kuwait’s Communications Minister Sulayman Hammud alKhalid signed a contract with Siemens AG, a West German company, to import and install Kuwait’s second ground station for satellite communications. (AR-RA’Y AL-’AMM, FBIS—Arabian Peninsula, 18 July 75, Cl) . .
Launch of the Dual Air Density (DAD) spacecraft from the Western Test Range failed when a catastrophic event during third-stage burn caused loss of vehicle control and failure to achieve orbit. The destruct signal was transmitted 341 sec after ignition. The four-stage Scout-D launch was to have placed into orbit two satellites—a small rigid sphere of aluminum and a large inflatable sphere of mylar—similarly instrumented with a mass spectrometer and associated electronics. The satellites were to have been in 9(F polar orbits intersecting periodically, to measure atmospheric densities at two differing altitudes but at the same latitudes at the same local-hour angle of the sun. The measurements would show effects on upper atmosphere readings of changes in solar heat input and the relationships between upper and lower atmospheres. The launch, scheduled for 3 Dec., had been delayed because of a malfunction in the ignition system of the Scout launch vehicle. (NASA Release 75—300; MOR S—863—75—05, 6 Jan 76; HQ memo, Goozh, 9 Dec 75; SBD, 5 Dec 75, 186)
Aetna Life and Casualty would become the third partner with Comsat General Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. in a venture to establish a domestic satellite system, the three companies jointly announced. In a letter to the Federal Communications Commission, the three companies had proposed a corporate structure of the jointly owned CML Satellite Corp. under which each of the three companies would own a part of the organization. IBM would purchase 42.5% and Aetna would purchase 15% of CML stock, with Comsat holding the remaining 42.5%. Aetna would also purchase a convertible note, bringing its investment to the same level as Comsat and IBM; the three partners would have equal representation on the board of directors. The arrangement would comply with FCC’s requirement that no partner own less than 10% nor more than 49% of CML’s stock [see 23 Jan.]. After FCC approval, the three partners would each invest up to $55 million with additional funding obtained fropi outside financing. CML had been formed in 1972, with other stockholders, to enter the U.S. domestic communications satellite business; Comsat had owned all the stock of CML since July 1975 and, with IBM, had been seeking a third partner.. Both Comsat and IBM had been providing the interim financing. (Aetna-Comsat-IBM Release, 26 Sept 75)
According to International Telecommunications Union figures, a satellite had been launched every 3 days in 1974. Of the total of 124 launched, 18 belonged wholly or partly to the U.S., and the Soviet Union accounted for 95. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 3) November 1975
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization—had awarded a 20-mo fixed-price contract for $220 000 to the Messerschmitt—Boelkow—Blohm Co. of Munich for design, fabrication, and test of a prototype lightweight deployable solar array for use in synchronous satellites. The new array would provide 30 to 33 watts per kg at the end of a 7- to 10-yr mission, compared to the current level of 10 to 15 watts per kg. (INTELSAT Release 75—20)
DOD announced the award of a $3.6-million contract to Aerojet Electrosystems Co. for design, development, and delivery of one prototype and one flight microwave temperature sounder to be used on military meteorological satellites between 1977—1980. Under the contract, Aerojet would build and test one mechanical-thermal simulator and associated ground equipment for calibration and testing, and would develop a software data package to convert satellite data to temperature profiles. The microwave sounder would be designed to measure atmospheric temperature from the surface of the earth to altitudes above 30 km without regard to cloudcover. (AFSC Release OIP 028.75)
Western Union Corp.’s Westar satellite system, which included Westar 1 and 2 (launched 13 Apr. 74 and 10 Oct. 74), began commercial video service with the transmission of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission coverage from Houston to Chicago. TVN Independent Newservice, the first customer, used a transponder on Westar 1 to transmit coverage for 75 clients in the U.S. and Canada. The two satellites, in synchronous orbit; were linked to earth stations near major cities. (WU Release, 15 July 75)
The U.S.S.R. launched Aryabhata, India’s first scientific satellite, from Kapustin Yar in the Soviet Union. The satellite entered orbit with a 611-km apogee, 568-km perigee, 96.5-min period, and 50.7° inclination. The Delhi Domestic News Service said that the 360-kg satellite, named for a fifth-century Indian astronomer and mathematician, carried instruments to measure x-rays from celestial sources, look for neutrons and gamma radiation from the sun, and measure ionospheric parameters. Ground tracking stations in India and the Soviet Union reported the instrumentation was functioning normally. Aryabhata, designed and built by scientists at India’s Space Research Organization with technical assistance from Soviet scientists and specialists, was completed under an agreement for joint Indian-Soviet collaboration signed on 10 May 1972. The press reported the estimated cost of the project to be $6 million. (Delhi Dom News Ser, FBIS—India, 22—24 April 75; Weintraub, ATT, 21 April 75, 49; GSFC Wkly SSR, 17—23 April 75; educ’l attache, Indian Embassy, Wash DC, interview, 18 Nov 76)
The fierce rivalry between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was not confined to ground, air, and sea, but extended to space, the People’s Republic of China’s The People’s Daily said in an article entitled “Competition in Space and Hardship on Earth.” Both superpowers had invested huge amounts of money, manpower, and materials to turn cosmic space into an arena for arms expansion and war preparations as well as espionage. U.S. and U.S.S.R. military satellites, which accounted for most satellite launchings, were used mostly to spy on each other. In recent years their rivalry in space had become more and more acute, disturbing tranquillity in space. (Peking NCNA, FBIS-PRC, 21 July 75, Al)
Calculation of crop acreage from satellite images had proven “generally adequate” in NASA tests involving wheat acreage in nine Great Plains states during the past year, NASA Associate Administrator Charles W. Mathews told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Reporting on the 9.9% error rate in the LACIE (large area crop inventory experiment) test using Landsat data, Mathews said that the U.S. had demonstrated the feasibility of an operational global forecasting system for wheat. Mathews mentioned other Landsat data applications: The Geological Survey and NOAA had developed computer techniques for processing multispectral Landsat data that made oil slicks clearly visible. Other computer techniques using the data had detected subtle differences in surface soils and rocks that revealed mineralization and potential ore deposits. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 931, 938, 939)
European Space Agency announced a postponement in the launch of COS-B, scheduled for a 6 Aug. 6:56 pm PDT launch from Western Test Range, because of hydraulic-valve failure in a telemetry aircraft needed to monitor third-stage ignition of the launch vehicle. The launch had been rescheduled to 8 Aug. at 6:48 pm PDT. COS-B would be ESA’s first satellite launch since the new agency’s establishment on 30 May. (ESA Release, 7 Aug 75)
The Soviet Union launched Prognoz 4, a 905-kg automatic station to study corpuscular and electromagnetic emissions of the sun, flows of solar plasma, and near-earth magnetic fields, to determine solar influence on the earth’s magnetosphere. The satellite’s orbit would have a 40 836-km apogee, 451-km perigee, 12 hr 16 min period, and 62.8° inclination. (Tass, in FBIS No 247, 22 Dec 75)
Didier Ratsiraka, President of the Supreme Council of Revolution of the Malagasy Republic, said in a radio broadcast to Malagasy citizens that his government would ask the U.S. to close its satellite tracking station there if the U.S. did not “raise concrete and satisfactory proposals before July 14.” Ratsiraka said that “To avoid possible maneuvers of sabotage, the government has taken necessary measures to place the station under control of the armed forces from this day.” People’s Republic of China’s Hsinhua news agency quoted Ratsiraka as saying that the U.S. was reluctant to fulfill its obligations under the agreement signed in October 1963 by the U.S. and Malagasy governments, being in “flagrant violation of the written engagements.” (FBIS-PRC, 15 July 75, A3)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization announced the award of a $99 894 15-mo contract to the Research Foundation of the State Univ. of New York for a study of radiation-induced defects in solar cells. The Foundation would develop an information base for predicting electron damage to silicon solar cells over a wide range of parameters for the materials from which the cells were made. (INTELSAT Release 75—32)
The European Space Research Organization (ESRO) announced the award of a $4.4 million [3.5 million accounting units] contract to a European consortium to provide software for ESRO’s Meteosat meteorological satellite, scheduled for launch in April 1977. Under the terms of the contract the consortium, consisting of companies in France, United Kingdom, West Germany, Belgium, Italy, and Sweden, would provide data-acceptance capability, image processing, operational mission support, data archiving, analysis and dissemination of image data, and monitoring of the overall data-process-ing system. Meteosat, ESRO’s first applications satellite, would record and transmit data for more accurate weather forecasting. (ESRO Release, 7 April 75)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency and NASA signed a contract for launch of three Japanese geosynchronous satellites in 1977 and 1978. NASA would launch the satellites on a Delta launch vehicle on a cost-reimbursable basis. The satellites—GMS, a meteorological satellite; CS, an experimental medium-capacity comsat; and BS, an experimental medium-scale broadcast satellite—would participate in the worldwide Global Atmospheric Research Project (GARP) sponsored by the United Nations World Meteorological Organization. (Kyodo, FBIS—Japan, 22 July 75, C3; NASAMOR M-492-101-77-01, 12 July 77)
NASA was inviting U.S. and foreign corporations, universities, and government organizations to propose experiments for the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May 1974) after it completed its year of service to India [see 2 July]. After the Indian experiment, Ats 6 would be moved westward to the west coast of South America where it would operate within range of North and South America and adjacent ocean areas. NASA’s announcement of experiment opportunities for the comsat’s third year of operation invited proposals in the fields of societal, communications, or technological disciplines. (NASA Release 75 — 187)
The Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded a $36.3-million contract to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for building and testing in earth orbit a space laser communications system. The 5-yr contract would produce three synchronous satellites to relay high-data-rate messages by laser to aircraft, ground stations, or other satellites, with a capability of transmitting a billion pieces of data per sec—about 20 times the data volume possible with present commercial communications-satellite systems. The award includes development of the space and ground-station equipment. McDonnell would work on high-accuracy pointing of the laser beams, within 10 millionths of a degree. (St. Louis P-D, 20 Nov 75,13; LA Times, 9 Dec 75, 15C; SBD, 20 Nov 75, 107) 21 November-. Goddard'Space Flight Center awarded Boeing Co. a fixed-price incentive contract for $8 236 000 to provide modules for the first two Atmospheric Explorer missions: AEM—A (heat capacity satellite) and AEM—B (the stratospheric aerosol gas experiment—SAGE). AEM-A, scheduled for launch in 1978, would carry a heat-capacity mapping radiometer that NASA would acquire independently, to gather thermal-inertia data on rock types, location of mineral resources, soil moisture, and vegetation-cover temperature measurements. AEM—B’s SAGE would measure spatial distribution of stratospheric aerosol and ozone on a global basis. It had been scheduled for launch in 1979. (NASA Release 75—299; WSJ, 24 Nov 75, 28)
Satcom 1, first of three domestic communications satellites to be placed in geostationary orbit around the equator for RCA Corp. to transmit long-distance telephone calls and service data, had Been launched at 8:56 pm EST from Cape Canaveral on a Delta vehicle into a parking orbit with 35 980-km apogee and 182-km perigee. A kick motor was to be fired at 5:41 pm EST 15 Dec. to put the satellite into a synchronous orbit. The RCA Satcom was the second domestic communications satellite to be launched by communications companies; the Western Union Corporation’s Westar system became operational earlier this year. Each Satcom would receive and transmit data on 24 channels. Westar—a two-satellite system—had only 12 message channels per satellite. Each Satcom channel was built to transmit 1000 telephone calls at a time, or one color TV channel, or 64 million bits per sec of computer data. Satcom 1 would be stationed at 119°W, and the two subsequent Satcoms would be located at 99°W and 129°W over the equator to handle television, voice channels, and high-speed data between the contiguous U.S., Hawaii, and Alaska. (NASA Release 75— 302;NYT, 13 Dec 75,37;SBD, 16 Dec 75, 242; KSC Releases 289-75, 295-75)
The first successful air drop of data-collection platforms for use by the Nimbus 6 polar-orbiting weather satellite would lead to another first: successful day-to-day tracking of ice-pack movement in the Arctic Sea north of Alaska’s oil-rich Prudhoe Bay area. Knowledge about the interaction between the winter sea ice and the continental shelf would be important to government and to oil companies; government would use the information in allocating drilling areas and overseeing their use by private industry. Oil companies would need to know whether to locate drilling rigs on the ice or sink them into the sea bed; whether to bury pipelines under the ocean floor, lay them along the bottom, or run them over the ice to loading areas. The exterior sphere of the platforms, built to be dropped on the ice from small aircraft, had been constructed of a tough material to foil the hunger and curiosity of polar bears, which reportedly would attempt to chew on anything appearing different from the usual surroundings. The tracking and data-relay experiment aboard Nimbus 6 had successfully completed its share of a transmission test that sent sensor, telemetry, and ranging signals from its near-polar 1110-km orbit to NASA’s Ats 6 in geostationary orbit 35 900 km above India. The signals, relayed to NASA’s Madrid receiving station, were immediately retransmitted to GSFC. Information gathered in the test would be used to design the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) planned for late 1979. The system would use two geostationary satellites to relay tracking data, commands, and communications between a central ground terminal and a number of spacecraft in low earth orbit; this would increase low-orbit spacecraft access to ground stations from 15 to 85%, reducing NASA requirements for ground-station networks. General Electric’s Space Div., reporting on the success of the test, said the quality of all data received was excellent. (Marshall Star, 26 Nov 75, 4; San Diego Union, 9 Nov 75, 1 ;Aero Daily, 26 Nov 75, 140; SBD, 26 Nov 75, 143)
Heos 1, Europe’s longest-living satellite, reentered the earth’s atmosphere as predicted after exceeding its nominal lifetime by nearly 6 years. Launched 5 Dec. 1968 by the European Space Agency, Heos 1 was third of eight scientific satellites launched by ESRO/ESA between 1968 and 1975. Its full payload of 7 experiments gave excellent results 4 months longer than the nominal lifetime; the experiment to study the interplanetary magnetic field worked until reentry, providing invaluable data on the field for almost 7 of the 11 yr of a solar cycle. Experiments were: interplanetary magnetic field, high-energy galactic cosmic rays, and solar protons (Imperial College, London); solar wind (Universities of Florence, Rome, and Brussels); low-energy cosmic rays (Centre d’Etudes Nucleaires); high-energy electrons (CEN/University of Milan); barium cloud (Max Planck Institut). (ESA Release 29 Oct 75)
The U.S.S.R. was planning to flight-test the SLX—14, a launch vehicle larger than the Saturn 5, from Tyuratam during the summer of 1975, Kenneth W. Gatland reported in the Christian Science Monitor. Launch preparations, observed by the Air Force’s Big Bird reconnaissance satellites, had been under way since 1974. Gatland reported that the project had been delayed for more than 5 yr when a previous prototype caught fire and exploded during a 1969 fueling test. Two others had failed in flight, in 1971 and 1972. After considering cancellation of the project, Soviet officials ordered a drastic design review and the program continued with increased emphasis on systems reliability and ground testing. (Gatland, CSM, 16 April 75,1)
The Knights of Columbus, a U.S. Catholic fraternal organization, had agreed to pay for worldwide satellite coverage of three live 90-min Vatican events, the Washington Post reported. Four Intelsat satellites would telecast the midnight mass at Christmas, the Stations of the Cross from the Roman Colosseum on Good Friday, and the Pope’s Easter Sunday message. Each broadcast would cost an estimated $25 000. (W Post, 21 Aug 75)
The Communications Satellite Corporation filed with the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia a petition for review of the Federal Communications Commission decision of 4 Dec. on the allowed rate base, rate of return, and rate structure for ComSat’s international satellite services. ComSat intended to apply to the FCC—and to the court—for a stay of the FCC order that new tariffs be filed by 5 Jan. 1976. The corporation had prepared a letter to its stockholders on the FCC decision. (ComSat Release 75—61)
The communications satellite business was becoming one of the fastest growing businesses on earth, Thomas O’Toole said in a Washington Post article. The huge dish-shaped antennas used as telephone and television links between earth and the dozen or so orbiting comsats had sprouted up in the suburbs of Moscow and Peking, in Brazilian jungles, in the mountains of Iran, and in the deserts of Algeria. In addition, Algeria was building 14 antennas; Indonesia, 60; and Brazil, 2000. More than 90 countries were currently communicating by satellite, most using the seven Intelsat satellites orbited by the 89-country consortium, the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Worldwide Intelsat traffic was growing by 20% a year. In addition to the Intelsat comsats, the Soviet Union, Canada, France, and West Germany, and Western Union already owned their own comsats. Japan would have one by 1977, and Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Indonesia were each planning to orbit their own. Besides making it easier to communicate around the world, satellites were responsible for cutting the cost of overseas conversations. In 1947, a 3-min phone call from New York to London cost $12. The same call in 1975 cost $5.40. (O’Toole, W Post, 12 Jan 75, 1)
The 14-nation Arab League, joined by 6 other African and MidEastern states in a 20-nation satellite organization, had finished initial technical and economic feasibility studies for an Arab satellite-communications network and were beginning to define specific technical requirements for the system, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Program goals were to meet telecommunications requirements of Arabic-speaking states in North Africa and the Middle East for police work, weather broadcasting, civil aviation communications, and shipping, and to expand Arab technology into space. The Arab States Broadcasting Union estimated immediate need of 15 radio channels for direct broadcast of educational and cultural programs to remote areas, and 2 TV channels each for general and educational broadcasting. Estimated need of the Arab countries by 1976 would be as many as 1060 telephone, teletypewriter, and telegraph channels, and up to 6200 channels for this traffic by mid-1984. Av Wk reported that, although the first satellites and initial ground stations would be bought from Western countries, the long-term goal was to shift operation and control to Arab nationals after 6 mo. The system, which would provide communications and broadcast coverage for 95% of the Arab world, would include a main orbiting satellite, a standby orbiting satellite to replace the prime satellite in case of failure, and a reserve satellite kept on the ground ready for quick launch in case of satellite failure. (Ropelewski, Av Wk, 21 July 75, 56 -59)
Communications Satellite Corp. had received initial orders to lease terminals on tankers and other commercial vessels for communications via the Marisat maritime-satellite system. Exxon International Corp. had ordered five shipboard terminals to provide communications with Exxon tankers at sea. The U.S. Maritime Administration had ordered terminals for six U.S.-flag ships as part of a cooperative cost-sharing program between USMA and the vessel owners. The Marisat system, scheduled for commercial service later this year, would provide high-quality telex, data, and telephone communications 24 hrs a day to ships and offshore facilities. (ComSatCorp Release 75—48)
