INTELSAT—the International Telecommunication Satellite Organization— awarded a 12-mo $22 000 fixed-price contract to the Republic of China’s Government Radio Administration for collection and study of ionospheric scintillation data at 4 ghz, to be used as a data base for studying satellite-signal fluctuations caused by ionospheric effects. (INTELSAT Release 76-5-M) During January: Using Landsat imagery of an 85 000-sq-km region from the western edge of the Nile to the border of Libya along the Mediterranean coast, the Egyptian Academy of Scientific Research and Technology at the request of President Anwar Sadat made a study of the region’s geology, drainage, and ground water. The study resulted from problems of a rising ground-water table and salinity on newly reclaimed areas west of the Nile Delta. A copy of the report, sent to NASA by the Egyptian academy’s remote-sensing research project, said in part, “The new maps prepared from Landsat satellite images are more detailed and much more elaborate as compared to previous maps prepared by the traditional methods ... It has been possible to construct on the Landsat images 14 geological and environmental units in the investigated area . . . This work helps to decipher the geological history of northern Egypt, the Mediterranean Sea and the Nile Delta ... It is emphasized that additional irrigation waters should not be introduced in the area of investigation until detailed geological and hydrogeological studies have been carried out.” (Wkly Briefs for Administrator, 12 Jan 76)
The French government had earmarked a preliminary budget of $3.6 million for development of a spy satellite that would survey the earth’s surface with infrared cameras, the N.Y, Daily News said. Weighing several hundred kg and orbiting at 500 to 600 km altitude, the satellite would use several lenses in visible and infrared light to detect details at sizes ranging from 10 to 100 m. The government’s representative for armaments, J.-L. Delpech, said that France had “no military space policy” because reconnaissance satellites were “not essential” to France’s “deterrent strategy.” (FBIS, in French, 13 Jan 76; NY News, 14 Jan 76, 58)
The European Space Agency announced choice of payloads for its Ariane launcher L02 and L03 qualification flights scheduled between June 1979 and October 1980. Principal passenger on the L02 flight would be the recently announced Geosari satellite, with a lateral passenger, Amsat, a 70-kg radio-amateur space communications satellite proposed by a German organization affiliated with the Inti. Radio Amateur Satellite Organization. Ariane L03 would carry the India comsat Apple (Ariane passenger payload experiment), a three-axis-stabilized spacecraft weighing 616 kg that would continue experiments in the 4- to 6-ghz frequency to be performed by India in the Satellite Telecommunications Experiments Project (STEP). Mounted in the lower central portion of the launcher, Apple would bear the load of a principal-passenger satellite to be chosen by the end of the year from among a second Meteosat prototype; a flight prototype of Symphonie, Franco-German comsat; an Italian Sirio microwave comsat with a payload different from the first model (see A & A75, 10 Mar); and a Canadian CTS spacecraft equipped with a European communications payload. Nominal orbit for the L02 and L03 flights would be 35 800-km apogee, 200-km perigee, and 17.7° inclination. (ESA release 13 Oct 76)
Western Union announced that it had signed a 7-yr contract with the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB) for transmission services via the Westar satellite. Duration of the contract was a possible 15 yr. Contingent upon approval by the Federal Communications Commission, Western Union would begin 31 December 1978 to provide CPB with service on 3 fulltime fully protected transponders for $800 000 per transponder per yr, or $2.4 million annually, permitting CPB to offer national distribution of programs to 165 public-television stations through its manager, the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). The contract would give CPB an option on a fourth Westar transponder and establish rates for both scheduled and unscheduled service, and anticipated satellite distribution of radio programs to about 170 public radio stations through National Public Radio (NPR). Use of a 3- or 4-channel satellite system would serve many of the Congress’s policy goals for public broadcasting, CPB officials said: autonomy of local public stations, increased flexibility in programming, and lower cost of expanding public broadcasting coverage. (Western Union release, 16 June 76)
NASA launched Marisat 3, third and last in a series of Comsat General maritime communications satellites, from ETR at 6:44 pm EDT on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit. At seventh apogee 8:11 pm EDT 16 Oct., the apogee boost motor was fired to maneuver the satellite to a position at 36 000 km altitude above the equator at about 182°E; final move to operation location at 73°E above the Indian Ocean would take place in Nov. The spin-stabilized active-repeater spacecraft, weighing about 700 kg in orbit, was a cylinder with a diameter of about 2 m and an overall length of 3.65 m. Built by Hughes Aircraft Corp., the comsat would act as a relay station to transmit and receive information between ships and submarines at sea and shore stations. It would join Marisat 1, operating at 15°W over the Atlantic Ocean since Feb. 1976, and Marisat 2, operating at 176.5°E over the Pacific since June. (The Marisat 3 mission was judged successful 3 Nov. 1976; the Marisat 2 mission [see 9 June] had been judged successful 6 Oct. 1976.) (NASA Release 76-156; MOR M-492-205-76-03 [prelaunch] 6 Oct 76, [postlaunch] 5 Nov. 76; WStar, 15 Oct 76, A-5; MOR M-492-205-76-02, 14 Oct 76)
The board of governors of INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization—announced award of a 14-mo $2.9 million contract to the Societe Des Telecommunications Internationales du Cameroun for additional tracking, telemetry, command, and monitoring services to be provided by a new antenna collocated at Zamengoe, Cameroon, with existing standard communications and antennas. The new facilities, to be operational by October 1977, would augment service as the global satellite system became more complex, providing redundant service especially in the Atlantic and Indian Ocean areas. The contract included an option for extended service for an additional 24 mo. The Cameroon facilities had monitored Intelsat IV-A satellites since 1 April 76. (INTELSAT Release 76-23-1)
Marisat 1—first satellite of a privately owned $ 100-million system to provide rapid high-quality communications between ships at sea and shore stations—was launched on a Delta for Comsat General Corp. from Cape Canaveral at 5:32 pm local time (1032 GMT). The 655-kg craft was headed for a stationary orbit 35 788 km above the Atlantic Ocean at 15°W, about 547 km southwest of the coast of Liberia. A second satellite, Marisat B, would be stationed over the Pacific later this year. Marisat 1 carried 2 channels each about 4 mhz wide, operating in the L and C bands; one would translate shore-to-ship signals from 6 to 1.5 ghz, the other would translate ship-to-shore signals from 1.6 to 4 ghz. Ground stations at Southbury, Conn., and Santa Paula, Calif., would provide earth-satellite communications links, using 12.8-m-dia. antennas to relay tracking, telemetry, and command information between the satellites and the Comsat General control center in Washington, D.C. The U.S. government would use three UHF channels on the satellite, completely separate from the L- and C-band channels, through its own terminal facilities. The satellite system, owned and operated by a consortium headed by the Comsat General Corp., would he used by commercial shipping lines, as well as by the U.S. Navy pending completion of its own Fleet Satellite Communications System. By early April, commercial telephone, telex, and data communications would be available to link ships and offshore facilities with shore stations connected into domestic and international communications networks worldwide. Marisat mobile terminals had been purchased or leased from ComSat and installed on ships of a number of nations. (NASA Release 76-22; MOR M-492-205-76-01 [prelaunch] 26 Jan 76, [postlaunch] 13 Apr 76; ComSat Release CG 76-107; W Star, 20 Feb 76, A-6)
A vacuum test facility built near Philadelphia in 1962 by General Electric to test satellites would be used to freeze-dry most of New York City’s air-pollution control records, damaged in a 16th-floor records office on Wall Street by flooding from a ruptured check valve in the 17th-floor airconditioning system, the New York Times reported. Hundreds of thousands of cards and pages had been shipped in a refrigerator truck to Pa. to be dried before mold could form and consume the cellulose fibers in the paper. After placement in the chamber, the records would undergo a vacuum so that the water would turn into vapor, move to a condenser, and turn to ice; after being frozen and dehydrated, the papers would be rewarmed. Use of the facility would save “hundreds of thousands of dollars” and untold time in attempting to duplicate the records, the Commissioner of Air Resources said. (NYT, 29 Jan 76, 35)
The first satellite in the 2-ocean Marisat system inaugurated communications services to U.S. Navy ships. However, the scheduled 1 Apr. start of service to commercial shipping was canceled because of malfunctions in C- and L-band transmissions, involving random variations in signal strength. The Navy operations used UHF frequencies. Marisat 1 was launched 19 Feb. into synchronous orbit over the Atlantic; Comsat General Corp.—86% owner and manager of the Marisat system—said tests indicated that the problems could be solved “with respect to the [second] spacecraft” awaiting launch at ETR, in time to permit its scheduled launch 27 May for service in the Pacific Ocean. The difficulty appeared to be associated with a despun C-band triplexer, arising from loose metal particles. (Av Wk & Space Tech, 29 Mar 76, 14; Comsat 1975 rept. to stockholders, 9)
INTELSAT announced award to the British Aircraft Corp. of a 15-mo fixed-price contract for design, fabrication, test, and delivery of a model onboard processor programmable to perform a variety of tasks, including monitoring and control of satellite electronic functions. A standardized system based on microprocessors, rather than hard-wired logic, for each individual function or system would reduce weight and power consumption and increase satellite reliability and efficiency. Value of the contract was $121 600 in U.S, dollars. (INTELSAT Release 76-27-M)
Noaa 5, launched by NASA 29 July for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) into a sun-synchronous polar orbit at 1505 km, was turned over to NOAA after checkout and would become the primary operational satellite providing weather forecasters with a wide variety of environmental data. Noaa 5 would replace an earlier version, Noaa 4, which would become the backup spacecraft; an older polar orbiter launched in 1973 would be deactivated. NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service operates 2 satellite systems: one polar-orbiting, the other consisting of 2 geostationary satellites remaining in the same relative position to earth’s surface at all times. The polar-orbiting craft would scan any spot on earth twice every 24 hr and return visual and infrared imagery of cloudcover, sea-surface temperature, and other environmental indicators. (NOAA Release 76-199; MOR E-601-76-17 [postlaunch] 1 Oct 76; telcon, NOAA PAO, 5 Oct 76)
A Titan III-C rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center at 2:55 am local time (0755 GMT) carried into stationary orbit at about 36 000 km 2 experimental nuclear-powered comsats for the U.S. Air Force; 23 min later, the Navy’s Solrad 11-A and 11-B riding piggyback on the same rocket were sent toward an orbit more than 120 000 km up and at opposite sides of the earth, where they would monitor solar flares that disrupt communications and navigation systems on earth. The Air Force’s Les—8 and Les—9 were designed to guard against space jamming of U.S. military communications; spokesmen said the satellites were “right on the money” but would undergo various tests before they began their experimental message traffic. (NYT, 17 Mar 76, 39)
NASA launched Palapa 1, first of a series of Indonesian comsats, into a synchronous transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 7:31 pm EDT on a Delta vehicle. Orbital elements were 36 504-km apogee, 231-km perigee, and 24.6° inclination. At the 10th apogee, the boost motor was fired (4:30 pm EDT on 11 July) and the spacecraft was maneuvered into a position above the equator at about 83°E. Satellite status was reported satisfactory. The satellite’s name came from a 14th-century prime minister, Gaja Mada, who vowed not to eat a popular delicacy called palapa until Indonesia was united. The 8 July launch date was selected to ensure that the satellite would be operational on 17 Aug., when Indonesia celebrated its 31st anniversary of independence. Produced by Hughes Aircraft, the Palapa satellites would be identical to the Telesat Canada and Westar satellites except for antenna modifications; each satellite could relay 12 color TV channels or up to 4000 telephone circuits. A second Palapa was scheduled for launch in 1977. (NASA Release 76-117; MOR M-492-208-76-01, [prelaunch] 24 June 76, [postlaunch] 14 Oct 76)
U.S, failure to renew the Indian government’s access to the ATS satellite relaying birth-control and agricultural information to 2400 villages might intensify tensions between Washington and New Delhi, the Baltimore Sun said in an editorial. An alliance of U.S. scientists and environmentalists had already protested the sale to India of uranium for a power station near Bombay; the group had asked the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to require India to demonstrate that the substance would not be used to make bombs, as India had done in 1974 with plutonium derived from Canadian material supplied for a joint atomic-energy project. Combined with Ford Administration efforts to use development aid to force India into a more friendly posture, the Sun said that withholding advanced technology used by India for humanitarian purposes would create “an unnecessary blur” between humanitarian and development aid and would exacerbate rather than relax existing tensions. (B Sun, 6 Mar 76, A-12)
Comsat General Corp. announced an agreement with ARCO—the Atlantic Richfield Co.—to install a Marisat terminal on the S/S Arco Prudhoe Bay, a tanker commissioned in Baltimore in 1971, to evaluate satellite communications with an eye to equipping other Arco ships if the new medium should prove reliable. The tanker would transport crude oil from Alaska to U.S. west-coast ports, and communications via satellite would be valuable during periods when the aurora borealis (northern lights) made high-frequency communication difficult. Comsat facilities had been installed previously on 15 commercial vessels; the Marisat system would be the 16th, and would begin operations in commercial service about 1 April. (Comsat Release 76-105)
NASA launched Marisat 2, second in a series of ComSat maritime communications satellites, at 8:09 pm EDT from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle, into a transfer orbit with apogee of 36 924 km, perigee of 185 km, and 26° inclination. The apogee boost motor fired 11 June would put the spacecraft into a 36 000-km-altitude synchronous orbit at 176°E over the Pacific. Marisat was designed to transmit voice, data, facsimile, and telex messages to and from ships at sea, through special stations in Conn, and Calif, interconnected with existing domestic land networks; initially, the system would be used by the U.S. Navy, until its requirements terminated in the late 1970s. The cylindrical satellite, weighing 655 kg at liftoff and 317 kg in orbit, measured 2.1 m in diameter and was 3.6 m long. Like Marisat 1, which had been operating over the Atlantic since its launch 19 February, it carried 3 UHF channels for government use, activated or deactivated by ground command, and 2 4-hz channels operating in the L- and C-bands respectively to carry ship-to-shore and shore-to-ship signals; the full ship-to-shore capacity would always be available independent of government use of the UHF channels, which would use separate receiving facilities. (NASA Release 76-83; MOR 492-205-76-02 [prelaunch] 7 June 76, [postlaunch] 14 Oct 76)
The European Space Agency announced that its exhibit at the Famborough International Aerospace Exhibition in Sept, would include a full-scale model of the Spacelab, to be exhibited for the first time in Rritain to give the British public a better idea of Europe’s space activities and to extend contacts with science and industry. ESA’s exhibit would also include full-size models of Meteosat and the OTS comsat, plus a tenth-scale model of the Ariane launcher. British firms were prime contractors for the OTS (orbiting test satellite) scheduled for launch in 1977 and for the maritime satellite Marots to be launched early in 1978. (ESA release 19 Aug 76)
A simple device to reorient an orbiting satellite toward the earth stations with which it would communicate had been used successfully on Satcom 1, RCA-owned comsat launched by NASA in December 1975. Patented by two engineers at the RCA Electronics Div. in N.J., the new equipment took advantage of the gyroscopic effect of a wheel normally rotated to stabilize a satellite in synchronous orbit; only a simple start signal from the earth could activate it. Previous systems needed precision controls involving delicate sensors and thrust motors manipulated from the ground. Satcom 1, in synchronous orbit at about 35 000-km altitude, had been rotated 90° by the new system to point its instrumentation at the earth; it would begin regular transmission in March. (ATT, 21 Feb 76, 31)
The Communications Research Centre (CRC) of the Canadian government’s Communications Department in Ottawa announced successful demonstration of a new satellite-aided search-and-rescue concept that could reduce time, fuel-dollar, and other costs associated with conventional ways of finding downed aircraft. The demonstration was funded by the Canadian Department of National Defence. The project, begun in May 1975, used the Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation’s Oscar 6 satellite with simulated distress signals to show that crash sites in Canada—and elsewhere in the world—could be pinpointed with accuracies as good as 1.6 km, generally within 3 km, in as little as 15 to 20 min after the spacecraft first heard the signal. The conventional emergency locator transmitter (ELT) mandatory for aircraft in Canada and the U.S. would automatically signal on crash impact, as designed, providing a signal on the international distress frequency of 121.5 hz for at least 100 hr for search-and-rescue aircraft to home into. The search range until now had been within 50 km of a crash site, flying crisscross patterns involving many planes and dozens of costly as well as risky flying hours. The satellite system would depend on two things: highly precise orbit predictions (knowledge of the satellite’s exact position at any instant) and sophisticated computer processing of distress signals relayed to a ground station. The system works by measuring the Doppler shift in the ELT signal frequency as the satellite at about 1100 km altitude passes over the crash site; locations of about 60 “crashes” simulated by transmitters as far away as Winnipeg had been fixed by processing Oscar 6 signals with increasing degrees of accuracy. An operational system would include 3 satellites with a design lifetime of 7 to 10 yr, with total spacecraft and launch costs about $30 million. When the satellite nearest to a crash site appeared over the visible horizon, it would alert ground stations that it had received an alarm; 15 min later, at the conclusion of its pass, an immediate fix accurate within 112 km would be possible, and a position fixing the site within 3 km would be delivered within 2 to 15 min depending on the capacity of the computer. A $3 million annual cost over 10 yr would be only a small part of what Canada was now spending on aerial searches. (CDC release 8 June 76)
The 26-m “Venus dish” at NASA’s Coldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calif., normally used to communicate with interplanetary spacecraft, was serving as a research tool to study conversion of solar energy from satellites to electricity for use on earth, Goldstone researchers reported. In the tests, the big antenna represented an energy satellite collecting and converting sun energy into microwaves; more than a km and a half away, a set of receiver panels called a “rectenna” played the part of a ground station. The 7.6-m-high receiver panels contained more than 4500 aluminum T-shaped rectenna elements about 100 mm high, working like a TV antenna to gather and filter the microwave energy, converting it to AC or DC that could be fed directly into a utility. Results had been promising, with collection and conversion of mierowave beams to usable electricity at an efficiency of 82%. (NASA PAO, 76-H-685, caption)
The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) reported 1975 net income of slightly more than $46 million, compared to nearly 145 million for 197 4, attributing the increase to additional leasing of circuits to the corporation’s customers—3833 at the end of 1975, compared to 3510 in 1974. The report noted the FCC decision of 4 Dec. 1975 ordering lower rates for services provided through ComSat’s global system, and warned that the decision would have “a substantial adverse impact” on future earnings unless modified by judicial review. ComSat had appealed the ruling and delayed filing a schedule of lower rates. (ComSat Release 76-3)
NASA-funded studies conducted in Fla. and Tex. using infrared images from NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service had provided fruit and vegetable growers with timely information on ground temperatures during periods of crop-killing freezes, NOAA announced. The images, provided every half hour by Goes 1 from its equatorial station over South America at 35 800-km altitude, were transmitted from heat-radiation sensors to ground stations for conversion to visual imagery. The Fla. study used a computer to display the temperature variations in shades of gray, verified by ground readings taken in the area by Univ. of Fla. personnel. The Texas study converted the satellite data to typewriter characters that produced a remarkably similar printout, transmissible over teletypewriter machines, more widely available than photofax equipment. Both studies aimed at helping growers decide whether to undertake expensive steps to keep crops from being damaged by frost; heating orchards in Florida might cost up to $5 million per night. (NOAA Release 76-257)
The official Manila radio announced an agreement between Domestic Satellite Philippines and the Nippon Electric Co. of Japan for acquisition, installation, and construction of 11 earth-satellite stations in a $26 million satellite communications system, to be operational by 1978. The system would provide long-distance service in the national communications network. (FBIS, Manila FEBC in English, 5 Oct 76)
India’s second artificial earth satellite would be launched in 1978 from a USSR cosmodrome, Tass announced. The agreement had been made at a Moscow meeting of a working group of Soviet and Indian specialists. (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 Apr 76)
Two Landsats, launched in 1972 and 1975 to monitor earth resources, had been tested for the job of census taker by NASA and the Bureau of the Census, NASA announced. Public Law 521, signed by President Ford 18 Oct. 76, required a complete U.S. census every 5 yr instead of once every 10 yr; the satellites, if their performance in 1980 in regional readouts and verifications should prove satisfactory, would permit significant savings in manpower, the Bureau said. Landsat images, although not detailed enough to count people or houses, could serve to identify geological, agricultural, and societal features, especially residential patterns of growth. Satellite images of areas of Md. and Tex. had been processed in 1975 to identify land cover typical of transition from rural to urban use; conventional census boundaries overlaid on the images enabled a computer to identify urban fringe zones in the test areas, verified by actual census statistics, the Bureau said. (NASA Release 76-176)
San Marco C-2, launched from the San Marco platform 18 Feb. 1974 into an elliptical orbit to record day-by-day variations in the equatorial atmosphere’s density, composition, and temperature, was declared a success after 2 3 mo in orbit during which it obtained more than 17 diurnal cycles of data. The data had been correlated with data from Explorer 51 (AE-C) in studying the physics and dynamics of the thermosphere, and these studies would continue as more data from the two satellites were processed and analyzed. Two U.S. scientific instruments were still operating normally, but the Italian air-drag balance instrument (which malfunctioned shortly after launch) had not performed properly. (MOR S-894-74-04, 30 Jan. 76)
NASA launched ITOS-H, fifth operational spacecraft of the second-generation improved Tiros operational satellite (ITOS) series, from the Western Test Range at 1:07 pm EDT (10:07 am PDT, local time) on a 2-stage Delta vehicle into a synchronous polar orbit with 1523.6-km apogee, 1512.5-km perigee, 102.1° inclination, and 116.2-min period. After successful injection into orbit, the satellite was redesignated Noaa 5; upon completion of in-orbit checkout, spacecraft control would be transferred to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) as part of that agency’s National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (NOMSS). Of 4 previous Noaa polar-orbiting spacecraft, 2 still provided limited information but had deteriorated after 2.5 and 1.5 yr in orbit respectively because of harsh environmental conditions in space. ITOS spacecraft were designed to provide complete global coverage of earth’s cloudcover and atmospheric structure on a daily basis, using both daytime and nighttime instrumentation. The 345-kg boxlike spacecraft measured roughly 1 x 1 x 1.25 m and carried 3 winglike panels covered with solar cells, as well as earth-orientation devices and 4 communications antennas. Sensor systems included 2 vertical-temperature profile radiometers, 2 very high-resolution radiometers, and 2 solar-proton monitoring systems, as well as a scanning radiometer system to provide both stored picture coverage for transmission on demand and direct transmission of images to receiving stations within range. Visible-channel resolution was 3.7 km, infrared resolution 7.4 km. (NASA Release 76-130; MOR E-601-76-17 [prelaunch] 28 July 76, [postlaunch] 30 July 76, 1 Oct 76; NOAA Releases 76-143, 76-152)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) reported net income for the third quarter of 1976 of $7 607 000, down from last yr’s third-quarter net of $11 837 000. The decrease was the result of amounts placed in escrow under an FCC accounting and refund order of 16 June 1976; if the order had not been in effect, the quarter’s net would have been $14 603 000. Although operating income dropped as a result of the escrow requirement, the wholly owned Comsat General Corp. for the first time had realized revenues for the entire period from both Marisat and Comstar programs; in the third quarter a yr ago, the subsidiary had reduced ComSat’s net operating income by a penny per share. Operating expenses, including taxes, were $30 223 000 for the quarter, up from $24 997 000 for the third quarter of 1975; the increase was due to costs of the launches of Intelsat IV-A, Marisat, and Comstar satellites. ComSat’s gross operating revenues for the third quarter of 1976 totaled $36 260 000, an increase over last yr’s third quarter total of $35 116 000; the escrow requirement had prevented the gross revenues from increasing more than $ 15 million over last yr’s third quarter with the beginning of Marisat and Comstar services and continued growth in the number of circuits leased to customers of the Intelsat global communications system. Half circuits leased at the end of Sept. 1976 numbered 4129, a 16% increase over the 3547 leased at the end of Sept. 1975. Money put in escrow under the FCC order represented the difference between customer payments to ComSat under present rates, and the amounts based on lower rates that would be required under an FCC rate decision of 4 Dec. 1975. The rate decision was still under judicial review. (ComSat Release 76-16)
INTELSAT (International Telecommunications Satellite Organization) announced that its board of governors, meeting in Washington 21-28 July, had approved the loan of a cesium ion thruster to NASA under a 1-yr no-cost arrangement, for use in research on inert gases (argon and xenon) as propellants for auxiliary propulsion in spacecraft and ground-based applications. Like the nickel-hydrogen battery for the Navy’s navigation-technology satellite to be launched later this year and an echo canceller to be licensed for use in satellite communications, the INTELSAT thruster was developed under a series of contracts managed by COMSAT Laboratories at Clarksburg, Md. It had exhibited higher electrical and propellant efficiency than other thrusters of comparable size. (INTELSAT Release 76-22-M)
The Communications Satellite Corp. reported net income of $11 041 000 for the first quarter of 1976, compared with $12 692 000 for the same period of 1975. Although total income of $37 276 000 for the first quarter was 2% higher than that for the same period in 1975, higher depreciation charges associated with the launch of additional satellites— Intelsat IV-A F-l and F-2, and the first Marisat—and higher operating costs, together with expenses of operating Satellite Business Systems—a partnership formed by subsidiaries of ComSat, IBM, and Aetna— accounted for the reduction in income. ComSat had appealed the FCC decision of 4 Dec. 75 reducing its rates, and FCC had delayed the effective date of the lower rates until the court had ruled on the appeal. (ComSat Release 76-7)
Photographs from U.S. remote-sensing satellites had revealed the existence of water, oil, uranium, and other minerals in the Egyptian Sahara and the Sinai peninsula, the Washington Post reported. Egyptian scientist Ahmed Abdel Hady, head of an Egyptian-American scientific team in charge of a remote-sensing project that had been receiving data from satellites since 1972, said in an AP interview that the satellites revealed enough water in the Sinai desert “to turn most of it green.” (Most of Sinai was still occupied by the Israelis, who seized it in 1967.) The Egyptian government, working in cooperation with Okla. State Univ. and the Univ. of Mich., had an annual budget of $1.2 million for study of the untapped resources, Abdel Hady said. Although the satellite data had shown that highlands in northern Sinai and the coastal strip of Wadi el Arish, totaling more than 770 km“, concealed a huge water potential, he declined to go into details because “I don’t want to make it difficult for Egypt when it negotiates the next Israeli pullout.” However, he described photographs of an area about 1350 km" in Sinai that showed three different areas rich in petroleum and natural gas: the Gulf of Suez, with oil reserves already proven; the Mediterranean offshore area in northern Sinai, not yet explored; and a large area in southern Sinai marked by sedimentary rocks carrying natural gas. Uranium was also detected in northwest and southern Sinai, and west central Sinai contained huge amounts of silica that could lead to a glass industry, Abdel Hady said. Besides the desert potential, he added, the images also showed significant food-growing potential in a previously unnoted fertile area measuring about 965 km~ near the Nile basin; the images were also used to study the Qattara Depression in the desert west of the Nile, site of a huge proposed hydroelectric project. (W Post, 13 June 76, G-2)
Leadership of Europe’s comsat programs had gravitated toward the U.K.—“more by accident” than by design, said an ESA official—since prime contractorship for those programs had fallen to Britain’s Hawker Siddeley Dynamics within the European consortium known as MESH (Matra of France, ERNO of W. Germany, Saab-Scania of Sweden, Aeri-talia of Italy, and Fokker-VFW of Holland). Current programs included OTS, the orbital test satellite scheduled for launch in 1977 to evaluate items for an operational European telecommunications system; Marots, to be launched in 1978, an experimental maritime comsat; and ECS, the European comsat that ESA hoped to fly in the early 1980s. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that potential markets worldwide for prime-contractor capability had become so numerous that MESH had divided marketing responsibilities among its members according to their influence in various regions, HSD being strongest in Arab League areas and in Africa. An HSD official noted that Europe was ahead of the U.S. in three-axis stabilization and in higher frequencies for satellite communications; demonstration of effective project leadership would assure future success in the world market. (Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 96) Japan’s Natl. Police Agency announced that Belenko was the 15th Soviet national to seek protection in Japan with a view to taking political asylum in some other country; of the previous 14, 11 went to the U.S. and 1 each to Italy, Israel, and West Germany. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFB in English, 6, 7 Sept; Tokyo Kyodo in English, 6, 7 Sept; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 25; W Post, 7 Sept 76, A-l)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization— announced award of an $8840 contract to the Univ. of Oulu, Finland, for measurements of low-elevation-angle scintillation. The 1 -yr contract covered investigation of the slow fluctuation in received-signal strength from a satellite to earth stations in humid localities, at elevation angles of 5° above the horizon. Water vapor in the lower atmosphere could cause fluctuations in signal strength, intensified where the look-angle from station to satellite is as low as 5 °, causing the signal to pass through more of earth’s atmosphere than if the elevation angle were greater. (INTELSAT Release 76-21-M)
A radio sensing system deployed by the federal government in remote areas of the U.S. since the spring of 1975 to warn of impending natural disasters had already passed one test, reported David S. Johnson, director of the National Environmental Satellite Service. An impending flood upstream from the town of Deming, Wash., had been detected by the sensors, and the river had crested an inch above its flood stage as predicted. The radio sensors, attached to transmitters, collected and relayed data from NOAA geostationary satellites (Goes 1, watching the East Coast, and Sms 2 watching the Pacific Coast); the satellites relayed the information to NOAA computers in the World Weather Building at Suitland, Md. Initial work on the system began in the 1960s, and it was already operational. By summer of 1976, 150 to 200 sensor stations would be in place; a total of about 10 000 would eventually be situated to warn of floods, earthquakes, forest fires, or tidal waves that began in unfrequented areas. The system could also be used for keeping track of ships at sea or of trucks on the highway. (B Sun, 26 Feb 76, A—1; NOAA Release 76-32)
Scientists at Mass. Institute of Technology, using NASA’s Sas 3 x-ray astronomy satellite, found a stellar object unlike any other and were unable to say what it was. The discovery, located by Dutch astronomers in the center of the galaxy in the constellation Sagittarius, gave off x-ray bursts that were unevenly spaced, although pulse after pulse proved to be identical. The object might be a single new source or a combination of old ones, but its distance was millions of light years and the source might be nonexistent now, the investigators said. (W Star, 1 Feb 76, A-6)
The Aerosat Space Segment Board, representing the European Space Agency, Comsat General Corp., and the government of Canada, decided to issue requests for proposals for a supply of Aerosat spacecraft beginning 1 Mar., with target date for award of contract 15 Nov. The Aerosat program, to be carried out by ESA, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, and the government of Canada, would set up an experimental satellite-communications system between transoceanic aircraft and the ground to tesffunctions and timing of an operational system for the International Civil Aviation Organization. Two satellites designed for 7-yr lifetime would be launched into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean, probably in 1979-80. (ESA release 23 Jan 76; Comsat General Release 76-103)
At the request of the Soviet Union, U.S. satellites took pictures of the predicted bumper crop of grain in the USSR and turned the pictures over to that country to confirm the predictions, said presidential science adviser Dr. H. Guyford Stever at a White House briefing. The Russians had announced 5 Nov. that more than 220 million metric tons of grain had been harvested; U.S. Dept, of Agriculture officials said the final figures would probably exceed 1973’s record Soviet harvest of 222.5 million tons. (NYT17 Dec 76, A-4)
The Brazilian Telecommunications Company received bids from international firms to supply space tracking equipment to the Brazilian satellite communications system, according to a broadcast from the Brasilia Domestic Service. The announcement said the first stage of the domestic satellite system, to be concluded in 1979, would consist of 17 receiving and transmitting stations primarily in the Amazon region, and two space satellites; a third would be used for replacement. During a second phase ending in 1981, 19 more stations would be added. The system would consist of 44 stations in all, the last eight to be added later. (FBIS, Brasilia Domestic Service in Portuguese, 6 Oct 76)
Ithaco Inc. of Ithaca, N.Y., a space-industry subcontractor specializing in low-orbital unmanned-satellite electronics, had discovered a lucrative and largely untapped agricultural market by turning its expertise on animal electronics: specifically, a new device first marketed 19 mo ago to help farmers determine whether their pigs were pregnant and to preview the quality of porkchops the hogs would produce. The device would let farmers determine pig-pregnancy status 50 to 60 days earlier than previously possible, meaning substantial savings for breeders, company officials said, adding that the market would not be attractive to a large company. Overseas farmers accounted for up to 40% of “Scan-oprobe” sales, which totaled $3.8 million for the 1976 fiscal year, best in the firm’s 14-yr history. Ithaco would not abandon its space contracts, the company said, but employees who worked on intricate satellite parts could be switched over to the “animal electronics” contracts. (ATT, 15 Dec 76, A 16)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organizationawarded an 18-mo $275 000 fixed-price contract to TRW Systems, Inc., for a skewed reaction-wheel thruster attitude-control and stabilization system. A system based on the reaction-wheel principle would offer a combination of fight weight, high reliability, and accurate performance for future comsats. External disturbances of satellite stability would be canceled by spinning up the reaction wheels to create offsetting torques, then stopping the spin by use of thrusters. (INTELSAT Release 76-4-M)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced opening of a new ground station near Michelstadt/Odenwald, West Germany, that would include two 15m-dia parabolic antennas that would be operational for the launches of ESA satellites Geos and Meteosat in 1977. Geos, first geostationary scientific satellite, and Meteosat, Europe’s first meteorological satellite, would remain in uninterrupted contact with the Odenwald station because of their geostationary orbits. The two antennas represented an innovation in the field of telecommunications, ESA said, because of a special construction: To avoid mutual interference with ground-to-ground links operated by the W. German post office, the special construction resulted in an exceptionally low sidelobe level heretofore unattained, without reducing the station’s telecommunications performance. The station would be inaugurated 14 Sept, by Hans Matthofer, German minister for research and technology, and Roy Gibson, ESA’s director general. (ESA release 13 Sept 76)
Tass reported from Moscow the launch of Intercosmos 16, carrying scientific apparatus developed in the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, and Sweden, as well as in the USSR. Orbital parameters were said to be 523-km apogee, 465-km perigee, 94.4-min period, and 50.6° inclination. The probe was to study ultraviolet and x-ray radiation from the sun and the effects of this radiation on upper-atmosphere structure. Observatories in Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR, and Czechoslovakia were making ground observations of the sun simultaneously with measurements taken aboard the satellite. (FBIS, Tass in English, 27 July 76)
Goes 1, a new geostationary environmental satellite launched in Oct. 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), became operational, replacing Sms 1 above the equator over northern Brazil to provide forecasters with visual and infrared pictures of the western hemisphere, to monitor solar-flare activity, and to relay information from data-collection stations in remote areas. Sms 1 would be moved to standby status over the eastern Pacific south of Mexico; a prototype satellite, some of whose systems have degraded, it could still provide full operational data on an emergency basis. Sms 2, launched in Feb. 1975, was moved in Dec. from 115°W to 135°W to provide improved imagery of the Pacific in the Hawaiian Islands area. (NOAA Release 76-1)
NASA announced establishment of a joint working group with the Agency for Inti. Development (AID) to explore further cooperative programs upon successful completion of the AIDSAT project. Final demonstration of AIDSAT came 30 Oct. in Haiti. NASA’s Ats 6 satellite showed people in 27 developing nations how space could improve their way of life, using small portable transmitter-receiver units to broadcast high-quality color TV directly to low-cost receivers in remote areas. Programs consisted of both filmed and live portions: on film, viewers saw a message from President Ford, followed by one of three films produced by NASA on communications technology, remote-sensing satellites (like Landsat), and prediction and relief in natural disasters. The live segment contained two half-hour programs; the first, originating in the host country, showed officials describing technological challenges and current efforts to meet them, and the second was a two-way question-and-answer session between senior officials in the host country and experts in Washington, D.C., discussing education, health, agriculture, and similar national concerns. Millions of viewers had seen what in many instances were the first color TV broadcasts in the host country. (NASA Release 76-189)
Comsat General Corp. signed an agreement with the Water Resources Division, U.S. Department of Interior’s Geological Survey, to conduct a 6-mo joint evaluation of the use of satellites to transmit data from remote hydrological sensors to a central facility. Comsat General would provide 11 small data-collection platforms to receive and transmit the data via satellite to a central receive facility. The DCPs would be located near Survey sensors in the continental U.S.: 5 in the Pacific Northwest, 5 in eastern Pa., and one near Survey headquarters at Reston, Va. Central receiving station would be the ComSat station at Southbury, Conn., where the data would be stored on magnetic tape and accessed by the Survey on interconnecting terrestrial lines. The program would provide a chance to evaluate collection of environmental data by satellite under operational conditions; it would begin later in 1976 and conclude within 6 mo, subject to FCC approval. (ComSat Release CG 76-112)
Symphonie 2, the Franco-German telecommunications satellite that drifted out of its normal geostationary orbit late last month, was gradually repositioned by using its cold-gas stabilization system, Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported. French and German space technicians determined that the malfunction was caused by a still unidentified defect in one of 4 valves feeding the exhaust nozzles of the satellite’s hot-gas stabilization system. Transmissions normally handled by Symphonie 2 were shifted to Symphonie 1 while the repositioning went on; both satellites were reported working normally again. (Av Wk, 28 June 76, 11)
Interavia magazine printed a photograph of Dora, a solar, generator being manufactured by AEG-Telefunken under contract to the German Institute for Space Research to provide power for 1980s communications satellites. Dora was designed as a “variably deployable array,” meaning that it could begin its service life partially deployed; unfurled gradually at intervals, it could maintain a constant output over the years. It could also be folded down and brought back to earth at the end of a Spacelab mission. It consisted of two 22- by 2.8-m array panels carrying 46 000 solar cells. (Interavia, June 26, 504)
Communications via satellite was a science-fiction writer’s dream 30 yr ago, but within 2 decades after Arthur C. Clarke predicted it, the first comsat—Early Bird, launched 6 Apr. 1965 into synchronous orbit— began Operations 28 June 1965 and opened a new chapter in communications history. In an article in the Telecommunications Journal, Santiago Astrain, secretary general of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), viewed the past 10 yr, up to the new Intelsat IV-A, largest operational comsat to date. The brief history of INTELSAT summarized the organization’s development from 1960, when President Eisenhower called for the creation of a global communications system; after the United Nations passed a resolution supporting the concept, the U.S. Congress passed the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 that brought the Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) into being. On 20 Aug. 1964, 11 countries (representing 85% of the world’s telecommunications traffic) created an international consortium to be managed by ComSat on an interim basis. On 12 Feb. 73, the Definitive Agreements were signed; by the time they took effect, the number of member nations had increased to 80. Membership was open to all countries that were members of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU); any country, whether or not a member of INTELSAT, could have access to the system on a nondiscriminatory basis. Current planning was geared to meet a traffic demand for capacity to handle about 70 000 telephone channels by 1984; this would represent a 6-fold increase within 10 yr. Intelsat V satellites due to enter service in 1979 would provide more than 23 000 channels. As INTELSAT had the object of providing high-quality communications service, its policy had been to maintain a “spare” comsat in each ocean to make additional capacity always available; this had enabled the organization to provide domestic services at a reasonable cost. Since operations began in 1965, the number of countries actually participating in operations had increased from 5 to 64; the number of earth stations, from 5 to 90; and the number of antennas, from 5 to 115. (Telecommunications Jl, vol42, 672-677)
The Soviet Union would use artificial satellites and manned orbital stations to investigate dynamic processes in the ocean during the new 5-yr plan period, Tass reported. Soviet oceanologist Leonid Brekhovskikh in an interview forecast a growing number of experiments conducted jointly with other countries, among them a “polymode” experiment with the II .S. to study the nature of huge vertical formations in the ocean discovered by Soviet scientists in 1970. The USSR also planned a global satellite experiment called “pigap” for concurrent study of dynamic processes in the atmosphere and the ocean. (FBIS, Moscow Tass, U 1, 29 Jan 76)
The USSR launched Intercosmos 15 on 19 June, a Tass broadcast announced, as an example of “socialist countries’ cooperation” in space research. The spacecraft orbital parameters were 521-km apogee, 487-km perigee, 74° inclination, and 94.6-min period. Intercosmos 15 was designed to “test new systems and units,” including a telemetry system developed and manufactured with the participation of specialists from Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the German Democratic Republic, as well as the USSR. Satellite data would be transmitted to receiving stations in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and the GDR. (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 June 76)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization— awarded a 9-mo $75 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for development of improved vibration-test techniques for testing future Intelsat spacecraft, leading to reduced spacecraft weight and a lessening of spacecraft fatigue. (INTELSAT Release 76-1-M)
NASA announced that LeRC, the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Navy, and the Natl. Weather Service had successfully completed in Alaska a 3—wk demonstration of an all-weather ice-information system developed in response to a Congressional request to see if the Great Lakes could be kept open for shipping all year. Cargoes reshipped because their barges had been iced in or turned back by weather had incurred additional transportation costs estimated at between $30 and $50 million in 1975 alone. The demonstration—performed along the western and northern coasts of Alaska, a region having serious shipping problems caused by thick ice 60% of the time-—used a Coast Guard plane equipped with NASA’s side-looking airborne radar to obtain daily microwave imagery similar to black-and-white photography, that revealed the type and distribution of ice in any kind of weather regardless of dense cloudcover. The data on coastal shipping were relayed through a Goes satellite by way of Wallops Island to LeRC; after processing, the images were sent back through Canada’s CTS satellite to Alaska for the Navy’s ice interpreters to use in making navigation charts for vessels moving in offshore ice. The system had been used in the Arctic to aid the Coast Guard icebreaker Glacier in operating through ice in zero-visibility conditions. Use of the system had helped to keep the Great Lakes open for shipping for two full seasons for the first time in history, at an estimated saving of hundreds of millions of dollars each year; the 1976-77 shipping would be the third and final year of demonstration. (NASA Release 76-165)
Switzerland and the U.K. became the first 2 countries to sign a protocol authorizing the European Space Agency to “undertake the exploitation phase” of its meteorological satellite Meteosat. The agreement, signed in Paris, would remain open until 30 September for signature by the other participants (Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden) and for other countries to participate. Meteosat, being developed for ESA by the Cosmos consortium with Aerospatiale (France) as prime contractor, was one of four current ESA applications programs; it covered the design, development, construction, launch, management, and control of a preoperational satellite. ESA’s responsibility for checking out Meteosat in orbit for the first 6 mo after launch (scheduled for the third quarter of 1977) would be extended by the protocol to include the subsequent 2.5-yr “exploitation phase” of the satellite to be carried out with meteorological authorities in the participating countries. Other ESA applications programs were OTS (telecommunications), MAROTS (maritime communications), and Aerosat (air traffic control). (ESA release 23 June 76)
The USSR launched the second operational satellite in its Statsionar 1 series, also known as Raduga (Rainbow), into a circular orbit at 35 900-km altitude, 0.3° inclination, and 1436-min period, Tass announced. Carrying retransmitting equipment for continuous telephone and telegraph communications, Raduga would also transmit color and black-and-white TV programs to Central Asia and Siberia. (UPI in NYT, 14 Sept 76, 28; Sf Mar 1977, 117)
Geos 3, the geodynamics experimental ocean satellite launched 9 Apr. 1975, completed 9 mo in orbit and the project was judged successful with respect to the prelaunch mission objectives. Problems with orbit definition and revised criteria for data distribution had delayed the release of large quantities of data, said a report by Charles W. Mathews, Associate Administrator for Applications at NASA, but the first batches would be shipped 30 Jan. to principal investigators, and subsequent batches would be released monthly thereafter. (MOR E-855-75-01 [postlaunch], 25 Feb 76)
The USAF launched an early-warning satellite from Cape Canaveral at 11 am EOT on a Titan IIIC. The satellite—product of the TRW/Aerojet Defense Support Program—was reported to be a replacement for a satellite launched 14 Dec. 1975 that malfunctioned. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 35 600 km; perigee, 35 600 km; inclination, 0.5°; period, 1433 min. DOD, which had 10 launches in 1975, had launched 7 so far in 1976. (SBD, 29 June 76, 6-F)
The French government halted operations of sounding-rocket and scientific satellite launchings from its base at Kourou, French Guiana, after 7 yr of activity that included launches of 275 rockets or balloons, many of them under U.S. government or National Science Foundation programs. The base had become a victim of European economic problems that had led to the abandonment of ELDO—the European Launcher Development Organization formed by several countries in July 1966—when the first launching in 1971 failed. The head of the operations division at Kourou said there was a complete lack of coordination among the countries, although France and its partners had spent about $500 million on the site and support facilities at Kourou. Space research would resume in about 4 yr with the launch of a 3/4-ton telecommunications satellite sponsored by the French government, under a new system in which each project would be under the management of one country. Ten European governments would contribute money, and the funds would be allocated in the form of contracts for each project. (W Post, 11 Jan 76, E 7)
ESA announced acceptance of the first solid-propellant apogee boost motor produced in Europe—designed and made by SNIA-Viscosa of Italy in collaboration with SEP of France—for use in its Geos (geostationary scientific satellite). The motor, measuring 1.1 m long with maximum diameter of 0.7 m, weighed 305 kg, more than the remainder of the spacecraft, and would serve to inject the satellite into geostationary orbit from the elliptical transfer orbit provided by a Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The satellite was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral in April 1977. (ESA release 9 Nov 76)
ESA announced that its council meeting in Paris 16 and 17 Dec. had approved a new program, Earthnet, in which ESA would centralize and coordinate European activities in reception, processing, distribution, and archiving of earth-resources satellite data. Earthnet would give European users access to data from NASA programs such as Landsat, Seasat, Nimbus-G, and the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission, to provide a basis for defining European requirements for future remote-sensing satellite programs. Earthnet would be integrated into existing data-reception and processing facilities at Fucino, Italy, and would use ESA’s computerized data center at Frascati, Italy, with an information-retrieval network RECON to disseminate information on the data available. (ESA release 21 Dec 76)
Cloud-brightness images from orbiting satellites would enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to predict the difference between relatively “dry” hurricanes and destructively wet ones such as Agnes (1972), Fifi (1974), and Eloise (1975), said Dr. Neil Frank of the Dept, of Commerce’s National Hurricane Center. For years, said Dr. Frank, meteorologists had known that some hurricanes were wetter than others, with those having highest potential rainfall also highest in damage over land. A new technique would estimate hurricane-rainfall potential from cloud images calibrated with computer models of river-basin flooding; the technique would be “a predictive tool” for inclusion in hurricane warnings. Heavy rains from Fifi in 1974 caused one of the worst natural disasters of the Western Hemisphere when heavy rains brought unexpected flash flooding that killed thousands in and around Honduras. Besides killing 118 people, Agnes caused an estimated $2.1 billion in property damage from torrential rains and flooding; Eloise caused an estimated $200 million in property damage, again mainly from rain-caused flooding. The satellite technique was used retrospectively to estimate the rainfall from 7 hurricanes for which radar and rain-gauge measurements were available; results disclosed little or no relationship between the volume or intensity of a storm and its rainfall. However, the rainfall potential calculated by the new procedure for the 7 hurricanes in the study agreed well with actual experience. Although estimates obtained through the new technique were relative, not absolute, the NOAA scientists viewed the procedure as a valuable tool for developing nations, an inexpensive system to monitor rainfall and improve the meteorological basis of agricultural and water-management planning. (NOAA Release 76-158)
Intelsat IV-A F-2, second in a series of improved commercial comsats, was launched from Cape Kennedy on an Atlas-Centaur at 6:56 pm EST (2356 GMT) into a transfer orbit at about 31 000-km apogee, aimed at a station over the Atlantic Ocean at 29.5°W which it should reach by April. Working as a backup to Intelsat IV-A F-l, the newly launched spacecraft would provide almost two thirds more communications capability than previous Intelsats, by increasing the number of transponders from 12 to 20 and by using an improved antenna system that permitted frequency reuse by beam separation. The east-pointed am used for transatlantic service would illuminate Europe and Africa; the same 320-mhz bandwidth would be reused in the west beam aimed at North and South America, doubling the usability of the frequency and the satellite’s capacity. The cylindrical spacecraft was about 7 m high and 2.38 m in diameter, with a solar panel about 2.8 m long; liftoff weight was 1515 kg, and in-orbit weight 825.5 kg. (NASA Release 76-8; MOR E-491-63 3-7 6-02, 12 Feb 76 [prelaunch], 25 Feb 76 [postlaunch])
NASA announced plans to launch a second maritime satellite (Marisat) for the Comsat General Corp. later this month, as part of a system to provide communications to the U.S. Navy, commercial shipping, and offshore industries. The first satellite of the system, Marisat 1, was successfully launched 19 Feb. into an orbit over the Atlantic at 15°W longitude, where it had provided UHF service to the Navy since 25 Mar. NASA hoped to inaugurate fulltime commercial voice and data communications, using both Marisats, by 1 July. A third satellite had been constructed as a spare. (NASA Release 76-83)
Three satellites making simultaneous investigations of earth’s magnetic field had confirmed that long low-frequency waves spreading the disruptive effects of magnetic storms on earth had been generated far out in space by energetic particles from the sun, NOAA announced. Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, Calif., earlier in Dec., Dr. Joseph N. Barfield of NOAA, R.L. McPherron of UCLA, and W.J. Hughes of London’s Imperial College reported the waves might have practical uses in exploring for oil and minerals, and in aiding undersea communication with submarines, which now had to surface to make contact. Environmental satellites Sms 1 and Sms 2, with research satellite Ats 6, in geosynchronous orbit on a line along the earth’s equator, had carried magnetometers used to detect the low-frequency waves passing each satellite in a predicted order, the first use of multiple spacecraft to make such measurements simultaneously. Confirmation of the theory also identified the point of origin as the magnetosphere and the existence of a “resonance region” that amplified the wave frequency. The region was described as about 1200 km thick. (NOAA Release 76-281)
JSC announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Co. for negotiations leading to award of a contract, valued at about $970 000, funded by NASA and ERDA for the study of space-based solar-power systems. The 12-mo two-phase study would provide specific data on the most effective way to convert solar to electrical energy using satellites, and would determine where in space the various phases of a solar-power satellite should be constructed and assembled; the second phase would define weights and costs of a satellite system. The project would aim at providing uninterrupted energy beamed to earth from large satellites in fixed orbits at altitudes above 35 000 km. (JSC Release 76-69)
Aeronutronic Ford Corp. would probably win a $250-million contract to build Intelsat V, the next generation of seven global comsats owned by INTELSAT (the 94-nation Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization), said the New York Times. Scheduled for launch starting in 1979 to expand message-handling capacity of the INTELSAT network, particularly across the North Atlantic, Intelsat V would be first to use both a spatial separation technique used on Intelsat IV and a cross-polarization technique used on two ComSat domestic satellites leased to American Telephone & Telegraph and the General Telephone and Electronics Corp. INTELSAT’s board at its July meeting chose Aeronutronic for final negotiations over Hughes Aircraft, which had build all but one of the preceding generations of Intelsat spacecraft; other competitors eliminated earlier were TRW Systems (which had built one previous generation of the Intelsats) and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. All the competitors had selected West European or Japanese subcontractors. Unlike previous Intelsats, which were cylinders coated with solar cells, Intelsat V’s would be boxlike containers with flat solar-cell panels stretching from each side like windmills; weighing nearly a metric ton apiece, the spacecraft would be stabilized by a 3-axis system similar to those used on the Franco-German Symphonie satellites over the Atlantic Ocean, and on the U.S. domestic satellites built and operated by RCA. Each Intelsat V would carry 27 signal-transmitting transponders with capacity of 12 000 two-way telephone conversations, compared to 6000 through Intelsat IVA and 4000 through Intelsat IV; each satellite would also transmit color TV. Intelsat V would replace Intelsat IVA which had replaced the Intelsat IV, seven of which were in orbit above the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans. (NYT, 10 Aug 76, 37)
The 1976 summer Olympic games at Montreal 17 July-1 Aug. were the most widely telecast event in history, INTELSAT announced, having been viewed by more than 1 billion persons according to press estimates. Record use of the global system for satellite coverage included more than 930 transmissions during the games, more than 70 telecasts on some days. During peak periods satellites transmitted as many as 5 programs simultaneously across the Atlantic Ocean. The global television coverage used 2 Intelsats over the Atlantic, 1 over the Pacific, and 1 over the Indian Ocean; the 4 satellites sent 2585 half-channel hours of Olympic and related transmissions, more than twice the number of hours of the 1972 Olympics at Munich. Teleglobe Canada, the Canadian communications authority that arranged for the global services, used earth stations at Lake Cowichan, B.C., and Mill Village, N.S., as well as a transportable station at Montreal; other transmissions went through ComSatCorp’s Andover, Me., ground station. (INTELSAT Release 76-24-1)
The council of Intersputnik—the International Organization for Cosmic Telecommunications—ended its fifth meeting in Berlin after 4 days of deliberations. Attending were delegations from Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR; also attending were observers from the Inti. Organization for Radio and Television (OIRT), Intercosmos, and the Standing Commission for Post and Telecommunications (CEMA). The meeting adopted documents on the use of technical installations for transmitting TV, radio, telephone, telegraph, pictures, and data by satellite. (FBIS, ADN Inti. Service in German, 20 Sept 76)
NASA announced selection of Western Union Telegraph Co. and RCA Global Communications, Inc., for competitive negotiations leading to award of a single contract to provide tracking and data-relay satellite services (TDRSS) to support earth-orbiting spacecraft for 10 yr beginning in 1980. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage procurement of two relay satellites in synchronous earth orbit, plus groundterminal facilities to be located at White Sands, N.M. The system would support all of NASA’s scientific, applications, and manned spacecraft missions in earth orbit up to 5000-km altitude, including Space Shuttle, Spacelab, and the automated spacecraft which the Shuttle would insert into orbit in the 1980s. TDRSS, when fully operational, would provide coverage over 85 to 100% of each orbit as compared to a present average of 15%, and permit closing down many government-owned ground stations and leased communications circuits now needed to support earth-orbiting satellites in the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN); portions of the latter system would be retained only for synchronous satellites and those in higher altitude elliptical earth orbits. (NASA Release 76-158)
NASA announced that its Nimbus 6 weather satellite would be monitoring the cross-country progress of a 1914 Dodge participating in the Bicentennial world antique auto race that began 15 June in Istanbul, Turkey, and wound through 11 countries in Europe. Having crossed the Atlantic by ship, the four entrants—all American—were scheduled to rally
ESA announced award to European industry of two study contracts, one to define a large (about 900 kg) technological and experimental satellite in geostationary orbit, the other to define the communications payload for such a satellite. The 4-mo contracts, each valued at about $450 000 U.S., went to groups headed by Engins Matra and SNIAS of France for the spacecraft, and to a group headed by Germany’s AEG-Telefunken for the payload. The new satellite would be designed for launch by ESA’s Ariane, possibly on the fourth development flight scheduled for Oct. 1980; it would flight-test equipment and techniques as forerunner of a large platform carrying various communications payloads for direct and semidirect television and sound broadcasting and for propagation experiments in the 20- to 30-ghz range. The new system would differ from ESA’s OTS in offering new services required by countries without elaborate ground communications and broadcasting installations; it would carry four or more high-power TV channels for direct home reception, besides providing low-cost facilities for national telecommunications through small “thin route” terminals. (ESA release 1 Dec 76)
The European Space Agency announced selection of General Electric Co. to produce and launch two satellites for the Aerosat program [see 8 Sept.], saying that the GE bid was “significantly below” that of the other two contenders, the RCA Corp. and TRW Inc. A GE spokesman estimated the value of the contract at $60 million, half to be spent in the U.S. and half to go to a consortium of foreign companies known as the Cosmos Group, which had formed a bidding team with GE. (NYT, 11 Sept 76, 33)
Information from space satellites orbiting more than 900 km above the earth was being regularly evaluated in U.S. attempts to measure crops in the Soviet Union, the Peoples Republic of China, and other countries, officials of the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture said. The information had been incorporated with other data in a project known as the Large-Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) that had been going on since 1974 and would be completed by mid-1978. The disclosure of crop-watching appeared in a weekly issue of Foreign Agriculture published by the department’s Foreign Agricultural Service. {W Star, 30 Aug 76, A-5)
The Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that the Assembly of Parties meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, had confirmed the appointment of Santiago Astrain of Chile, since 1973 the secretary general of INTELSAT, as the first Director General of the international organization. The board of governors had appointed Astrain in July to serve a 6-yr term as Director General, beginning 31 Dec. 1976. The Director General would be responsible for implementing permanent management arrangements and for tasks such as implementing a new high-capacity satellite system to be known as Intelsat V in the late 1970s and early 1980s. About 200 delegates, representing 69 of INTELSAT’s 95 member countries, attended the Nairobi meeting. Elected were a chairman, Isaac Omolo Okero of Kenya, and a deputy chairman, Fernando Gaviria of Colombia. Vice chairmen elected to represent the five world regions were Romulo Villar Furtado of Brazil (The Americas); Joachim Jaenicke of the Federal Republic of Germany (W. Europe); Zika Ra-dojlovic of Yugoslavia (E. Europe and N. Asia); and Sribhumi Sukhanetr of Thailand (Asia and Australasia). The meeting also recognized the People’s Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of China, and welcomed the PRC to join INTELSAT. (INTELSAT Releases 76-28-1, 76-29-1; Satellite Pathways, ComSat, vol. 1 no. 7, Sept-Oct 76)
NASA announced plans for a 3-mo demonstration this summer of using Ats 6—known as the “teacher in the sky”—to help some of the world’s poorest people boost food production, improve health and nutrition, expand family planning, and raise income levels, through applications of remote sensing, space communications, and high-resolution aerial photography. The program, a joint effort of NASA and the Agency for International Development, would consist of both filmed and live portions broadcast to as many as 30 countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. AID would provide $3 million to finance the demonstration. At a UN conference in Nairobi 6 May on trade and development, Secretary of State Kissinger emphasized the use of satellite technology to improve cooperation between industrialized and developing nations; depending upon the response to the broadcasts, AID would be prepared to propose to Congress a long-range follow-up technology program. Ats-6 was completing a year-long program of instructional television for India; upon completion of this mission 31 July, NASA would move the satellite to a location over the Western Hemisphere where it would beam audio or audiovisual presentations in black and white or in color to special receivers on the ground. AID officials and NASA specialists would set up one transmitter-receiver unit in the capital of each participating country, and up to 5 receivers in outlying locations; each receiver terminal would be equipped with color-television monitors. The live portion of the demonstration would feature 2-way discussions between U.S. personalities and representatives of the recipient countries; a local program would be developed in the host country to demonstrate the communications abilities of the ATS. NASA would be responsible for moving the equipment from country to country and for operation of the satellite and associated equipment. (NASA Release 76—101)
An environmental satellite operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had used its capability of measuring ocean temperatures to help fishermen on the Calif, coast find tuna and salmon. A pilot project using satellite imagery to locate areas of “upwelling” off the coast—areas where cold nutrient-rich water would rise from the bottom to the surface—had shown that these areas were favored by the fish, and the fishermen could save time and fuel by using the data to locate them. NOAA’s polar-orbiting satellite passing over the coast twice daily would use visual and infrared sensors to relay data including sea-surface temperatures to earth, where images of thermal fronts indicated upwelling areas. The fronts transferred to navigation charts would be available to fishermen at northern Calif, ports. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service conducted the research through a NOAA-supported sea grant program at Humboldt State Univ.; the technique would be applicable to fishing industry in many parts of the world. (NOAA Release 76-10)
