India and the Soviet Union had reached agreement on coordinating their satellite systems, said the Indian news agency Samachar, as reported by the Foreign Broadcast Information Service. The agreement resulted from a recent visit to Moscow by a team of experts from India’s Ministry of Communications and Department of Space. The problem arose because of possible interference between the proposed India domestic comsat Insat, to be placed in geostationary orbit over the Indian Ocean, and existing or proposed satellite systems of the USSR. The aim of the talks was to ensure avoidance of satellite interference through discussion of the technical aspects of the systems, including the distance between satellites. Satellites already in operation in that area included those of the Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization, Indonesia, and others. (FBIS, Delhi Patriot, Dec 26/76, 1)
The NY Times reported an announcement by Hughes Aircraft Company that Telesat Canada had chosen it to negotiate a contract for a new generation of Anik comsats operating at frequencies of 12 and 14 billion cycles per second, to replace in the 1980s the 4- and 6-billion-cps now the standard for national and international communications systems. The higher frequencies would ease radiocommunications crowding in 22 300 mile altitude equatorial orbits, and would expand the number of satellite-communications channels to approach the number available on terrestrial microwave and cable links. Telesat Canada, which had operated that country’s domestic comsat system since 1972, said that two rival companies—RCA’s Astroelectronics Div. and GE’s Space Division—remained in the running with Hughes for award of the contract, which could go as high as $50 million. RCA had built the Satcoms used by the U.S., and GE had built a direct-broadcast comsat for Japan. The NYT said the electronics industry had been watching the competition closely because the same three companies had been vying to build 3 data-transmission satellites for Satellite Business Systems in the U.S. (NYT, Aug 17/77, 49)
A NASA earth resources monitoring satellite, Landsat 1, had experienced a malfunction in band 1 of its multispectral scanner on Mar. 3, AvWk reported. Although the malfunction affected only band 1 (a green spectral band identifying sunlight reflected from green plants), NASA had shut down the entire scanner pending a safety investigation by controllers. Landsat 1 had performed satisfactorily since its 1973 launch. (AvWk, Mar 14/77, 16)
NASA launched from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle the second in a series of three communications satellites for use by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, into an orbit with 35,797km preliminary apogee, 35 777km perigee, 1436.2min period, and 2.6° orbital inclination. The cylindrical Nato IIIB spacecraft had a covering of solar cells for power generation and was gyrostabilized, providing stability for the antenna system which would counter-rotate to point to the earth at all times. All active communications components were redundant, having an identical backup part on board. After fifth apogee, about 48hr after launch, firing of an apogee motor would put Nato IIIB into a circular synchronous orbit at about 35 900km altitude, where its onboard reaction-control system would take it to a predetermined location. The U.S. Air Force’s satellite-control facility would operate these activities on behalf of NATO, which had funded three Phase III comsats built by Ford Aerospace to replace the Nato II satellites in the NATO integrated communications systems. (NASA Release 77-5; Spacewarn SPX-280; Sf Satellite Digest, July-Aug 77, 298)
INTELSAT reported that the Peoples Republic of China on Aug. 16 had become the 98th member of the organization. Peking’s Administration of Long Distance Telecommunications had signed the operating agreement, making the PRC the 28th Asian nation to join INTELSAT. China, which had used INTELSAT since 1972, currently had 3 ground stations, 2 near Peking and 1 near Shanghai. It currently operated 23 full-time satellite circuits on the INTELSAT system and was using TV capacity on an as-needed basis. (INTELSAT Release 77-20-1)
The Pentagon had been working on an interceptor spacecraft capable of knocking Soviet satellites out of orbit, DOD officials told Congress. The Washington Post reported that the program, begun under President Ford, had aimed at producing weapons to protect U.S. space systems from attacks by foreign satellites. (WPost, Mar 30/77, A-8)
NASA launched Palapa 2 (formerly Palapa-B), an Indonesian telecommunications satellite, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral on a Delta at 2316 GMT, into a transfer orbit with 36 499km apogee, 231.2km perigee, and inclination of 24.6°. Palapa 2, second Indonesian domestic comsat, would use its apogee kick motor Mar. 12 to move into synchronous orbit above the Indian Ocean. Forty ground stations throughout the archipelago would link the islands with the 2 satellites, each capable of handling 4000 phone calls or 12 simultaneous color TV channels. (MORs M-492-208-77-02, [prelaunch] Feb 2/77, [postlaunch] Apr 12/77; NASA Release 77-23; FBIS, Jakarta Domestic Service in Indonesia, Mar 11/77)
ESA and Canada’s Centre for Remote Sensing (CCRS) announced they had signed an agreement to cooperate in studying remote-sensing applications, developing microwave remote sensing, and improving ground stations for processing satellite data. (ESA release, Mar 21/77)
NASA announced that GSFC and Marshall Space Flight Center would join the USAF in solving a yrs old problem of comsat makers and users: flying in a synchronous orbit at about 34 500km (22 OOOmi) altitude, the comsats routinely encountered electrically charged particles from the magnetosphere that built up static electricity on the spacecraft surface, causing arcing that could damage solar-power cells and thermal insulation, interfere with signal transmission, and switch spacecraft functions erroneously. The joint project called SCATHA (satellite charging at high altitudes) would obtain specific data on the phenomenon. The USAF planned to launch a satellite in Jan. 1979 to study electrostatics at geostationary orbit. MSFC would provide 3 light ion-mass spectrometers to measure speed, temperature, and density of low-energy ions and detect their points of origin. GSFC would provide two instruments, one to measure space electric fields, the other to measure space magnetic fields. (NASA Release 77-183; MSFC Release 77-164)
NASA announced it had used Landsat, the earth resources monitoring satellite, to inventory irrigation systems in Nebraska. The 12 000 central-pivot irrigation systems proved easily recognizable by their circular shape in photos from Landsat’s 1480km-altitude orbit. Annual inventory of the irrigation systems had become necessary when the number of central-pivot sites increased by 40 to 60% each yr, affecting property values, land use, and fuel and water allocation. Landsat had proved the cheapest way to acquire an accurate and timely inventory. (NASA Release 77-38)
NASA announced it had agreed with the St. Regis Paper Co. in N.Y. to use the Landsat for monitoring from 900km (560mi) commercial timberlands owned by the company over a 5-state area in Fla., Ga., Ala., Miss., and La. St. Regis would use the satellite data to manage its timberland. JSC would manage development of an automatic system for classifying forested areas, to identify kinds of trees, estimate timber volume, and detect changes in health or growth of the forests, combining the new system with existing data from aerial photography and ground surveys. Software and techniques from this first major undertaking between NASA and a private company would be in the public domain, to benefit other forest-resource managers. Past cooperative uses of Landsat had been between NASA and other U.S. or foreign government agencies. (NASA Release 77-226; JSC Release 77-73)
GSFC controllers and Navy meteorologists at the U.S. Navy Fleet Weather Facility in Suitland, Md., had used since 1971 a microwave radiometer on weather satellite Nimbus 5 to track an Antarctic iceberg the size of Rhode Island, NASA reported. Satellite tracking had allowed Navy forecasters to minimize ice damage to ships in polar ice fields. (NASA Release 77-68)
NASA announced that Det Norske Meteorological Institute in Oslo, Norway, had asked that the Nimbus 6 satellite help it track a huge oil slick resulting from an oil well blowout in the North Sea. By May 16 the Norwegians would put 5 random-access measurement-system (RAMS) buoys into the oil slick to send environmental information to the spacecraft. Goddard Space Flight Center engineer William W. Conant, noting that similar buoys earlier this year had helped the U.S. Coast Guard track an oil slick off Nantucket Sound, said NASA would support the Norwegian effort by transmitting locations of all the buoys twice daily for 30 days, adding “We don’t normally provide daily teletype information.” For more than a yr, the Norwegians had been tracking ice drift in the Spitzbergen region north of Norway, using a RAMS system as an accurate method of tracking in all weather. (NASA Release 77-30)
NASA announced it would join EPA and the Univ. of Md. in sponsoring a conference on the use of remote sensing to solve Chesapeake Bay ecological problems. The 80 participants would discuss use of satellites (particularly NASA’s earth resources monitoring satellite Landsat) to obtain information on land use, resources exploitation, and pollution. (NASA Release 77-70)
NASA might undertake a Cosmic Background Explorer satellite program, AvWk reported. The satellite would examine the character of cosmic background radiation claimed by many scientists to prove the big-bang theory of the universe’s formation. (A v Wk, Mar 7/77, 11)
Reductions made by the House subcommittee on defense appropriations in funding for the defense satellite communications system (DSCS) and the USAF/Navy Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) program would force the DOD to lease its communications channels from commercial carriers, AvWk charged. The subcommittee had eliminated the DOD’s entire $60-million request for R&D funds to proceed with a contract awarded in Feb. to General Electric for a qualification model and two flight-demonstration DSCS-3 satellites. It also had denied money for a fourth and fifth FltSatCom satellite to be built under a contract awarded to TRW in 1972; the Navy had been leasing capacity since March 1976 on the Marisat system managed by Comsat General. The subcommittee, headed by Rep. George Mahon (D-Tex), had advocated continued leasing despite DOD testimony that leasing would be more expensive, and had refused the funds requested for two other DOD satellite systems: it had rejected outright DOD’s international global-positioning system to be built by Rockwell, and had reduced the $83.2 million requested by the USAF for a Hughes-built satellite data system by more than half, postponing procurement of a fifth spacecraft. (AvWk, June 6/77, 60)
A yr-long (Dec. 1978-Nov. 1979) international program of global atmospheric research using Soviet and U.S. satellites would attempt to construct a model of the atmosphere, Tass reported. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 29/77)
The Dept, of Commerce announced that 2 oceanographic research ships and 4 aircraft had scanned the Gulf of Mexico during Oct. to demonstrate measurement of ocean properties using satellite-borne instrumentation. Dr. Warren Hovis, director of NOAA’s satellite experiment laboratory, said the program was a preliminary to launch in 1978 of the Nimbus-G with a coastal-zone color scanner. The joint NASA-NOAA tests had used aircraft equipped with models of the scanner to record data that could be confirmed by surface measurements taken on the ships. (NOAA Release 77-265)
Dr. Albert Rango of GSFC and Dr. K.I. Itten of the Univ. of Zurich announced that orbiting earth satellites could monitor winter snowpacks and their runoff as accurately as ground-based or airborne observations, NASA reported. Their findings appeared in the journal Nordic Hydrology. Comparing costs and relative accuracy of ground, airborne, and satellite measurements, the two scientists decided that the use of NASA’s Landsat earth resources monitoring satellite and the Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s environmental satellite Noaa 2 would provide timely and accurate information at lower cost than the alternatives. (NASA Release 77-52)
Strategic arms limitation might suffer another blow, the Washington Post said in a column by Victor Zorza, from the USSR’s test of a killer satellite viewed by the U.S. as a new weapon intended to deactivate U.S. observation satellites if and when the Soviets decided to launch a first strike. Zorza noted that current agreements did not cover hunter-killer satellites; by the time a new agreement was reached, both powers might have passed another point of no return in the arms race. (W Post, May 11/77, A21)
The Netherlands had “finally decided” at the end of 1976 to join the U.S. and ESA in financing a second astronomy satellite (IRAS, the infrared astronomy satellite), but not all its citizens were enthusiastic over the anticipated expense, said a report in Nature magazine. Starting with a preliminary definition study in Jan. 1975, followed by 13 proposals for experiments in response to a NASA announcement, a U.S. study team of 11 astronomers had begun discussion with Dutch colleagues on the scientific program and had reached agreement at the beginning of 1976. NASA had expected signing of a memorandum of understanding between the U.S. and the Netherlands by July 1976; the Dutch government had agreed in principle in July, but it had taken 6mo to find the money for the project. The U.S. and the Netherlands would each pay about 110 million guilders, and the United Kingdom Science Research Council, which had taken active part in the U.S.-Dutch negotiations, would contribute 10 million guilders. Plans were to launch IRAS from the Western Test Range in the spring of 1981, to trace and map about 10 million infrared sources. Dutch associations of scientific workers had protested in 1974 against further space activity, especially in behalf of underdeveloped countries lacking means to take advantage of such effort. (Nature, Jan 20/77, 202)
The Communications Satellite Corporation announced that its earth stations in Andover, Maine; Etam, W.Va.; and Jamesburg, Calif., had operated with two TV channels in each of four Intelsat satellites to transmit coverage of President Jimmy Carter’s inauguration to about 70 countries around the world. Total transmit-receive time for the satellite TV coverage was 61-1/6 half-channel hr. The European Broadcasting Union (EBU), the U.S. Information Agency (USIA), the Armed Forces Radio and TV Service, and other organizations had reached audiences in both western and eastern Europe through the ComSat network. Countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia, and Australia had seen inaugural events transmitted either live or on film and videotape news services transmitted by the satellites. (ComSat Release 77-8)
NOAA reported that airline passengers between Miami and Latin America could enjoy smoother flights because of satellite weather images. Lineas Aereos Nicaragua (LANICA) and 8 other carriers were sharing Goes 2 weather photos of the area from the southeastern U.S. into South America, including all of the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea. A LANICA official said that, until now, the airlines had little idea of the location of storms; now they could avoid them, or use the windflow to save time and fuel. (NOAA Release 77-247)
Comsat General Corp. announced that the U.S. Navy had agreed to extend its use of three Marisat satellites for an additional 2.5yr, ending in 1981, at a cost of about $138 million [see During June]. The Navy had begun using the Atlantic Marisat in March 1976, the Pacific satellite in June 1976, and the Indian Ocean satellite in Jan. 1977. Each of the three Marisats had a design life of 5yr and could operate in three frequencies: UHF (ultrahigh frequency) for Navy service, and the L-band and CJband for commercial maritime users. The Navy had leased all UHF capacity in all three Marisats for communications between its own fixed and mobile terminals. The Marisat system was owned and operated by four companies under a joint-venture arrangement approved by the Federal Communications Commission: Comsat General, which acted as system manager, with nearly 87% ownership; RCA Global Communications; Western Union Inti.; and ITT World Communications. (Comsat General Release CG 77-3; WSJ, July 29/77, 6)
Telesat Canada expected to award contracts in Nov. 1977 for three commercial telecommunications satellites, the Wall Street Journal reported. The new comsats would use higher frequency bands than the three Telesat Canada satellites now providing television, telephone, and message communications throughout Canada. First of the high-frequency comsats would be delivered early in 1980 and launched later that yr. (WSJ, Feb 15/77, 3)
Pressures from inside and outside the scientific community might result in restricting the freedom of inquiry that had enabled science to flourish since the Renaissance, the annual meeting of the Am. Assn, for the Advancement of Science heard. Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times that a session on the role of science as the key to man’s political future had as discussion leaders George W. Ball, senior director of Lehman Bros, investment bankers; Lord Zuckerman, former chief science adviser to the British government; and Charles J. Hitch, president of Resources for the Future, Inc., of Washington, D.C. The panel cited controversies in the Cambridge, Mass., city council over regulating use of genetic material in that city’s research laboratories; the Calif, legislature’s proposal to regulate research on genetic hybrids; and other attempts to control the directions of research. The panel expressed the feeling that checks and balances within the scientific community should be able to deal with such problems, and said that misgivings about “too much knowledge” harked back to prehistoric and classical times when mankind feared probing into nature’s secrets. Although restraints on export of equipment and knowledge might delay the spread of nuclear weapons, Ball noted that the only real control would be “to create a climate where nations don’t find it [nuclear weaponry] useful.” (NYT, Feb 23/71, B-4) The satellite, a 1.41m-diameter cylinder 93cm long, carried a transmit-ter/receiver and five small rockets for attitude control, orbital shift, and speed adjustment. At about 6:45 pm local time, the satellite (called Kiku 2 in orbit) reached an elliptical transfer orbit with 191km perigee and apogee of about 36 000km, the altitude at which it would go into synchronous orbit within a few days. Its synchronous station would be at 130°E over Indonesia, the announcement said. This was the third satellite orbited by the agency and the tenth by Japan. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 23/77; NYT, Feb 25/77, A7; CSM, Feb 24/77, 2) NSDA officials announced Feb. 25 that Kiku 2 would change orbit a day early, on its seventh pass over the Indian Ocean, as data from tracking stations in Japan and on Christmas Is. had confirmed its success in elliptical orbit. The satellite would reach station by March 5 if all went well, the announcement said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 25/77) The NY Times carried a Feb. 26 item from Associated Press confirming that “Japan’s first experimental stationary satellite” had shifted to a circular orbit. (NYT, Feb 27/77, 7) NSDA announced Feb. 27 that Kiku 2’s apogee motor ignited at 2:32 pm local time on Feb. 26 to move the satellite from an elliptical to a circular orbit with apogee of 35 756km and perigee of 34 034km, close to preflight predictions and fast enough to permit drift to its permanent station over Indonesia at 35 800km altitude. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 27/77)
NASA announced it had reached an agreement with the Navajo Tribal Council in Ariz. for a 2-yr project to use Landsat data for an automated resource inventory of the 16-million-acre reservation in the southwest U.S. The tribe had asked NASA whether satellite and aerial remote sensing could help solve inventory and multiple-use management problems including range rehabilitation, timber, agriculture, harvest prediction, and wildlife counts. Phase one of the project would demonstrate how Land-sat data could apply to specific tribal needs and changes in resources; phase two would include training of tribal personnel and setting up an operational system at Navajo headquarters. The Navajo would assist other tribes to realize the benefits of satellite information systems. (NASA Release 77-223)
Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency planned to launch 2 satellites in 1978 to replace missions that failed during 1976, AvWk reported. Scheduled for Feb. 1978 was an ionospheric-research mission to replace an identical craft that malfunctioned in orbit in March 1976. An x-ray research satellite similar to a mission that failed during launch Feb. 4, 1976, might lift off in Aug. or Sept. 1978. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 26)
TROPEX, an international tropical weather experiment sponsored by the Soviet Union, would use USSR satellites with research vessels from some of the 70 participating countries to gather data on atmospheric conditions, the FBIS reported. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 22/77)
The Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced plans to use a new tool—satellite pictures—in establishing hunting regulations for Canada geese and other arctic-nesting game birds. Wildlife managers in Canada and the U.S. would use imagery from the Noaa 5 polar-orbiting satellite, showing snow and ice conditions in traditional nesting areas too remote for on-site inspection, to monitor habitat conditions. Identification of probable areas of castastrophic or outstanding goose production would enable managers to impose restrictions to prevent overkill of birds or to bring the populations to levels suitable for hunting. Factors affecting the nesting of arctic geese would include the timely disappearance of snow and ice, and availability of melt water to allow rearing of young; late seasons or adverse weather could prevent nesting or reduce clutch or brood sizes. (Dept, of Commerce/NOAA Release 77-13)
NASA launched the Navy’s Transat spacecraft at 9:52pm PDT from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle into an orbit with 600.7nmi apogee, 572.6nmi perigee, 89.9° inclination, and 106.9min period. The spacecraft, a modified Transit navigation satellite, would join 5 others in a system being used by U.S. Navy and other ships for global navigation, as the first to carry 2 modified transponders with a capability called Satrack to support Trident (fleet ballistic missile) development. Built by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, Transat would receive, translate, and relay NavStar global-positioning signals simulating a Trident missile in flight, to evaluate Satrack procedures before using them in Trident test flights and to check out Satrack processing at JHU/APL. NASA had agreed with DOD in Jan. 1970 to launch Scouts, carrying 15 Transit satellites and 3 Transit Improvement Program (TIP) satellites so far, the Navy to reimburse NASA for the launch vehicles, launch services, and mission support. The Transit system normally operated 5 satellites, with 2 on standby. (Langley Researcher, Nov 28/77, 2; MOR M-490-601-77-03 [prelaunch] Sept 30/77) NASA’s launch participation was judged successful as of Nov. 8-10. (MOR M-490-601-77-03 [postlaunch] Nov 15/77) •
The U.S. Dept, of Defense had begun development of plans to wage war in outer space, the Washington Post reported, and had contracted with six manufacturers to study ways of letting its satellites sound an alarm if approached, sound another alarm if attacked, and defend itself from an enemy satellite that approached too close. Quoting “knowledgeable sources . . . close to the Pentagon,” the Post said the USSR’s resumption last year of hunter-killer satellite testing after a 5yr hiatus had caused growing concern over the threat of war in space. The Pentagon presently had at least a dozen comsats in orbit linking U.S. military bases, ships, and aircraft around the world, and another dozen navigation satellites to guide Navy surface ships and submarines. A killer satellite launched by an enemy could knock out the entire U.S. defense communications system within a wk, according to the Post account, and the Pentagon had considered putting an entire array of comsats in orbit and turning off their radios until needed: “With their radios off,” said a source, “the opposition couldn’t track their radio beacons. And if they can’t track them they can’t find them.” No one had forecast a war in space within the next lOyr, the Post added, but the Pentagon planned to be prepared after that. Asked if the U.S. could fight a war on earth today if it had lost its satellites in space, a source replied: “Not successfully.” (W Post, Jan 10/77, A-26)
INTELSAT announced that Paraguay had become the 97th member of the organization on July 18, and the 22nd nation in the western hemisphere to join. Paraguay’s ANTELCO (Administracion National de Telecomunicaciones) had signed the operating agreement. Created in 1964, INTELSAT claimed to provide more than half the world’s transoceanic telecommunications and domestic communications for 9 countries through its global satellite system. (INTELSAT Release 77-19-1)
Earth-orbiting satellites had improved forecasts of water availability and warned of impending low water supply as a valuable tool to water management agencies in Arizona, California, Colorado, and Oregon, NASA announced. Other cooperating agencies included the U.S. Geological Survey, the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, and the Bonneville Power Administration. The 4 states had begun a combined 4yr operational program using NASA Landsat earth resources satellites and Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites to produce imagery of the snow lines along the Sierra Nevada that was faster and less expensive than conventional aerial surveys. Satellites also offered repeated mapping of the same snow cover area with a relatively constant perspective. A continuing drought in the western U.S. had resulted from below-normal snowfalls in the mountains, source of stream flow water supplies; ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 ORIGINAL PAGE [8 OF POOR QUALITY Landsat images of the same area of the Sierra Nevada show the difference in snowcover between Feb. 1975 and Feb. 1977. The 1977 snowline was 2000ft higher than in 1975, ayr of near-normal snowfall. Lake Tahoe is in the center of both pictures. (NASA 77-H-225, -226) reservoirs on the western slopes of the mountains had already dried up. Some areas had experienced drought for a longer period than others; Calif, had been hardest hit, with minimal snowfall in the Sierra Nevada for the second consecutive yr. (NASA Release 77-91) * ESA announced it had completed a revised program of switching on and testing the Geos satellite launched Apr, 20, since a malfunction of the launch vehicle had prevented the spacecraft from achieving its intended geostationary orbit. The 7 experiments were reported operational, and the two 20m booms had been extended to 2.5m without difficulty. Although the satellite could transmit 8hr of data a day, only half would be outside 5 earth radii (where the experiments had been designed to operate). The booms should deploy fully during the upcoming wk; the journal Nature called for prompt launch of the backup Geos. (ESA anno May 6/77; Nature, May 5/77, 8; May 12/77, 100)
NASA launched the ESA Meteosat at 8:35pm EST from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle into a synchronous transfer orbit with 37 001km apogee, 147km perigee, and 27.5° inclination. The apogee boost motor fired at 1:19 pm EST Nov. 23 to begin maneuvering it to a position on the Greenwich meridian at 0° longitude above the equator, where it would provide long-range forecasting coverage to Europe, the Near East, and Africa for at least 3yr. The cylindrical craft 3.2m long and 2.1m in diameter weighed 697kg at launch and 300kg in orbit; its payload was a telescope radiometer to observe earth and cloud formations, providing relay and transmission of meteorological data. The World Meteorological Organization had set up a chain of 5 such satellites, 1 European, 1 Soviet, 1 Japanese, and 2 U.S. Besides transmitting to user stations the data from a center at Darmstadt, West Germany, Meteosat would relay Atlantic Ocean images from the U.S. Goes. (NASA Release 77-230; MOR M-492-102-77-01 [prelaunch] Nov 16/77, [postlaunch] Feb 28/78; KSC Spaceport News Nov 11/77,1; ESA releases Nov 3/77, Nov 16/77, Nov 23/77)
NASA announced that, because of recent flight and checkout problems, it had revised the launch schedule of its Delta rockets: GOES-B, June 16; GMS (Japan’s meteorological satellite), July 14; Sirio (Italian comsat), Aug. 11; OTS/ESA (comsat), Sept. 8; ISEE-A/B, Oct. 13; Meteosat (ESA metesat), Nov. 3; and CS (Japanese comsat), Dec. 12. (NASA Release 77-123)
Av Wk reported the Inti. Telecommunications Union’s frequency board had distributed to its 100-plus member nations the technical details of a USSR plan to launch 7 geostationary Volna satellites for global maritime and air communications service. Members questioning possible interference with existing or projected systems had until Jan. 9 to respond. The 7 spacecraft would work in separate systems: numbers 2, 4, and 6 would each operate in 4 frequency bands, 2 allocated exclusively for mobile maritime service and 2 for mobile aeronautical service. Numbers 1, 3, 5, and 7 would also use these bands, plus a 240-400mc band now used by the US Navy for its maritime service which the Volnas would use for land-mobile service. The Volna proposal did not include fixed shore terminals, although USSR officials had said the system would be a national rather than international system. {AvWk, Nov 14/77, 20)
The quality of information from the Voyagers would greatly surpass that of earlier missions, said Philip Abelson in Science magazine. “A decade ago the level of knowledge concerning the planets and their satellites was such that almost any arm-waving explanation would fit the facts. This is no longer true.” Citing the potential of 5 of the 11 instruments, Abelson noted the Voyager cameras could “achieve a resolution and observing time at Jupiter better by a factor of 40 than those of the Pioneer spacecraft. . . . The radio infrared, visible, and ultraviolet instruments can all participate in a mutually reinforcing fashion.” (Science, Sept 9/77, 1858)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced it would award to a British company, AERE Hartwell, a 15mo $71 540 fixed-price contract to develop low-pressure, nickel-hydrogen power cells that would use a lanthanum-alloy member both as hydrogen reservoir and as negative electrode. Use of lanthanum would lower pressure in the cells, reduce the heat dissipated during discharge, and reduce the volume of cell density. If successfully developed, the cells would operate at a maximum pressure of about 6 atmospheres and would have a minimum life of 500 charge-discharge cycles when used in synchronous-satellite applications. (INTELSAT Release 77-1-M)
The W. Post reported that the latest test of a satellite-destruction weapon conducted by the USSR despite an appeal by President Carter had apparently ended in failure. In a test May 23, first by the USSR in about 5mo, the Soviet interceptor spacecraft had missed the target satellite by about 50mi, according to U.S. intelligence sources. The officials said that, without knowing the objectives of a test, it would be hard to assess results, but the consensus was that the operation had failed. Five USSR tests in the past 18mo had failed to destroy a target satellite; the attempts had not been aimed at any U.S. satellites but were confined to their own. Both nations had used observation satellites to monitor each other’s military activities, including strategic-weapons testing, missile-base construction, and similar indicators. Still in the research stage was a U.S. system to knock out Soviet satellites, with first flight tests at least 3yr away and first deployment estimated in about 5yr. (WPost, June 1/77, A-21)
NASA announced it would join the Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Land Management in using Landsat, the earth resources monitoring satellite, to inventory wild land resources (major streams, ground cover and vegetation types, reservoirs, and fire hazards) in south central Alaska, northwestern Arizona, and southwestern Idaho. The project would examine each of the 3 different regional ecologies for about lyr. During the 3yr project, the BLM and NASA would set up an automated inventory system to provide accurate and timely data on BLM land as another example of Landsat usefulness in solving public and private resource-oriented problems. (NASA Release 77-37)
Soviet satellites might help predict the cotton harvest in South Transcaucasia, Tass reported, through enhanced photographs of the regional cotton crop. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 29/77)
FBIS reported that the USSR had signed an agreement with Intersputnik, an international organization formed by 9 socialist countries in 1971, that the group would work out of Moscow and create favorable conditions for its activity in the USSR. Organizers of Intersputnik to use satellites and ground stations for international communications were Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, the USSR, and Czechoslovakia. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 16/77)
The Naval Research Reviews reported on satellite use in the oceanic biology program of the Office of Naval Research, covering biodeterioration (growth of fouling and boring organisms), sound in the ocean (marine mammals), dangerous marine organisms, and special projects. Sound in the sea, second major research area in the program, had centered on whales and seals, especially sounds produced by whales. Navy scientists had implanted radio transmitters in large whales such as blues, fins, and grays, to track them by boat, plane, or satellite. Knowledge of whale behavior and movements would be valuable to designers and operators of naval equipment. (NR Rev, Sept 77, 6) •
NOAA reported it had used two of its operational environmental satellites with NASA’s Landsat 2 to obtain imagery that could give early warning of river ice melts causing ice jams and flooding. David F. McGinnis, Jr., and Stanley R. Schneider of NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service (NESS) had studied the Ottawa River separating Quebec and Ontario provinces and joining the St. Lawrence River below Ottawa and Montreal over 12 days in April 1976 to find which sections were covered with ice. By the end of the period, all but three of the 14 sections studied had been free of obstructing ice. Disappearance of ice monitored by the team in the Chaudiere River of SW Quebec had resulted from hydraulic transport rather than melting, which had occurred in the Ottawa River because of the blocking effect of dams, islands, and sharp bends in the river. (NOAA Release 77-145)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) announced it would buy back 1.5 million shares of its common stock for $37 cash per share until Dec. 6. The organization had decided on the repurchase as a preliminary step in possible future acquisitions, and a restructuring of its accounts to show a substantial debt, as the FCC had indicated its rate making would be based on such a debt in the organization’s capital structure. ComSatCorp emphasized that it was currently debt free. (ComSatCorp Release 77-28)
RCA (formerly the Radio Corporation of America) observed the 17th anniversary of the first weather picture received from space through the first Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS), Today newspaper reported. The 26011b TIROS delivered “a pretty shabby product compared to today’s images from space,” RCA admitted. The company had since built a series of 24 other weather watchers that had taken 3.5 million pictures and logged more than 7 billion miles in orbit. Managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the spacecraft had gone from pinpointing major storms to predicting runoff from snowmelt, helping ships navigate through icefields, and assisting commercial fishermen to find promising areas for their efforts. RCA was currently developing a fourth-generation TIROS. (Today, May 1/77, 18A)
NASA announced it would join with Canada in a 3-day meeting Nov. 29-Dec. 1 to assess performance of Cts, world’s most powerful comsat, now in orbit for nearly 2yr. The meeting would hear experimenters discuss their results and the social, technical, and economic aspects of CTS-type comsats. Canada and the U.S. had shared time on Cts, which used a LeRC-developed transmitter tube to operate in a new frequency band at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than those of other comsats, making it possible to use smaller and less expensive ground receivers. Cts had permitted 2-way TV and voice contact experiments for health, education, business, and similar purposes. Besides managing all U.S. experiments on Cts. LeRC had also used a portable earth terminal in an over-the-road van resembling a TV studio to connect the satellite with local events to be broadcast. (NASA Release 77-237)
Two balloonists attempting a transatlantic crossing from Bar Harbor, Maine, on or about Sept. 19 would carry a lightweight satellite-tracking beacon like the one that helped save Maxie Anderson and Ben Abruzzo when their balloon ditched near Iceland on Sept. 12. The FAA had required Charles E. Reinhard and Charles A. Stephenson to carry the device as an air traffic control aid and in case of a need for search and rescue. This type of beacon had previously gone around the world on a polar flight, and another rode a 33ft sailboat on a 600mi trip through the Bermuda Triangle east of Fla., both successfully tracked by a Nimbus satellite. The balloonists would cover the cost of the beacon; NASA would take no part except for use of the satellite link and ground systems, which would operate 24hr anyway. (NASA Release 77-194)
The W. Post reported that the leader of a USSR expedition on the first surface ship to reach the North Pole had told a news conference that his major problem was deciding when the ship had reached its destination. Soviet Minister of Merchant Marine Timofey B. Guzhenko said that, as the ship neared the pole Aug. 17, fog had made sun readings impossible; the polar daylight obscured the stars; and magnetic compasses were worthless when they “began to jump at the pole.” The vessel’s officers had to spend several hr determining whether they had reached the pole. They finally relied on a satellite navigation system accurate within about 800yd, and made two passes through the ice floes to make sure they had reached their goal. The crew of the 13-day 3582mi expedition on the nuclear-powered icebreaker Arktika had planted a Soviet flag and capsule containing a copy of the USSR constitution to mark their accomplishment. (WPost, Aug 28/77, A24)
The Natl. Aeronautic and Atmospheric Administration announced it would conduct a pilot project this summer with the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture to improve accuracy of crop forecasting, based largely on the amount of solar radiation, available moisture, and air temperatures for a given area. Using devices on NOAA spacecraft to measure cloud cover and relate it to the amount of sunlight reaching ground-based pyranometers, NOAA and USDA investigators would compare hourly readings from the Goes 1 geostationary satellite with measurements from a network of pyranometers across the Great Plains, to determine the amount of solar energy available to crops in any given period. The researchers emphasized solar energy as a vital factor in plant photosynthesis and in evapotranspiration (loss of water directly from the soil by evaporation and from plants by transpiration). A Great Plains Agricultural Council representing land grant colleges in Texas, N.M., Okla., Colo., Kans., Nebr., S.D., N.D., Wyo., and Mont., and the USDA agencies serving those states had requested the pilot project as an aid in the production of corn, wheat, and sorghum. (NOAA Release 77-122)
Columnist Jack Anderson reported in Today that a Senate subcommittee had asked the Pentagon for military equipment, including planes, radar, sensors, and satellites, to be used in the “battle against drug abuse.” Senators Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) and Charles Percy (R-Ill.) had sent a private letter to Defense Secy. Harold Brown saying that drug abuse was costing the U.S. $17 billion a yr and that more than 5000 Americans were dying each yr from drug abuse. DOD alone had the vehicles needed to pursue and overtake the drug traffickers, the senators said, calling the fight against drugs a “war.” “When fighting a war,” they added, “you use the best resources available and make every effort to win. This is not being done.” A spokesman for the Pentagon said an answer was being prepared. {Today, Apr 21/77, 16A)
NASA announced it would launch on or about May 28 a new environmental monitoring satellite GOES-B, latest in a series to be operated by NOAA, to keep watch over the eastern half of the U.S. and the Atlantic Ocean, just in time for this yr’s hurricane season. Built like the first three in the series by Ford Aerospace Corp., GOES-B would replace Goes 1 as NOAA’s east coast satellite at about 75°W; Goes 1 would move to standby status at about 105°W. (NASA Release 77-88)
NASA announced it had ended an aerial survey of the Pacific Ocean along the west coast of the U.S. that was an operational prelude to the use of SeaSat-A, the oceanographic satellite scheduled for launch in May 1978. The survey had used high-flying NASA aircraft to test four sensors from SeaSat-A: a synthetic aperture imaging radar, a wind-field scatterometer, a scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer, and a radar altimeter. The mission was a rehearsal in research cooperation that scientists would need when SeaSat became operational. (NASA Release 77-62)
The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) reported it would proceed with its plan to buy back its common stock [see Nov. 11], noting that the FCC had authorized it to borrow $25 million to finance part of the cost of the repurchase. A letter to stockholders said the corporation would contest FCC’s attempt to make it put more money in an escrow fund for possible repayments to customers, because it said the FCC’s action was “neither lawful nor appropriate.” (ComSatCorp Releases 77-31, 77-32)
