ESA announced plans to launch its scientific satellite Geos-2 in mid-July from ETR/Cape Canaveral on a Delta. This satellite would carry out the mission originally planned for Geos 1, which a malfunctioning Delta injected into a transfer orbit too low to permit attaining its scheduled geostationary orbit. The European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) at Darmstadt, W. Germany, had fired Geos 7’s apogee boost motor to inject it into a 12-hr elliptic orbit; after a yr in this orbit, results showed Geos 1 had made a significant contribution to the International Magnetospheric Study (IMS). Main mission objective of Geos-2 would be to learn more about responses of the near-earth environment to processes occurring in outer space. The satellite’s geostationary orbit would be in a region of earth’s magnetosphere where many dynamic processes causing magnetic and ionospheric disturbances were believed to develop. Geos-2’s exceptionally high real-time transmission rate (over lOOkilobits per sec), combined with a continuous link with ESA’s Odenwald ground station in Germany, would allow it to transmit about 100 times as much data as any previous European scientific satellite. Built as a qualification model at the same time as Geos 1, the spacecraft had been converted into a high-quality flight model. Based on Geos 1 experience, only minor modifications were made in some Geos-2 subsystems. Geos-2’s very sensitive experiment payload had put severe constraints on spacecraft design in the areas of electromagnetic and chemical cleanliness: for example, a complex system of 8 booms deploying in orbit had to be designed to put the sensitive experiment detectors measuring minute variations in the magnetosphere as far as possible from any electrical interference generated by the satellite. Prime contractor for Geos-2 was British Aerospace Dynamics Group, under the direction of industries in 10 European countries. (ESA Release, June 22/78; ESA Newsletter, June 78, 4)
The Marshall Star reported that an MSFC researcher had been working to complete a weather experiment for the second Shuttle orbital flight test (OFT-2) scheduled for July 1979. His instrument, known as NOSL (nighttime-daylight optical survey of lightning), would obtain data on the many thunderstorms viewed by the Shuttle during a mission. The equipment consisted of a 16mm data-acquisition camera synchronized with a 2-channel cassette recorder, receiving the output of a photocell optical system serving as a sensor to pick up both visible and invisible lightning flashes and to record them as clicks on the tape. Otha Vaughan, Jr., system developer, said he hoped to analyze the magnetic tapes containing cine photos and associated photo-optical data to get new insights into convective structure of cloud systems and lightning, the horizontal dimensions of lightning discharges, and possible electrical discharges that extend into the stratosphere. A successful experiment would permit adaptation of the data-acquisition and analysis technique to future meteorological satellites for identifying severe weather situations. (Marshall Star, Mar 15/78, 4)
GSFC reported that scientists using astronomy satellite Sas 3 had pinpointed just beyond earth’s galaxy the nearest of some 600 quasars found in the universe so far. The object, first discovered a yr ago, had never been identified as a quasar; besides being the nearest, the new quasar (named 0241) had been the third in recent mo found to radiate x-rays. The quasar had been 800 million light-yr away, obscured by thick dust in the galaxy and overlooked previously. Scientists hoped the nearby quasar might explain the mysteries of quasars’ origin, either as eruptions in the centers of galaxies or as long-dead objects associated with the beginning of the universe, whose light was only now reaching the earth. (Goddard News, Aug 16/78, 4)
ESA announced its Ots 2 satellite had successfully completed its first transmission tests of television programs beyond continental Europe. During a conference on “The Role of Space Technology for Development” in Cairo Oct. 7-12, ESA had demonstrated TV-signal transmission from the British Post Office’s Goonhilly Downs station via Ots 2 to a transportable receiving station in Cairo. From Oct. 7 to 11, nearly 8hr of BBC-1 TV programs were transmitted directly from Britain to Egypt at a rate of about 1.5hr per day. Ferranti Microwave Division of Ferranti Electronics Ltd., in association with the U.K. Dept, of Industry, had developed the transportable station. After 5mo of preliminary tests, the Ots 2 communications-test program had reached an operational level that would last at least 3yr, to prepare for subsequent exploitation of the operational European Communications Satellites (ECS) that would begin service in 1981. Tests had included telephone as well as TV routing and propagation experiments and new applications using much simpler terminals. Some 50 institutes, universities, and telecommunications entities would participate in the second category of tests, using more than 30 small terminals with 3m-diameter antennas. (ESA Release Oct 16/78)
GSFC announced that, in a cooperative program with NOAA, its scientists had demonstrated the benefits of using short-interval full-resolution satellite images to monitor tropical cyclones. The agencies had undertaken the program to determine optimum resolution and image frequency for selecting winds to study, in forecasting tropical-cyclone intensity. Experiments using the Sms 2 to study hurricane Eloise and cyclone Caroline, and Goes 1 for tropical storms Belle and Holly, had taken scan images of the storms at varying resolutions and at a variety of time intervals. GSFC using its atmospheric and oceanographic information processing system (AOIPS) to examine the experimental data, had found that rapid-scan full-resolution visible images could best disclose the wind vectors. Scans taken every half or quarter hr had been inadequate, because many clouds of the type and size best suited for tracking did not persist or maintain their shape for as long as 30min. GSFC scientists also had found that the full-resolution visible images could improve cirrus tracking and could increase the number of trackable elements available from coarser-resolution infrared images. (Goddard News, June 21/78, 4)
NASA declared the launch of ESA geostationary operational environmental satellite Geos 2 on July 14, 1978 successful. Launch-vehicle performance was nominal and had placed the spacecraft and its apogee-boost motor (ABM) into the desired transfer orbit. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit, and the ABM was fired successfully July 16, 1978. The satellite was being maneuvered over the South Atlantic to a position at 6°E above the equator. All subsystem functional checks were complete and satellite status was satisfactory. The mission had replaced Geos 1, whose Delta vehicle had put it into an incorrect orbit in April 1977. (MOR M-492-302-78-02 [postlaunch] Oct 30/78)
NASA announced that the United Nations would use the world’s most powerful comsat, the Cts communications technology satellite operated jointly by NASA and the Canadian Dept, of Communications, in a demonstration of remote simultaneous interpretation of a conference and of transmission by facsimile of conference documents for remote translation. Cooperating in the demonstration would be ComSatCorp and ENTEL, an Argentine state-owned telephone company. The UN Conference on Technical Cooperation Among Developing Countries currently meeting in Buenos Aires, Argentina, through Sept. 12 would be the demonstration subject. Pictures and voices of the conferees sent to a portable NASA terminal at UN Headquarters in New York would be interpreted, translated into five official UN languages, and returned through Cts to a portable ComSatCorp terminal in Buenos Aires, where conference attendees could select the language of their choice. The New York terminal, a NASA-developed portable earth terminal bus, was a mobile broadcast-receive studio with a 2.4m (8ft) dish antenna designed for use with Cts. Another phase of the experiment would be high-speed simultaneous transmission on other Cts channels of texts of speeches and other documents from Buenos Aires to UN. Hq for translation and return the next day. Cts earth terminals could transmit at a frequency of 14GHz and receive at 12GHz. (NASA Release 78-134)
NASA declared the launch from Cape Kennedy at 6:36pm Mar. 31 of Intelsat IVA F-6, last of the Intelsat IVA series, to be successful. NASA had launched the satellite on an Atlas Centaur into the desired transfer orbit, thus meeting all objectives. Orbital parameters had been 35 912km apogee, 548.8km perigee, 21.84° inclination. ComSatCorp had fired the apogee kick motor Apr. 1 to place the satellite in a neargeosynchronous orbit that would take it at mid-June to its final location at 63°E over the Indian Ocean. (MOR E-491-633-78-06 [postlaunch], June 23/78)
FBIS reported that the People’s Republic of China had launched on Jan. 26 an earth satellite that had functioned normally in orbit and returned to earth “after fulfilling tasks of scientific experimentation.” The report added that the achievement had resulted from the guidance of the wise leader Chairman Hua Kuo-feng. (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 30/78)
In a report on Soviet space activities, Defense/Space Business Daily said Progress 2 had crashed into the Pacific Aug. 4, 2da after it had undocked from the Salyut station where it had been for 25da. This Progress resupply spacecraft (a modified Soyuz) had not been designed as a recoverable reentry and descent vehicle. The Soviets had orbited Cosmos 1028, believed to be another in a series of long-duration high-resolution reconnaissance/surveillance satellites; orbit was 182/272km, 67.1° inclination, 88.7min period. Another in the series, Cosmos 905, launched Apr. 26, 1977, had remained in orbit 30da and was recovered. Others in the series had been Cosmos 758, in orbit for 20da after launch Sept. 5, 1975; Cosmos 805, in orbit for 20da after launch Feb. 20, 1976; and Cosmos 844, in orbit 39da after launch July 22, 1976. (D/SD, Aug 8/78, 171)
MSFC announced that its weather scientists working with colleagues from Texas A&M had encountered practically every kind of severe weather—thunderstorms, tornadoes, torrential rains, hail, and snow—within the study of the zone, roughly the south central states, during the 7th atmospheric variability experiment (AVE-7). As a 3-day weather pattern had moved across the test area, 24 rawinsonde stations operated by NOAA and one each by MSFC and Texas A&M had acquired data. The experimenters had also received for comparison a weather picture from a Goes satellite every 15min and reports from weather radars throughout the area every hour. In the AVE-7 experiment, rawinsonde stations every 3hr released balloons carrying instruments to record temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, and wind velocity and direction from ground level to an altitude of about 25km (15.5mi). The balloons, normally released about every 12hr, on a 3-hr schedule had allowed researchers to spot small-scale events that could dissipate quickly. The balloon data, combined with satellite pictures at 15-min intervals, had permitted computerized weather forecasts by showing scientists how to spot approaching bad weather much earlier; comparison of ground-based with satellite data would help identify the causes of severe weather. With more such experiments using space technology, scientists could eventually accumulate enough information to more accurately predict severe weather. {Marshall Star, May 10/78, 1)
NASA reported that the Netherlands astronomical satellite ANS had been a success, based on comparison of mission results and prelaunch objectives. ANS, an Explorer-class x-ray and ultraviolet mission, was a cooperative program of the U.S. and the Netherlands, the U.S. providing a 2-part medium-energy x-ray instrument and the Scout, launch vehicle, and the Netherlands providing the spacecraft, a 2-part soft x-ray instrument, and a small ultraviolet telescope with photometers. During its 20mo lifetime, ANS had measured positions, spectra, and time variations of galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources in the energy range 2 to 15keV; defined upper limits of silicon-line emissions around 2keV; and transmitted more than 18 000 observations of about 4000 objects in the UV range 1500 to 3300A, in addition to other unexpected discoveries. Although an unplanned elliptical orbit had drastically limited the x-ray observations, particularly in the pointed mode, and had substantially increased the spacecraft’s exposure to radiation, the data it had returned were of a consistently high quality, except for partial failure of half the soft x-ray instrument lOmo after launch. ANS had reentered the atmosphere June 14, 1977. (NASA MOR S-875-74-01 [postlaunch] July 18/76)
The USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) was conducting initial ground tests of a prototype laser-communications (LaserCom) system to transfer data from satellite to satellite as well as to and from ground and airborne users, the AFSC Newsreview reported. Over a 2yr period SAMSO would test the system at the White Sands Missile Range, N.M., in three phases: ground-to-ground transmission and reception of the laser beam, by reflecting it off a 24in steerable mirror 1 to 6mi from the laser; interim air-to-ground tests, evaluating aircraft ability to acquire and point the laser transmitter toward a ground-based beacon laser; and full demonstration of the air-to-ground system, using prototype equipment. Although most of the tests had been successful in laboratory Simulations, a few unknowns remained, including laser-beam communications through the atmosphere. LaserCom had some inherent advantages over existing satellite communications systems: for example, its narrow beam width enhanced security by allowing only the intended user to receive the beam, it also offered an unprecedented data-transmission capability because its 1-gigabit-per-sec rate would accommodate a great number of spacecraft, airborne and surface vessels, and ground users that would be relaying information to a synchronous-altitude LaserCom satellite for subsequent real-time or delayed transmission to other users. After completing its tests in 1980, DOD would evaluate the system for technical capability, requirements, and cost; should LaserCom application prove feasible, in-orbit operation of the system could begin as early as 1986. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 78, 1)
INTELSAT announced it had awarded a $101 539 contract to General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., for a reconfigurable-beam satellite communications antenna. Under the 15-mo contract GE would develop an antenna capable of beaming dual-polarized transmissions that could be reshaped on command while the satellite was in orbit; GE would also fabricate portions of such an antenna for demonstration. Reconfigurable-antenna developments might be incorporated into INTELSAT satellites launched during the 1980s. (INTELSAT Release 78-36-M)
Tass announced that the USSR had launched a Molniya 3 comsat carrying relay apparatus to operate in the centimeter waveband, into an orbit with 40 631km apogee in the northern hemisphere and 661km perigee in the southern hemisphere, period of 12hr 16min, and 62.8° inclination. The satellite would ensure operation of a long-distance telephone, telegraph, and radio-communications system, and program relay from USSR central television to points in the Orbita network. (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 24/78)
Worldwide demand for international satellite communications would increase by more than 100% in the next 5yr, INTELSAT announced. The prediction came out of the fourth global telecommunications traffic meeting sponsored by INTELSAT, in which 172 international communications experts representing 93 telecommunications entities around the world participated. Purpose of the annual meeting was to forecast the demand for services provided by the INTELSAT system. INTELSAT would use these forecasts in configuring its system to meet user requirements with maximum efficiency, and in planning for future satellite systems. Preliminary figures from the meeting indicated that global demand for satellite-telecommunications capacity would increase from 14 105 equivalent full-time simultaneous telephone circuits at year end 1978, to 29 282 circuits by the end of 1982, up 108%. The biggest demand was expected to be from countries surrrounding the Atlantic Ocean, where communications traffic by satellite was expected to rise by 114% over the next 5yr. Traffic in the Indian Ocean region was projected to increase by 98%, and in the Pacific Ocean region by 91%. (INTELSAT Releases 78-19-1, 78-20-1)
NASA had mounted a “new effort” to make space applications the “administration’s centerpiece,” starting with a reorganization of applications management that could double that office’s $283 million budget, AvWk reported. The new effort would include a major push for a “global information system” supported by all civilian earth-sensing spacecraft, to encompass all Landsat, Seasat, and environmental and meteorological satellite data, coordinated so that for any need an individual user could access all pertinent information available from space platforms. Theoretically, all space-derived information could some day come from a single distribution point. NASA’s effort would emphasize agency cooperation (NASA officials had met with representatives of the Depts. of Agriculture and Interior, EPA, and AID); management changes (a plan awaiting approval would remove flight projects from the traditional applications branches; the project offices would instead develop user-oriented sensor systems to be passed along to an applications-systems division, which would then reconfigure the sensors into the proper spacecraft format); center changes (instead of the previous lead-center approach to managing flight projects, NASA Hq would formulate programs as the main user liaison); applied sciences (greater emphasis by space applications on the phenomena its spacecraft would measure); ground systems (speedup of work on the end-to-end data system); an operational comsat system (solution of years-old Landsat operating problems); and communications research (industry would foster the research, while government agencies would concentrate on creating and sustaining a real market for public service communications). (Av Wk, Mar 13/78, 67)
. . . Passage of this bill would commit the nation’s taxpayers to $25 million ... in fiscal year 1979. Conservation estimates indicate capital investment reaching a . . . price tag of $2.5 trillion! The proponents of this legislation indicate that passage would commit the nation to a program plan to study the feasibility of utilizing solar energy to generate electricity for domestic purposes. This is not the first phase of this study. We respectfully point out that such a program has already been underway for sometime by the Department of Energy and NASA. . . . “Boeing estimates that the cost of a single launch vehicle would be $10 billion alone while the cost per satellite is in the $20.5 billion neighborhood. These are just a sampling of the costs in terms of dollars; they do not reflect the potential dangers to the environment that are inherent in this program. While the use of solar energy is always viewed as benign, this bill would spawn a . . . malignancy on the nation's already fiscally ill taxpayers ...” (NASA Legis Actv Rept. Aug 22/78)
A fundamental reappraisal by Western European governments of the overall European space effort had resulted in a demand by the West German government for more efficiency and better return on its investments in space, Av Wk reported. On hold during the debate were production of an initial batch of Arianes (European heavy launchers) and development of a new heavy telecommunications bus, as well as adoption of a broad new telecommunications package that would include the heavy bus. Meanwhile, determined to get more for its money, West Germany had begun exploring possible national or limited international programs outside the framework of ESA. Industry sources said that West Germany, traditionally one of ESA’s biggest contributors, was unhappy mainly because of repeated new beginnings of experimental communications-satellite programs as technological objectives changed. The Germans had wanted Europe to move directly into an operational comsat project after the successful launch and initial operations of the Franco-German Symphonie satellites. However, instead of building on this initiative, Western Europe (primarily through ESA) had taken up other experimental satellites like OTS (orbital test satellite), Marots (maritime OTS), and the H-Sat (experimental heavy telecommunications/multipurpose bus). West Germany, therefore, had begun thinking of developing independently (or more probably bilaterally), a direct-broadcast satellite that would be operationally feasible at home and commercially attractive abroad. (AvWk, Mar 13/78, 71)
NASA announced that the first major symposium on crop monitoring based on space-age technology, scheduled for JSC Oct. 23-26, would discuss results of the Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE). The symposium would give participants from government, industry-agriculture, and university communities around the world more information about LACIE’s pioneering effort and how it could best be used to improve the world food situation. LACIE, a 3yr program of NASA and the U.S. Department of Agriculture working with university and industrial research groups, had been designed to estimate wheat production in major growing areas throughout the world by using satellite data and the global weather-observation network. LACIE had begun in the fall of 1974 when DOA had recognized a need for information on wheat-growing areas outside the U.S. Landsat satellites continuously scanning agricultural regions had provided the electronic imagery for area estimates. Combined daily with ground-acquired data and information received from 8000 worldwide weather stations, the imagery had made it possible to predict crop area, yield, and production of domestic and foreign wheat-growing regions and to give an early warning of problems. Earth resources scientists had learned to identify the “signature” (appearance) of wheat in the satellite data; others had been able to estimate the growth stage and potential yield of wheat. Computer programs combining records of weather conditions in past growing seasons with figures on crop yields in the past had enabled experimenters to estimate yields for the current growing season. Results from LACIE had shown the effectiveness of new technology in improving knowledge of global wheat production generally applicable to other crops. USDA was considering use of the data source to give early warning of significant changes in prospects for global commodity production. (NASA Release 78-125)
Heao 2 had radioed back its first picture Nov. 18, an image of x-rays coming from the edge of what may be a black hole, the Washington Star reported. When the picture first appeared on a GSFC television monitor as a collection of bright dots against a black background, scientists and engineers were described as “ecstatic.” Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory said: “The significance of today’s event is that for the first time x-ray astronomy has become of age, and it has achieved the kind of resolution and sensitivity which has been traditional in the fields of radio and optical astronomy.” He said the x-ray telescope on Heao 2 should be able to detect x-rays from objects two-thirds of the way toward the edge of the universe, meaning that the satellite would be seeing radiation created roughly 10 billion yr ago. Giacconi added, “The scientific significance is what it tells us we are going to get in the future,” and noted the telescope was 100 to 1000 times more sensitive than previous x-ray detectors placed above earth’s atmosphere. The picture reconstructed by computer from data radioed back by the satellite was a test to demonstrate the capability of the telescope, which had a 23-in-wide mirror and an 11-ft focal length. Target for the test was a star system in the Milky Way galaxy called Cygnus X-l, selected because of its well known location and its brightness. Cygnus X-l, 6000 light-yrs away, also happened to be the best candidate for a black hole; observations by a smaller x-ray satellite had shown that its x-ray emissions were unlike those seen from other objects. {W Star, Nov 19/78, A-13)
The ESA Council had given the go-ahead to produce an initial batch of 5 operational Ariane launch vehicles, and had approved interim funding of approximately $23.8 million for preliminary production-related expenses, AvWk reported. Although individual participating countries must approve the expenditures, Council approval had been sufficient to begin production. The first operational launcher should be available by the end of 1980 to launch ESA’s Exosat scientific satellite in early 1981. Cost of the 5-launcher package had been estimated at approximately $182.6 million, with an additional 10% proposed as a contingency reserve. Total budget would amount to about $200 million. At West Germany’s insistence, the individual satellite programs that would use the Arianes would fund the launcher costs. Program managers at ESA had sought approval to produce a first batch of 6 Arianes; however, policy of governments involved was to fund production of launchers only for identified markets. Once production buildup was completed, production rate of the Ariane was expected to reach 2 vehicles per year; program officials predicted this could increase rather quickly to 4, or possibly 5, a year to meet market demand. (AvWk Apr 24/78, 96)
MSFC announced that NASA had instituted a NASA End-to-End Data Systems (NEEDS) project to ease the enormous burden of storing data collected by its satellites and aircraft. NASA’s public archives had been growing by 100 000 000 000 bits of data per day; during the 1980s and beyond, spacecraft like Spacelab, earth-orbiting satellites, and planetary probes would produce a staggering quantity of data, creating a major problem of storage and availability to users. NEEDS would decrease processing time and storage space, reduce maintenance costs, and provide better user access. Four field centers would participate in the project, MSFC being responsible for developing a medium to replace magnetic tape and microfilm. Working with Harris Corp. of Melbourne, Fla., MSFC had developed the optical mass memory system, using a dry-process film that could store as much data as on magnetic tapes or microfilm in 100 times less space, and could make access 100 times faster. The goal of NEEDS would be a tenfold reduction in the present $300-million-per-year storage/maintenance cost, and a thousandfold increase in information return to users. (Marshall Star, Jan 18/78, 4)
ComSatCorp announced it had derived 57% of its 1978 operating revenues from services provided through Intelsat satellites; 37% from maritime and U.S. domestic services provided by Comsat General through the Marisat and Comstar satellite systems; and 6% from its investment share in INTELSAT and operational and technical services. ComSatCorp had been considering expansion into the growing environmental information services field in which satellite technology could play a significant, possibly essential, role. Comsat General, in cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey and Telesat Canada, had already demonstrated the ability of satellites and small unattended earth stations to collect water-resources data from remote areas of the U.S. and Canada. ComSatCorp would enter the field by acquiring at a price not to exceed $20 million Environmental Research & Technology, Inc. (ERT), currently engaged in a broad spectrum of environmental services. Adding ERT’s expertise in environmental data collection, monitoring, analysis, and prediction to ComSatCorp’s expertise in satellite communications and related technologies should make the organization better able to extend satellite-communications technology to the growing environmental-information services market. ComSatCorp had also been working to apply advanced technology in developing and manufacturing specialized products, including earth-station components, signal-processing systems equipment, and fiber-optics communications equipment. (COMSAT annl rept 78, 1-7)
LeRC reported that the communications technology satellite Cts, world’s most powerful comsat, had made possible quick diagnosis of burn and multiple-injury victims of a simulated catastrophe at the Baltimore/Washington International Airport. The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services had conducted a disaster exercise called Emergency Management of an Airport Catastrophe as part of a 2-day seminar for physicians, interns, residents, nurses, and other health care professionals. The “disaster” (a simulated collision between a commercial airliner and a ground aviation fuel tanker) had tested airport and statewide emergency medical plans to aid the “injured,” including about 180 crash victims. The scenario at the site included a breakdown in local communications, and an overload of local emergency medical facilities. A joint program between the U.S. and Canada, Cts operated on a new frequency at power levels' 10 to 20 times higher than those of other satellites; the higher broadcast power had allowed use of much smaller and far less expensive ground-receiving equipment. (Lewis News, May 26/78, 2)
GSFC reported that, after a 2mo search, its Copernicus satellite had located what might be a second invisible “black hole” in the universe. The satellite’s x-ray experiment had found in the constellation Scorpio what was believed to be a super dense collapsed star with such strong gravity that even light could not escape it. Scientists had declared it much more active and convincing than the first black hole found, Cygnus X-l. The new black hole was orbiting Scorpio V-861, a supergiant star visible with the naked eye from earth, and gradually siphoning away the larger star’s atmosphere. Tracing the massive amounts of x-rays released from matter emanating from the giant star had led scientists to what they called the “best black hole yet”; discovery had given astronomers their first opportunity to study a black hole as it passed behind its companion star and to test some of their black-hole theories. Glen Pollard, coinvestigator on the project, said he hoped the new information would define the shape of the cloud of stellar material sucked into the black hole, reveal the dynamics of such systems, and provide a measure of the quantity of material being removed at speeds up to 2 million mph. Studying black holes would extend astronomers’ knowledge of physics into areas not observable on earth—the physics of relativity. (Goddard News, July 19/78, 1)
The People’s Republic of China had launched eight spacecraft, some of them military reconnaissance satellites, Av Wk reported. Mainland Chinese had confirmed earlier speculation that reentry packages returned from three PRC spacecraft were of that type. Av Wk also said that Cosmos 1031 launched Sept. 8 from Plesetsk by the USSR, appeared to be a close-look reconnaissance satellite to report on NATO’s Northern Wedding exercise to repel a simulated invasion of the Shetland Is. north of Britain. The satellite had an unusual perigee location of 60°N over the Shetlands; its inclination was 62.8°. (AvWk, Sept. 25/78, 9)
NASA’s Office of Legislative Affairs had reported on a letter from the National Taxpayers Union to Sen. James Abourezk regarding S.2860, a bill that would commit the U.S. to the development and demonstration of solar power satellites. The letter read in part:
INTELSAT announced award of an international research contract valued at $75 380 to Cable & Wireless, Ltd., London, to determine the effects of rain on comsat radio signals. C&W would obtain annual statistics for rain-caused depolarization at 4GHz frequencies by measuring the relative amplitude of the 2 orthogonal circular-polarized components of a satellite signal. INTELSAT would use results to develop transmission and reception techniques that could double the capacity of its international telecommunications satellites. (INTELSAT Release 77-8-M)
ESA announced it had organized a tour of several Mediterranean countries to demonstrate use of data from the Meteosat weather satellite. Tom: objectives were to display Meteosat-system capabilities exhibited in the documents or images produced by the spacecraft; and to show potential users (meteorologists and others working on the study and management of earth’s natural resources) how to use the system. The system included a secondary data-user’s station (SDUS) mounted on a trailer towed by a vehicle containing a 2.5m-diameter receiving antenna and all equipment needed to receive analog signals in the WeFax (weather-facsimile) format. Demonstrations had begun in Cairo and would continue in Athens, Tunis, and Algiers. ESA had planned similar demonstrations in other countries covered by Meteosat. (ESA Release June 1/78)
The USAF announced that its ESD Spacetrack System Office had awarded Bunker Ramo Corp. of Westlake Village, Calif., a $927 000 contract for equipment to record and store data for military and authorized scientific use on all man-made objects orbiting the earth. The system would record information received at the Space Computational Center in NORAD’s Cheyenne Mountain Complex, Colo., on positions of the thousands of satellites and other man-made objects in space, and would store the data for 3yr in the computer’s active file. It would also microfilm historical data for permanent storage. The new system had become necessary because the automatic data-processing equipment formerly used by the Aerospace Defense Command lacked permanent-storage capability and was very expensive to maintain. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 6) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
INTELSAT announced that earth stations handling satellite communications in countries bordering the Indian Ocean would begin switching to a new larger-capacity comsat, Intelsat IV-A, which would carry about 6000 2-way telephone circuits (25% more capacity than its Intelsat IV predecessor) and would eventually provide increased capacity for international satellite television. The Indian Ocean Intelsat had provided communications for and between countries in an area bounded approximately by Britain and Europe in the west and Japan and Australia in the east. The transition of 47 earth stations through 150 steps was scheduled to start Sept. 18 and to be substantially completed by the end of 1978. No interruption or disruption of telecommunications services was anticipated, except that television transmission facilities would be unavailable during the latter half of Nov. The switchover operation would position Intelsat IV and Intelsat IV-A in orbit at the same location and synchronize their harmonic motion (a sway induced by natural forces acting on the spacecraft). The proximity of the satellites would allow earth stations to see both simultaneously, permitting changes in the operational configuration without a break in service. (INTELSAT Release 78-25-1)
GSFC reported that U.S., Canadian, and other scientists had been studying the first data from the applications Explorer mission Aem 1, launched Apr. 26 into a polar orbit. Using information on day-night temperature changes, the scientists had examined black-and-white and false-color images for clues to the locations of mineral resources and to identify rock types, soil-moisture changes and plant stress, and the effects of urban heat islands. The first false-color image had covered a 700km swath of the eastern U.S. from Cape Hatteras to Lake Ontario. The scientists would correlate data from Aem 1, first of a series of satellites for NASA’s heat-capacity mapping mission, with data from other satellites, especially Landsat. (Goddard News, July 19/78, 2)
ESA announced that the third (upper) stage of the heavy launcher Ariane, designed to use highly advanced liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propulsion techniques, had been successfully tested Jan. 10 at the Societe Europeenne de Propulsion’s Vernon test center. The firing had lasted 250sec, as scheduled. With previous successful tests, this test had demonstrated European mastery of the technology, ESA said. ESA had developed Ariane to launch communications and other applications satellites weighing up to 1000kg into geostationary orbit 36 000km above the equator; ESA had plans to launch about 200 geostationary satellites between 1980 and 1990. (ESA Release Jan 12/78)
Launches of USSR military space missions continued a marked decline, with total flights in 1978 23% fewer than in 1977, a possible Soviet effort to influence the atmosphere for a SALT II agreement, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Notable omissions from the Soviet military-spaceflight schedule were satellites related to antisatellite interceptor development and nuclear-powered ocean surveillance. These systems had come under intense public scrutiny and criticism in the past yr, as President Carter emphasized that they were major instruments of instability and needed to be banned. No antisatellite system launch had occurred for several months, since the Soviets had agreed to discuss a ban of such weapons and just before the convening of the first such meeting in May. The last Soviet ocean-surveillance satellite was Cosmos 954, which had reentered over Canada Jan. 24 trailing fragments of its nuclear reactor [see Jan. 28, Feb. 20]. At that point in 1978, the USSR had sent 50 military missions into space, a significant reduction from the 65 completed in the same time period in 1977. However, the USSR had not reduced photographic recon-naissance/surveillance activity; launch of the high-resolution observer Cosmos 1047 Nov. 15 was the 28th photographic recon/survey mission in 1978, launched at the same rate as in 1977. (D/SBD, Nov 17/78, 79)
The U.S. Postal Service would soon begin a lyr test of an electronic message service system that would reduce letters to electronic impulses, relay them to their destination by satellite, reconvert them to letter form using high-speed printers, and deliver them by regular carriers, Defense/Space Daily reported. If the test was successful, the agency could offer electronic mail services in up to 10 cities within 3yr. The initial test would send messages by satellite from one room in a Postal Service facility in Rockville, Md., to another room in the facility. A $2.3 million RCA study of the electronic message service system had concluded that it would cost the Postal Service 10 to 11 cents to deliver this kind of mail, a price equal to or less than present costs. RCA suggested that the system could be used within 6 to 8yr for up to one-fourth of the 100 billion letters sent through the U.S. mails annually and estimated it would cost the Postal Service $2 billion to install the system in 87 cities around the U.S. (D/SD, Nov 27/78, 120)
INTELSAT announced it had signed agreements with Saudi Arabia and Zaire to lease capacity on global-coverage Intelsats for domestic telecommunications in those countries. Saudi Arabia had leased a total of 2.25 global-beam transponders, extending domestic service to 8 cities in addition to Jeddah, Riyadh, and 2 mobile antennas served since 1977. The 5-yr agreement with Zaire had earmarked a full global-beam transponder in a spare-capacity satellite to serve 13 locations in that nation. Fifteen countries had begun (or would soon begin) to use the Intelsat system for domestic telecommunications. (INTELSAT Release 78-5-1)
INTELSAT announced it had awarded Nippon Electric Co., Tokyo, Japan, a $175 000 contract for development of a multimode phase-shift-keying (PSK) modem for a nonlinear satellite channel. INTELSAT had established full-time global communications using 197 antennas at 161 earth stations in 87 countries. (INTELSAT Release 78-3-M)
U.S. share of the 102-nation INTELSAT organization had dropped from its 61% starting point in 1964 (when 19 nations had joined to establish a global communications consortium) to 25.1%, Av Wk reported. Charges that the U.S. had dominated INTELSAT had caused friction in the organization since its inception. The 1964 interim agreements had ensured U.S. majority ownership of not less than 50.6%; expanded membership and traffic patterns had decreased U.S. control as well as the friction. Other ownership shares under the new allocation were those of the United Kingdom, 10.8%; France, 5.98%; Brazil, 4.23%; and Japan, 3.68%. The 1964 interim consortium had been capitalized at $200 million; the 1971 agreements had boosted the figure to $500 million, including members’ net capital contributions and the outstanding contractual capital commitments. The amount had reached $900 million in 1976 to finance Intelsat V satellites. (AvWk, May 22/78, 56)
NASA announced that its Tiros-N third-generation weather satellite launched from WTR Oct. 13 had returned excellent quality data and pictures from a near-perfect circular polar orbit at 870km (543mi) by 860km (537mi) altitude. Its advanced very high-resolution radiometer, the automatic picture transmission system, and the high resolution picture transmission system designed to provide local area coverage to hundreds of weather forecasters around the world were all working. After NASA completed a checkout in 3wk, it would turn over the satellite to NOAA for operation. (NASA Release 78-164)
ESA announced that since the end of March its Meteosat 1 had been transmitting daily meteorological data collected by special equipment aboard a French naval vessel in the North Atlantic. ESA had relayed the data to the European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) in West Germany. The satellite had transmitted messages every 3hr that included the ship’s position, and parameters such as wind characteristics, sea states, and air and sea temperatures. The experiment, carried out jointly by the French meteorological service and ESA, had been planned to demonstrate the reliability of automatic communications between ships and the Meteosat 1 satellite for regular production of meteorological reports. The experiment would last until July and would resume later with other European meteorological services. When operational, the system should include several hundred ships all over the world fitted with Meteosat equipment. (ESA Release, Apr 12/78)
The NYT reported that the Soviet Union had apparently agreed to a U.S. proposal to begin talks on banning hunter-killer satellites, which the USSR had been developing for about a decade. A senior Western diplomat said the Kremlin had formally conveyed its willingness to negotiate but had not said when. Marshal Nikolai V. Ogarkov, chief of staff of USSR armed forces, had outlined the Soviet position when he met with 21 visiting U.S. congressmen in Moscow. The Carter Administration had revealed earlier that it had suggested a treaty after 3 successful USSR tests of a new satellite (known in military jargon as Asat) able to maneuver close to another satellite in orbit and explode. If perfected, such a weapon (which the U.S. did not have) could threaten satellites used to verify compliance with strategic arms agreements, to give early warning of missile attack, or for civilian and military communications links. The Pentagon was unhappy about the administration’s decision to negotiate because it had 2 U.S. hunter-killer satellites under development: one could be launched into an orbit similar to that of the satellite to be destroyed, and another more maneuverable model using infrared sensors could seek out targets over great distances. The administration apparently hoped Pentagon plans would induce the Soviets to begin negotiations in Apr. It was not clear whether a treaty would cover only hunter-killer satellites or would include ground-based antisatellite weapons such as powerful laser beams, which the Pentagon opposed banning. (NYT, April 1/78, 5)
NASA declared the launch of two satellites had been successful, Japan’s direct broadcast satellite BSE and ESA’s orbital test satellite Ots 2. A Delta had launched BSE into a synchronous transfer orbit from ETR at 5:01pm EST Apr. 7, 1978, with 35 923km apogee, 166.1km perigee, 27.2° inclination. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit. The boost motor had fired at 7:34pm EST Apr. 8 to move the satellite over the South Pacific to a position at approximately 110°E above the equator south of Japan. All subsystem functional checks had indicated satisfactory satellite status. NASA had launched Ots B (Ots 2 in orbit) at 6:59pm EDT May 11 from ETR on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit with 35 946km apogee, 183.6km perigee, and 27.4° inclination. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit. The boost motor had fired at 8am EDT May 13, to move the satellite over the South Atlantic to a position 10°E above the equator. All subsystem functional checks had indicated satisfactory satellite status. This was the first flight of the Delta 3914 (Castor IV) configuration since failure of the OTS-A mission in Sept. 1977. (MOR M-492-212-78-01 [postlaunch] and M-492-210-78-02 [postlaunch], both June 28/78)
ESA reported that its council and communications satellites program board had unanimously approved at March and April meetings a first series of five operational Ariane launchers [see Apr. 24]; two operational satellites for intra-European telephone, telegraph, arid telex communications and television relay (ECS-1 and -2); and a second maritime-communications satellite (Marots-B). Three of the five Ariane launchers would be financed from ESA programs for the scientific satellite Exosat (to be launched in early 1981), Marots-B (mid-1981), and ESC-1 (end of 1981). One launcher had been earmarked for the French earth. observation satellite SPOT; the fifth launcher was a reserve. The council also had agreed that a preliminary phase of the H-sat program should revise the proposed satellite design to require only minor modifications (reducing the time scale) to go from an experimental “heavy” platform and payload to an operating direct-broadcast satellite. Other design modifications required to move from, a qualification to an operational Ariane had delayed the scheduled H-sat launch. (ESA newsletter, June 78, 2)
FBIS reported the USSR had launched a communications satellite, Horizont, Dec. 19 under a program “for further improvement and development of communications systems and television transmissions.” Satellite apogee was 48 365km; perigee, 2581km; period, 23hr 40min; inclination, 11.3°. Horizont carried improved multiplex-relay apparatus for transmitting telephone and telegraphic radio communications and TV programs, including those from the 22nd summer Olympic games in Moscow. It had a three-axis system for precision orientation, a power-supply system with independent guidance and alignment of the solar batteries with the sun, a thermo-regulation system, a telemetry system for transmitting data on onboard systems, a radio system for precision measurement of the orbit’s parameters and control of the satellite, and an orbit-correcting system. All satellite systems were functioning normally. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 20/78)
NASA announced it had judged the UK 5 (Ariel 5) mission successful in prelaunch objectives. This Explorer-class x-ray mission launched in 1974 had contributed significantly to x-ray astronomy and astrophysics. Ariel 5, a cooperative program between the U.S. and the U.K. Science Research Council, had discovered many new transient x-ray sources, although most of its studies were of steady x-ray sources. The second Ariel 5 catalog had listed locations of 107 high-latitude x-ray sources, many of them extragalactic. The satellite had performed well, far beyond its 6mo design life, although gas for the attitude-control system had run out 2.5 yr after launch (18mo beyond prelaunch estimates). An onboard magnetic fine-torquing system had maintained attitude stability and allowed some spin-axis maneuvers. All 6 onboard instruments had performed as they did the first yr after launch and should continue to produce exceptional results. (MOR S-870-74-05 [postlaunch], Mar 15/78)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science had successfully launched a satellite to study the phenomenon of northern lights, the Washington Post reported. The 200-lb Exos B, one of three artificial moons to be launched in Japan’s international magnetic-sphere observation program, would orbit the earth in an elliptical trajectory every 8hr 45min. The northern lights (aurora borealis) was a luminous phenomenon best viewed in the Arctic region. (WPost, Sept 7/78, A-16)
The JSC Roundup printed a report by Dr. Thornton Page on his experiences during a friendship tour to China. Page, who had used the extreme-ultraviolet camera during Apollo missions, had asked for and received tours of Chinese astronomical facilities; in discussions with Chinese, Page learned most of their data were of western origin because of the limited quality and size of Chinese astronomical instruments. “They were delighted to have the books, reports, pamphlets, and photos I presented to them, particularly the NASA photos of Shuttle, Skylab in orbit, and ALSEP instruments deployed on the moon,” Page reported. “They spoke about the large telescope under construction in Nanking, and their own telescope planned for a mountain site some 30mi northeast of Peking. Drs. Pan How-Ren and Wu Jian-Cheng are calibrating x-ray and far-UV detectors for use on a satellite, but they could not tell me when it will fly.” The Chinese told Page that a major change in national policy on science had taken place during the past yr, since the “Gang of Four” had been removed from power. Chairman Hua had given high priority to science and technology and had set a goal of doubling by 1982 the number of scientists and technicians in China. “None of the scientists I met,” Page added, “was involved in teaching, and none of our other visits to universities and high schools in Manchuria or Shanghai revealed classroom instruction in these subjects.” (JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 1)
NASA announced it had postponed to at least June 24 the scheduled June 10 launch of SeaSat-A because of precautionary changes and tests on the Atlas F launch vehicle. Temperature increases in the aft sections of recently launched Atlas vehicles had necessitated the changes and resulting tests. NASA would use SeaSat-A, first satellite designed to study the world’s oceans, to see if microwave instruments scanning from space could provide scientific data useful to oceanographers, meteorologists, and commercial users of the seas. The spacecraft would send information on sea-surface winds and temperatures, currents, wave heights, ice conditions, ocean topography, and coastal storm activity. NASA would attempt to demonstrate the feasibility of an operational multiple-satellite network to monitor oceans on a continuous near-realtime basis; twice daily, the system could provide ships at sea with detailed charts updated to show latest weather conditions, sea states, and hazards. Long-range use of the system could influence ship design, port development, and selection of sites for offshore facilities such as power plants. Other potential users of SeaSat data would include commercial fishermen, oil exploration firms, the Weather Service, pollution-control agencies, and the Coast Guard and Navy. (NASA Release 78-77; JPL Universe, May 26/78, 1)
NASA announced it had rescheduled launches of the TIROS-N third-generation operational meteorological satellite and the Nimbus-G pollution-monitoring satellite, originally set for mid-Sept. to Oct. 14 and 23, respectively. NASA had postponed the WTR launches because of malfunction of an onboard computer in TIROS-N, and subsequent discovery of reworking required for tape recorders on both TIROS-N and Nimbus-G [see Sept. 18]. NASA had returned the tape recorders to the manufacturer for correction of the suspected problem (loose solder particles) and would reinstall the instruments in the spacecraft over the next 2wk. (NASA Release 78-149)
Preliminary results from a 6-yr experiment at the San Andreas fault in Calif, indicated that earth motion along the fault had accumulated at a rate much faster than expected, equivalent to 6 to 7m over the past 70yr, Goddard News reported. Measurements from tracking sites on both sides of the fault in the San Andreas Fault Experiment (SAFE) to determine gross pla.e motion across the fault, and to demonstrate practical application of satellites and ground-based lasers in tracking relative motion of the earth’s upper plates, had produced satellite tracking data accurate within a few centimeters. Gross motion across the fault had provided a measure of strain energy as it accumulated, eventually to be released as an earthquake. Goddard Spaceflight Center’s pulsed laser ranging systems had measured earth motion by determining the range to a satellite, measuring the time required for a short pulse of intense light to travel from the laser to the satellite and back, and repeating the measurements once per second throughout each satellite pass. GSFC had performed the SAFE experiment in cooperation with a broad cross section of the scientific community. (Goddard News, June 21/78, 1)
KSC announced it had awarded the Univ. of Florida a $99 013 contract for development of a water-management system using satellite data and other NASA-developed technology. A Florida water-resources management information system could provide managers with a computerized bank of information to help meet increased demand for water; data from earth-resources satellites like NASA’s Landsats and NOAA’s Goes should reduce guesswork in water management. Studies by the Univ. of Florida and the South Florida Water Management District had substantiated Florida’s need for a comprehensive water-management system. The university study showed lack of water as the main problem facing Florida agriculture, and reported that water demand would equal the existing supply by about 1980. These studies, coupled with a 1972 mandate by the Florida legislature for a water-use and supply development plan, prompted state water-management districts to seek help from the university and KSC in solving their problems. (KSC Release 32-78)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that the USAF had awarded Harris Corp.’s Electrical Systems Division, Melbourne, Fla., a $4.7 million contract to design and produce transportable weather-satellite receiving terminals. The company would build and deliver one operational prototype and three production units to support SAMSO’s Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP). The terminals (called Mark IV, a follow-on to the Mark III weather terminals currently in operation) would give military commanders precise weather information accumulated from DMSP spacecraft orbiting the earth every lOlmin. The terminals, half the size of present terminals, could fit on C-130 aircraft or M-55 trucks and be operational within 6hr, as opposed to the present 48hr, automatically tracking a satellite appearing over the horizon and receiving visual and infrared imagery in real time. An operator using magnification and other techniques could choose and enhance a specific area of coverage, or could process the entire 4500-nautical-mi-long 1600-nm-wide satellite image. The Mark IV project officer, Capt. James Fowler, said that the operator, after choosing the area most suitable for the mission, could produce a hard-copy print in 2min and transmit the photo to four remote laser-image processors lOmi from the terminal. “This capability, unique to the Mark IV system, will provide battlefield unit commanders with weather data within 20 minutes after the satellite’s pass,” he said. The prototype Mark IV terminal had been scheduled for delivery in Feb. 1979; production units were to be in the field by Oct. 1980. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 1)
NASA announced it had adjudged performance of the Heao 1 satellite successful, as it had accomplished its primary and secondary objectives. Heao 1 had demonstrated that, in addition to its operating mode, normal scanning, it could point at specific celestial objects for detailed investigations; it had performed more than 50 pointings. NASA had solved some minor problems with the stored-command programmer early in the mission. The experiment complement had continued to receive high-resolution data over an energy range of 150 to 10 million electron volts. Although the sensitivity of the large-area counter array instruments had degraded, several of the counters remained unimpaired because of their modular construction and were able to achieve overall objectives. Heao 1 data clarified x-ray sources barely visible in older studies; the faintest sources seen were 10 to the 5th times weaker than the first x-ray star (ScoX-1) discovered 15yr ago. Heao 1 had identified many distant active sources, such as quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and BL Lacerta objects. For example, Heao 1 observed the BL Lacerta object Markarian-5011 spectra, which were extremely hard, establishing the lack of surrounding gas. Heao I had discovered that the strongest active sources in the galaxy were emitting radiation into the MeV range as a result of stimulation by strong nonthermal emission mechanisms. A map of diffuse x-rays in the range 0.15 to 60KeV indicated a hot thermal plasma extending beyond earth’s galaxy, and possibly early evolution of the universe. (NASA MOR S-832-77-01 [postlaunch] April 3/78)
NASA announced that an experimental oceanographic satellite had achieved an unexpected technological breakthrough: for the first time, earth-contour measurements by a satellite microwave sensor had exhibited an accuracy comparable to that of conventional" ground and aerial surveys used for small-scale mapping. An experiment sponsored by WFC had produced terrain contouring from Geos 3 (geodynamics experimental ocean satellite) radar-altimeter measurements at a height of 840km (520mi) above earth. As Geos 3 circled the globe at 7km/sec (4mps), the radar altimeter pointed vertically down and measured the distance between the satellite and the earth’s surface with a precision of 50cm (20in). Nineteen Geos-3 passes over the San Joaquin valley of southern Calif, had recorded terrain elevations for 40 000km2(15 500mi2), and comparison of the satellite-derived contours with U.S. Geological Survey small-scale topographic maps showed agreement within lm (3 ft). Since the altimeter had been designed as an ocean-sensing system, the acquisition of meaningful land data was unexpected. The ocean-optimized design of the altimeter and the nature of radar backscatter was expected to limit measurement of terrain variations to smooth or gently rolling topography such as a coastal plain, interior plain, or valley. The Geos 3 overland results showed that satellite-borne altimeters could measure terrain elevations for more rugged areas with accuracy sufficient to satisfy many small-scale mapping requirements, at a cost competitive with conventional methods. This technique would be particularly useful in remote areas of the world, such as arctic and desert regions where conventional surveying was difficult and expensive. (NASA Release 78-183)
The USSR had launched Soyuz 28 at 4:28pm Moscow time, Tass announced, with cosmonaut Vladimir Remek of Czechoslovakia accompanying Soviet cosmonaut Aleksey Gubarev on the first of a series of international cooperative flights that would include representatives from Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, and Romania. Soyuz launches later in 1978 would carry Polish and GDR cosmonauts. Since 1967 when the Intercosmos program began, scientists and specialists of participating countries had been using Soviet satellites and research rockets to study the physical properties of outer space, space meteorology, communications, biology, medicine, and natural resources. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 3/78)
Pioneer Venus, scheduled for launch May 20, would carry a recently completed JPL instrument to obtain new weather information on Venus, JPL Universe reported. VORTEX (Venus orbiter radiometric temperature experiment), a $4.5 million co-effort of JPL and Oxford Univ., England, would collect close-up data on winds, cloud structures, water vapor, and temperatures of Venus. Using technologies developed for satellite monitoring of earth weather, VORTEX would report 3-dimensional measurements of the Venus atmosphere. The complex instrument, an 8-channel radiometer combining 4 different subexperiments (three separate radiometers and a spectrometer) would weigh only 12 lb, partly because of the special hybrid microelectronics used. Orbiting as close as 100km above the cloudtops, it could “see” weather conditions at 7 different levels or layers. For a full Venus year of 243 days, scientists would process VORTEX data into weather maps and infrared images and compare meteorological conditions on Venus with those on earth. (JPL Universe, Mar 17/78, 2)
INTELSAT announced award of a contract to improve satellite communications in regions plagued by frequent heavy rainfall that caused satellite signals to fade at higher frequencies. Under the $39 827 contract, the Technische Universitat Graz, Austria, would conduct yr-long experiments for simultaneous comparison of fading caused by rainfall in four different locations. Results would determine whether alternative earth stations for use during rainfall would solve the fading problem. (INTELSAT Release 78-31-M)
GSFC reported it had asked industry to build a computer that could process satellite images 10 to 100 times faster than present machines. The new computer would be based on 6yr of research in “massive parallelism,” consisting of 16 384 processors working together, each processor a simple computer, with a single chip of silicon probably carrying 2 processors. Previous machines had not gone beyond a web of 64 simple computers. The new system would cross-correlate landmark images from earth-watching satellites 100 times faster than present MSFC where it would undergo vibration testing from May to November 1978. (NASA photo 78-H-222) ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY	73 machines, making multispectral classifications (such as distinguishing wheatland from cornfields) and geometric corrections for comparison of pictures taken from different vantage points in one-tenth of the time previously necessary. (Goddard News, Mar 78, 3) ■
NASA announced that Nimbus 6, a meteorological research satellite, would track the 6000km (3728mi) journey by dogsled of a lone Japanese explorer from northern Canada to the North Pole and back. The Smithsonian Institution, which had a scientific stake in the venture, had asked GSFC to manage the tracking. The 6-mo journey would begin March 4, 1978. The explorer, 37-yr-old Naomi Uemura of Tokyo, had driven a dogsled solo some 12 000km (7457mi) from Greenland to Alaska over an 18mo period in 1975 and 1976. During his upcoming Arctic journey, Uemura would carry a 4.5kg (101b) battery-powered satellite beacon on his dogsled to transmit once per min an automatic radio signal, including local temperature and atmospheric pressure. Nimbus 6 overflying the pole every 108min would monitor the signals and collect the data for relay to GSFC by a NASA tracking station in Fairbanks, Alaska, Uemura would systematically collect snow, ice, and air samples for Japan’s Natl. Inst, of Polar Research and the Water Research Inst, of Nagoya Univ. Researchers needed as accurate a record as possible of Uemura’s daily positions to correlate with the collected data. Satellite-tracking data would also verify Uemura’s deadreckoning and celestial-navigation readings, particularly difficult in polar regions. NASA’s expenditures on the venture would be minimal because both the Nimbus 6 and its ground-control computer would be routinely operating on a 24hr basis. (NASA Release 78-29)
ESA and INTELSAT had prepared a joint offer of Marecs (formerly Marots) satellites, plus maritime packages on Intelsat V comsats, for an international joint-venture attempt to set up a pre-Inmarsat maritime-communications system for the early 1980s, Aerospace Daily reported. The joint venture of Europe’s 17-nation Eutelsat group and other countries, including Japan and the Soviet Union, had accounted for about 74% of Inmarsat shares. The U.S., with 17%, had not participated. At its July meeting, the joint group indicated preference for a space system consisting of three Marecs satellites dedicated to maritime communications, plus maritime packages to be added to the last three of the seven planned Intelsat Vs. If costs or other factors made the option unsatisfactory, the joint venture had two others: a four-Marecs system, or a combination of two dedicated Intelsat spacecraft and three Intelsat V maritime packages. (An option using four dedicated Intelsat satellites was no longer under consideration.) INTELSAT’s board of governors at its mid-Sept. meeting would decide on pricing and other details, and the joint venture would receive the ESA-INTELSAT proposals at its late-September meeting. (A/D, Aug 23/78, 234)
INTELSAT announced that it, together with the Federal Republic of Germany and Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB), had funded development of a new high-efficiency solar-power collector. MBB had built the lightweight deployable solar array for use in satellites of the 1980s, with AEG Telefunken as subcontractor for solar cells on the array surface. ComSatCorp laboratories in Clarksburg, Md., had tested the array. Its weight, considerably less than that of current counterparts, would mean lower launch costs, and its higher power output would handle more onboard satellite electronics, enlarging its communications eapacity. At the beginning of a 7yr mission, the new solar array would provide up to 38watts of power per kg of weight, a 300% increase over current models. Incorporating thin solar cells in the design might increase output to 50watts of power per kg of weight. (INTELSAT Release 78-22-1)
NASA was proceeding cautiously toward its prospective 30/20GHz satellite communications demonstration program, with development starting in FY82 instead of the faster pace envisioned earlier, Aerospace Daily reported. Several questions of policy and organization remained unresolved, one of them being administration guidelines that appeared to contradict President Carter’s recently announced civilian space policy [see Oct. 11]. Major issues in the 30/20GHz program included whether a (dedicated satellite was to be flown and, if so, whether and how it should be used, apart from demonstrating NASA technology objectives. Another issue concerned the relationship between NASA and the Commerce Dept.’s National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), set up to take over support formerly provided by NASA to public service satellite-communications users. The 30/20 GHz program had been presented in May to the NASA Advisory Council as a prospective FY80 development program, leading to 1984 launch of a satellite using a Space Shuttle-compatible antenna less than 15ft in diameter, about 20 spot beams, and fast onboard switching. However, in November, an ad hoc satellite-communications subcommittee of the NAC learned that the current prospect was for multiple-contractor Phase B definition studies in FY80, with technology work to precede FY82 development and a 1985 launch. {A/D, Nov 17/78, 78)
AvWk reported that the Navy’s Electronic Systems Command planned to issue a request for proposals (RFP) to establish and operate a follow-on system to the Navy/TRW fleet satellite communications (FltSatCom) system. The Navy would lease from the contractor capacity on the new system, designated Leasat, which could be either a hybrid (providing service to merchant shipping as well as to the Navy) or dedicated (serving only the Navy). The RFP would require 3 satellites positioned over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. The first satellite should be available Oct. 1, 1981; the second, Apr. 1, 1982; the third, Oct. 1, 1987. A satellite that failed would have to be replaced within 30 days. The contractor would also build and operate a telemetry, tracking, and control system with central headquarters for coordination at 4 Navy communications stations in Va., Hawaii, Calif., and Guam. (AvWk, Mar 6/78, 14)
Spaceport News reported astronomers studying data obtained by the international ultraviolet explorer IUE satellite might have discovered a third black hole believed to be at the center of a globular cluster (a miniature galaxy shaped like a globe) some 15 000 light-yrs away. The IUE large ultraviolet telescope had penetrated the background light coming from a globular cluster and reached its core, where researchers found radiation from a group of 10 to 20 bright blue stars, apparently orbiting a black hole possibly small in size but with a mass equal to 1000 stars like the sun. Researchers would study movements and interrelationships of the stars to define the rotation about the center of the million-star cluster. (Spaceport News, Oct 13/78, 7)
ESA’s meteorological satellite, Meteosat 1, had been in orbit for a yr carrying out its image-taking, dissemination, and data-collection missions, ESA announced. Ground facilities at the European Space Operations Center (ESOC) in Darmstadt, Germany, for receiving, processing, archiving, and disseminating meteorological data from the satellite were ready to fulfill all requirements for the first GARP experiment, scheduled to begin Dec. 1. Meteosat 1, which transmitted every half hr visible and infrared images of the earth, had been retransmitting to primary and secondary data-user stations some 300 formats per day in various digital and analog forms. It also acted as a relay for image data from the U.S. satellite Goes 1 over the Atlantic, transmitted through the Centre de Meteorologie Spatiale at Lannion at the rate of about 20 formats per day. Meteosat 1 had also participated in Nov. in the first transmission tests of image data from the TJ.S. Goes 3 satellite over the Indian Ocean, so that users had received data from three geostationary satellites covering approximately two-thirds of the globe. Data-collection platform experiments had demonstrated the high quality of the links between Meteosat 1 and the mobile platforms; about 15 DCPs were operational, and about 10 were in the process of being admitted and would come into service in early 1979. Another mission of Meteosat 1 was to supply immediately usable meteorological products (wind speed, cloud height, sea-surface temperature, etc.). Meteosat image quality should maintain the serviceability of these products; results already achieved were at least comparable to those obtained by other geostationary satellites participating in the GARP. Use of the water-vapor channel, an original feature on Meteosat l, was considered by the meteorological community as a major advance in refinement of interpretation techniques. (ESA Release Nov 28/78)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. and USSR had opened a more reliable “hotline” using satellites, instead of telephone wires and undersea cables, to link the White House and the Kremlin. The direct line had been available since 1963 for use in an international emergency. The direct link would use the synchronous-communications satellite Intelsat and the Soviet Molniya system of satellites. The previous hotline had been subject to unexpected interruptions, a potentially grave problem in event of tension between the two governments; it had been cut at least three times, once when a Finnish farmer cut a buried cable while cultivating land. (WPost, Jan 17/78, A-10)
The People’s Republic of China had announced an 8yr crash plan to catch up with the rest of the world in scientific research, Nature reported. Vice-Premier Fang Yi told 6000 delegates to the All-Nations Science Conference in Peking that China had lagged 15 to 20yr behind the West in many branches of science and still more in others; the program would narrow the gap in some areas to lOyr by 1985, and would help in overtaking the rest of the world in all branches of science by the end of the century. The article said that China had planned to begin production of fast-mainframe computers and to establish a strong computer network and data base by 1985, with extra attention to peripherals, software, and associated areas of applied mathematics. PRC would devote its efforts to basic space physics, cosmic rays, and technical problems of remote sensing, and planned to launch a series of Skylabs and deep-space and communications satellites within 8yr. (Nature, April 6/78, 482)
