As decided earlier in 1979 [see June 30], NASA took the first steps to take ATS 6 out of geostationary orbit and boost it to a higher altitude to keep it from colliding with other spacecraft. On the evening of July 30, NASA fired the minus-pitch attitude-control thruster; the firing was successful, but ATS lost Earth acquisition because of intermittent telemetry problems. In order to reacquire Earth, the spacecraft was put in a Sun-acquisition mode the morning of July 31; boost procedures resumed about 1:30 p.m. and proceeded as planned, with completion expected in about 30 hours. Since its May 1974 launch, the five-year-old communications satellite had exceeded its planned lifetime by three years, but three of its four stationkeeping thrusters had failed, and the fourth was shaky. GSFC would use the remaining thruster to lift ATS to a level several hundred kilometers higher, where it would remain in orbit indefinitely. (NASA Release 79-81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt Aug 1/79)
NASA’s public affairs office reported that the 23,000-pound Pegasus 2 satellite reentered the Earth’s atmosphere at about 4:20 p.m. EST, coming down in the Atlantic Ocean northwest of Ascension Island. The “footprint” of descending "debris would have spread over a path 60 miles wide by 1,500	miles long over the South Atlantic, the report said. (Hq PAO, Nov 3/79)
The ESA reported from its November 29 meeting that British Aerospace, chosen as prime contractor for ESA’s Large Satellite, would receive a contract for the first part of a study phase. Contracts for payload studies would go to Selenia (Italy) for a television broadcast payload and a 20-30 GHz transponder payload; to BTM (Belgium) for a 20-30 GHz beacon payload; to United Kingdoms Marconi Space and Defense Systems for a specialized-services payload; and to Marconi with Telespazio (Italy) and Philips (Netherlands) for mission studies related to the 20-30 GHz transponder. Contractor work would be done by April 1980, with launch scheduled for early 1984. Objectives of the Large Satellite program were to build a multipurpose space platform to match user requirements in telecommunications and to demonstrate a service payload that would advance ESA technology, assess potential of new satellite services, and promote satellite usage. (ESA Info Bltn 33) ESA reported that Meteosat 1 had put itself into standby mode November 24, one day after its second anniversary of successful operation in orbit, because of an apparent power overload. Attempts to switch it back to full operating mode succeeded only briefly. ESA had begun a step-by-step unit switching to detect the area of failure and isolate it; the fault apparently occurred in the electronics that turned off the main power supply in case of overload. Periodic instabllity had appeared in this protection unit, but the data collection function was fully operational and Meteosat 1 was able to collect and relay data from meteorological platforms within its field of view. ESA was analyzing the problem for possible effect on Meteosat 2, scheduled for launch in September 1980. (ESA Info Bltn 34)
The Washington Post reported that NASA’s failure to tell a contractor about classified information on the USSR’s early-warning radar network had cost the federal government $75 million, the cost of rebuilding the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) to maintain communications with crews on the Shuttle in its first 10 years; of operations. NASA had had to renegotiate a $786 million contract awarded 3 years ago to Western Union, which designed the TDRSS without knowing about the problem of interference from USSR installations located between the Baltic and the Black Seas and using frequencies high enough to overpower transmissions between the TDRSS and the Shuttle orbiter. An unidentified source told the newspaper that U.S. intelligence had given such a “superclassified” designation to data on Soviet radar frequencies and power outputs that NASA could not give the information to Western Union and its subcontractor TRW Systems, Inc. Renegotiation and rework had delayed the satellite system by at least a year, NASA told Congress, but would not impair Shuttle operations already delayed by engine development problems. ( W Post, Feb 17/79, A-9)
NASA announced that it had selected 33 scientific investigations for 4 satellite missions scheduled for launch in 1982-1985. The investigations, 23 from the United States and 10 from 6 other nations, would be in climate and upper-atmosphere research. The 23 U.S. investigations represented 11 universities, 1 private organization, and 2 government agencies. Foreign countries represented were Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom. Each country would fund its own investigations; the cost of the U.S. studies would be about $5 million over the next five years, including instruments. Spacecraft used would be the earth radiation-budget satellite, two polar-orbiting NOAA metesats, and Spacelab 3. (NASA Release 79-165)
NASA reported that LaRC staffers were using the SAGE satellite launched from WFC February 18 to measure and track into the stratosphere the ash and gases from an eruption of La Soufriere, a volcano on St. Vincent island in the Caribbean, between April 13 and 17. The eruption, detected first by SAGE while passing over the island April 23, deposited as much as an inch of dust on neighboring islands and provided an opportunity to study stratosphere distribution of aerosols from a single source. NASA alerted scientists around the world to use ground-based and balloon-borne instruments in checking between 6°N and 20 °N latitudes for effects of the eruption. SAGE might answer questions about the effect of aerosols and ozone on climate and environmental quality. (NASA Release 79-56; LaRC Release 79-29; WFC Release 79-8)
NASA reported that its small astronomy satellite Sas 3 had reentered the atmosphere April 9 over the Pacific Ocean after nearly four years of scanning the skies for X-ray data, although its design lifetime had been only one year. Launched May 7, 1975, from the San Marco platform off the coast of Kenya, the 195-kilogram. Sas J in a 500-kilometer orbit had discovered 2 new quasars and about half the 35 known X-ray bursters (stars emitting huge brief bursts of X-rays once every few hours). Sas 3 indicated that these bursts resulted from thermonuclear reactions on the surfaces of neutron stars. (NASA Release 79-44)
INTELSAT reported that two new regional satellite systems proposed by member groups would be technically compatible with its present system and would not threaten its economic well-being. A proposed European Communications Satellite (ECS) system would provide telecommunications service to countries in Eastern and Western Europe and North Africa beginning in 1982, working with Europe’s terrestrial network. A Palapa B system, a joint venture of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries including Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, would serve remote areas not having access to INTELSAT’S system, also beginning in 1982. (INTELSAT Releases 79-07-1, 79-09-1)
INTELSAT would mark the 10th anniversary of its global communications satellite system begun July 15, 1969, when an Intelsat 3 satellite went into service over the Indian Ocean; Intelsat 3 satellites were already covering the Atlantic and Pacific. It had been just over 5 years since launch of the first commercial communications satellite (Early Bird, nickname of Intelsat I) April 6, 1965. “Best of all,” INTELSAT said, its charges for leased telephone circuits by satellite had decreased 71.2% over 10 years despite inflation. (INTELSAT Release 79-17-1)
ESA announced that, pending an INMARSAT decision on the configuration of its worldwide maritime space system, member states in the Maritime European Communications Satellite (Marecs) program had agreed at a July 26 meeting in Paris to prefinance a third maritime communications satellite, Marecs-C, under a new arrangement whereby, instead of ESA’s offering INMARSAT the Marecs-A and Marecs-B satellites through Interim European Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), ESA would offer three Marecs satellites directly to INMARSAT. The agreement authorized ESA to sign with the satellite contractor for about 45 MAU (million accounting unit) and begin arranging for a Pacific-area ground station. (ESA Release July 27/79)
FBIS reported that U.S. scientists and engineers visiting tracking stations, research institutes, and “cosmic centers” in the People’s Republic of China had seen their achievements in rockets and cosmonautics. At one center, the Chinese showed their U.S. counterparts the latest “spy in the sky” satellite planned for launch in late 1979. (FBIS, Moscow to Asia in English, Oct 6/79)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, administrator, and Dr. Willy Moenandir Mangoendiprodjo, director of Indonesia’s telecommunications agency, had signed a memorandum of understanding April 9 for launch of two Indonesian domestic communications satellites. NASA would furnish reimbursable launch and associated services for a second generation of Palapa spacecraft. The new satellites would replace existing communications satellites: Palapa A-l, launched July 8, 1976, and Palapa A-2, launched March 10, 1977. The Shuttle would launch the first Palapa B in June 1982; the second during the first half of 1983. (NASA Release 79-43)
NASA pronounced the mission of international ultraviolet explorer lue successful: observatory performance had “substantially exceeded design and mission objectives.” Gyros used on lue would serve the Space Telescope (ST); the spectrograph and cameras would influence the design of those on the ST; and operational software and guest-observer operations would provide an experience base for the ST. (NASA MOR S-868-78-03 [postlaunch] Aug 16/79) Wolfe said that all the experimenters who worked on the mission in 1969 were still alive, and only one had been changed (the principal investigator for infrared, who had taken a sabbatical). He called the media coverage of the Pioneer 10 and Pioneer II Jupiter encounters in 1973 and 1974 “outstanding.” A plaque in the National Air and Space Museum described Pioneer as “a spacecraft designed to fly by the planets Jupiter and Saturn’—Wolfe congratulated the museum on its forecast. He enumerated the options for imaging, explaining how the Pioneer would approach Saturn and its moons and how the information returned would assist the upcoming Voyager encounters. A NASA release August 21 said controllers at ARC had ordered a “left turn” for Pioneer 11 to permit one-at-a-time activation of its onboard instruments. Images of Saturn’s rings from 16 million kilometers looked no larger than a penny; by August 26, investigators expected them to be better than any taken from Earth and 20 times better by September 1. (NASA Release 79-108 [press kit], 79-109; ARC Release 79-37; text, press conf, Aug During August: NASA announced selection of a number of investigators and experiments for its missions. —NASA selected 24 scientists to use data from the laser geodynamics satellite Lageos launched May 4, 1976. Having completed an initial phase of settling into orbit and checking out its laser tracking system, the satellite was now ready to provide mobile and fixed receivers around the world with ranging data on crustal-plate motion, density distribution within the Earth, and polar motion/Earth rotation. The investigators would become part of a working group chaired by Dr. David Smith, Lageos project scientist and were to meet August 29 and 30 at GSFC. Seventeen investigators were from U.S. universities (six), private firms (five), or other government agencies (six); others were from France (four), the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and West Germany (one each). (NASA Release 79-102) —NASA selected 32 research proposals that would use global measurements of the near-Earth magnetic field from Magsat, scheduled for launch in October. The 19 U.S. investigators represented universities (12), private firms (6), and government agencies (1). The 13 foreign investigators were from Canada (4), France and Australia (2 each), and Brazil, India, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom (1 each). The 6-rnonth mission managed by GSFC would remedy shortages and discrepancies in data from many geographic areas. (NASA Release 79-103) —NASA selected 40 scientific investigations for Spacelab/Shuttle flights scheduled between 1983 and 1985; 33 of those chosen were from the United States, and 7 from other nations (Canada, France, Japan, and Belgium) each funding its own experiments. The studies, chosen from some 200 responses to a request for proposals, would be on astronomy, solar physics, upper-atmosphere physics, space-plasma physics, and high-energy astrophysics. (NASA Release 79-112)
NASA announced that its satellite system ASDAR (aircraft-to-satellite data relay) had started operation as part of the GWE that began earlier this year [see January 7], collecting and relaying weather observations from aircraft in flight and leading to possible million-dollar savings annually in aviation fuel costs. The system, consisting of a power supply, clock, 80-watt transmitter, small computer, and antenna, would monitor and report eight times per hour the aircraft’s location and altitude, together with weather data generated by equipment already aboard each ASDAR-equipped airliner. The system would relay the information through a NOAA satellite to weather data centers and on to the users. Relay of quickly changing weather information to subsequent flights within two hours could save time and fuel by taking advantage of favorable winds or avoiding threatening storms. Also, the 17 widebody jets using ASDAR would regularly cross the southern hemisphere and the tropics, where data were not usually available. Participating countries included England, Australia, the Netherlands, the Scandinavian countries, Singapore, and the United States (NASA Release 79-51) NASA also reported that ARC’s research aircraft Galileo II had gone to Saudi Arabia to join an international study of the monsoon, a storm system bringing nearly all the Asian subcontinent’s annual rainfall in June, July, and August, supplying torrents of moisture for the crops and overwhelming the area in floods. In 1978 the storms killed more than 900 people and left more than 3 million homeless. MONEX (the monsoon experiment) would trace the origin of the storms and attempt to provide weather forecasts that would be “extremely useful” in an area “practically devoid of basic weather data,” according to Joachim Kuettner, director of the U.S. effort. (NASA Release
NASA announced an MSFC award to General Dynamics Convair of a $250,000 contract to study feasibility of a space platform in geostationary Earth orbit carrying many separate payloads. The platform would contain plug-in equipment to accommodate communications, Earth resources, meteorology, and similar studies now flown on separate satellites. Preliminary MSFC investigations indicated that a platform could be built in space and located in a synchronous orbit at 40,000 kilometers to offer power and other functions to “tenant” missions parked there for a fee-like rent. Platform services such as power, available to all tenants, would eliminate the need for antennas, solar arrays, or batteries on individual payloads, reducing size and launch weight. Locating packages on a single platform would also simplify in-orbit repair and servicing. (NASA Release 79-82; MSFC Release
INTELSAT announced a first step toward intersatellite communications links: an award of a $170,000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Company for design and fabrication of a traveling-wave tube, a vital component of an intersatellite link. Direct transmission via satellite was now possible only between points within one satellite’s coverage area (about one-third of Earth’s surface); messages for locations outside that area had to use land-based links or ground relay to a second satellite. The planned communications links could transmit directly from one satellite to another, saving one down and one up transmission, freeing that link for other use, and making the whole system more efficient and economical by making more stations available to direct access. (INTELSAT Release 79-10-1)
NASA said it would join the Canadian Department of Communications and France’s CNES in a 15-month demonstration in 1982 of a search-and-rescue system to speed detection and location of distress signals by use of satellites. The three countries would set up ground stations and conduct simulated search-and-rescue. A satellite in polar orbit could cover the globe every 12 hours, listening on the emergency frequencies used by ships and aircraft. Minutes after receiving an alert, ground computers could pinpoint its origin within 20 kilometers (13 miles) and flash it to coordination centers. Canada would provide transponders, and France receiver-processors, to fly on NOAA satellites in polar orbit; the United States would modify, fit with antennas, integrate, and launch the satellites and develop emergency beacons for ships and aircraft to use with the systems. The parties to the agreement were also negotiating for cooperation with the Soviet Union. (NASA Release
NASA reported that an unmanned Soviet Cosmos satellite to be launched in mid-September would carry 13 experiments from the United States along with some from the Soviet Union and other countries, all designed to study effects of weightlessness on physiological processes. ARC would manage the U.S. portion of the project, in which 40 scientists representing 18 U.S. universities and research groups would participate. Major payload would be 38 white rats and 60 fertile Japanese quail eggs, scheduled to orbit about three weeks. The Soviet Union would make a first attempt to breed rats in space, separating males and females until the second flight day; two control sets of rats on Earth would be housed and fed like those in space, one exposed to stresses such as launch and reentry but not zero gravity. Three U.S. experiments would use material handcarried to Moscow a week before launch and returned to ARC after recovery. (NASA Release 79-114; ARC Release 79-39)
NASA announced award of a $4.7 million contract to Goodyear Aerospace Corp., Akron, Ohio, for fabricating a high-speed image-processing computer (called massively parallel processor) to analyze data from future Earth-observation spacecraft. Current computers had to process one at a time the thousands of picture elements (pixels) constituting a satellite image, a timeconsuming and expensive procedure. The new computer would use 16,384 simple interconnected elements to process the pixels simultaneously, 10 to 100 times faster than now possible and at a greatly reduced cost. Scheduled for delivery to GSFC in 1982, it would process data in the hundreds of images received there from NASA’s Earth-resources spacecraft. (NASA Release
NASA announced a new five-year development program to retain U.S. leadership in satellite communications and assigned LeRC to work with private industry, DOD, and other NASA centers to launch a sophisticated communications satellite in 1985 or 1986. Daniel J. Shramo, LeRC director of space applications, explained that NASA in 1973 had “phased down” its work in communications satellite technology because of budget pressures and “the strong capabilities present in the private sector.” Industry since then had been improving antenna performance, increasing the number of circuits per satellite, and decreasing satellite weight per channel. Technical studies already under way at LeRC should result in a communications satellite system capable of transmitting data anywhere regardless of population size or electronic sophistication. (NASA Release 79-143)
President Carter designated the NOAA to manage all civilian remote sensing from space. A space policy review committee chaired by Frank Press had assessed future U.S. civilian remote sensing requirements and decided that a single agency could best handle operational satellite activities. NOAA had managed three generations of weather satellites to prepare it for responsibilities in land remote sensing as well as atmosphere and ocean. The directive said the United States would continue to supply Landsat data to foreign users; the DOC would foster private-sector involvement in remote sensing and would coordinate and regulate civil remote sensing through a board representing federal and state organizations including NASA and DOD. (Text, Nov 20/79)
INTELSAT reported that it would turn off Intelsat 3 F-3 this date after 10 years of service that gave the organization the first truly global telecommunications system. The Intelsat 3 series of nine communications satellites was built by TRW Systems Inc., three of them having failed to orbit or destroyed at launch; Intelsat 3 F-3 was the last of the series in operation. Original design life was five years. Launched into synchronous orbit in February 1969, the communications satellite operated over the Indian Ocean until July 1972, carrying among others a worldwide telecast of Prince Charles’s investiture as Prince of Wales. It was placed on standby in May 1977, and its mechanically despun antenna stalled in April 1979, more than 10 years after launch, rendering it inoperable. As it had enough fuel remaining to push it 4,000 to 5,000 kilometers further out into space, INTELSAT would turn off spacecraft electronic systems and activate small propulsion motors to put it where it would need 4 to 5 million years to return to its old altitude, drifting at the rate of a meter a year. (INTELSAT Release 79-28-1)
NASA reported a prediction by NORAD that the Pegasus 2 spacecraft assembly launched by NASA in May 1965 would reenter Earth’s atmosphere about November 5. Pegasus 2, one of three satellites launched in 1965 to gather micrometeoroid data for use in designing future spacecraft, weighed considerably less at 10,430 kilograms than the 70,300-kilogram Skylab that reentered over Australia in July. The predicted descent area would be 31.7° north and south of the equator, an area three-fourths water. After the reentry of Pegasus 1 and 3 (September 1978 and August 1969, respectively), no parts of either spacecraft were found or recovered. (NASA Release 79-126)
The Washington Star reported on RCA’s plans to launch within 18 months a replacement for the $20 million Satcom 3 that vanished from orbit December 10. The company said that it wanted FCC authority to launch a spare satellite now being built; a complete search for the missing communications satellite could take several weeks, but so far “contact has not been regained.” (W Star, Dec 15/79, C-8)
