Further press comment on the USSR launch April 29 of Cosmos 1176 included a Washington Post speculation that the United States might deplore the nuclear-powered vehicle for more reasons than its deterrent effect on United Nations negotiations. Recalling the aborted attempt April 24-25 to rescue U.S. hostages in the Tehran embassy, the Washington Post noted that the Cosmos 1176 launch came only four days later. Just before it began the rescue attempt, the U.S. aircraft carrier Nimitz “sped away from a Soviet spy ship that had been trailing it, and apparently was able to launch the rescue helicopters on their secret mission without notice.” Satellites spying with radar needed nuclear sources for the necessary power; solar cells, e.g., could not produce enough electricity. The new satellite “passing daily over the Indian Ocean and Middle East.. .may well be meant to keep the Kremlin from being surprised again by providing radar surveillance of the U.S. fleet,” the Washington Post said. The Washington Star cited the January 1978 breakup of Cosmos 954 that scattered radioactive debris across a remote region of Canada; one expert suggested that the Soviet Union might have solved the problem causing the Canada crash or might have developed a new nonnuclear power source for the new satellite’s radar. However, U.S. officials were “virtually certain” that the new satellite was, like those in the Cosmos 954 series, powered by radioactive thermal generators creating heat that turned turbines to produce electricity. The United States had already detected radar emissions from Cosmos 1176, indicating that it was looking for U.S. and other ships. Its radar was 90% able to detect objects the size of aircraft carriers, 50% cruisers, and 30% frigates. Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had revealed that such satellites carried about 1001 pounds of uranium; after about 75 days, they were supposed to be rocketed to 500-mile-altitude orbits where they would remain for about 100 years, or until the materials were no longer dangerous. (W Post, May 2/80, A-6; W Star May 2/80, A-l)
INTELSAT said that it would reduce by 20% its charges for communications satellite capacity leased to nations for domestic use. The board of governors decided to charge $800,000 (U.S.) per year per transponder; the previous fee had been $1 million. Fifteen nations were currently leasing capacity on INTELSAT spacecraft for their own domestic use. (INTELSAT Release 80-03-1)
Today newspaper said that a 13-nation U.N. committee that met in Geneva, Switzerland, had drafted a report on a proposed satellite system to scan the Earth and spot disarmament violations. Ending a closed two-week session of the committee, the report said that the scientific, financial, and legal experts would meet there again in February 1981 to consider and approve the draft for submission to the United Nations. The statement contained no details of the proposed satellite monitoring system. U.N. Secretary General Kurt Waldheim had appointed the committee after a special General Assembly session in 1978 on disarmament received a proposal by France for U.N. establishment of an international satellite agency to check up on disarmament pledges. {Today, Sept 20/80, 10A)
NASA declared successful the mission of Magsat, launched Ocober 30, 1979, to measure Earth’s magnetic field. The satellite’s lifetime exceeded that planned for it by three months and met or exceeded accuracy requirements in instrumentation and in attitude and position determination. The mission had met the objectives of developing a worldwide magnetic-field model; acquiring data for crustal magnetic-anomaly maps; and adding to knowledge of Earth’s magnetic field and its temporal variations. (NASA MOR E-662-80-01, Oct 20/80)
INTELSAT announced that its assembly had agreed to technical and some economic compatibility with seven other satellite systems. Found technically compatible with existing and planned INTELSAT systems were Eutelsat, spare craft for a European communications satellite system; Germany’s TVSat broadcasting system; India’s Insat 1-A and Insat 1-B for television and meteorological use; Indonesia’s Palapa-A system for limited regional service to remote areas in southeast Asia; the Intersputnik system for limited use by Algeria; Japan’s GMS-2 metesat system; and Saudi Arabia’s broadcast-satellite system. Algeria’s proposal was the first instance of an INTELSAT signatory’s seeking use of another system for general international public traffic instead of for limited regional service. INTELSAT said that its permission would apply only through 1985 and to a total of 22 telephone lines; similar proposals by other members would require separate handling. The spec ific request by Algeria for use of Intersputnik would not constitute significant economic harm to INTELSAT at present; however, the assembly noted that INTELSAT’s objective was to promote development of “a single” global communications satellite system, and all signatories must continue to consider that a goal. (INTELSAT Release 80-23-1)
NASA reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, its administrator, had signed an agreement November 18 in Bangalore, India, with Dr. Satish Dhawan, secretary of the Indian government’s Department of Space, for launch by NASA of two India communications satellites/metesats. In geosynchronous orbit, India’s national satellites (INSAT) 1A and IB would provide the subcontinent with point-to-point television and voice, community broadcasting, and weather data. Launch would be either by Shuttle or, at India’s option, on Delta (expendable) launch vehicles. Under the agreement, India’s Department of Space would be responsible for manufacture of the satellites (under contract to Ford Aerospace), and for checkout and integration of a spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) to boost them into transfer orbit for maneuver to geosynchronous stations. NASA through KSC would provide all other launch-related services. INSAT 1A was scheduled for Shuttle launch in August 1983, or on a Delta in February 1982; INSAT IB, by Shuttle in December 1983 or a Delta in July 1983. (NASA Release 80-176)
NASA reported that it had begun a three-year program with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources using Landsat data to detect gypsy-moth damage. Under an agreement signed recently, the data would identify and locate damage so that subsequent satellite images could be used to monitor affected areas. Foresters could identify infestations and isolate areas for pest management. Results would be passed on to other states in the eastern United States that could use the techniques to control spread of gypsy-moth damage initially mapped in New England in 1910. Damage to hardwood forests in Pennsylvania over the past 10 years was an estimated $32 million; in 1980 alone, gypsy-moth caterpillars defoliated 440,000 acres of hardwood forest, (NASA Release 80-155)
NASA announced that, after five years of studying Earth resources and environment from an altitude of 920 kilometers (570 miles), Landsat 2 ceased operation when its primary flight-control mechanism failed because of wear. A two-month effort to use other on-board devices to keep the craft pointed at Earth had failed, and NASA staff had put it into an engineering-test mode that would allow further study of the attitude-control problem. Landsat 2, launched in 1975 with a one-year lifetime, was second of a remote sensing series that could also collect data from beacon platforms in remote areas. A major asset of the Landsat system was its repetitive observation, as often as every nine days with two satellites, which would permit immediate detection of short-term changes. Landsat L, launched in 1972, was retired early in 1978; Landsat 3, launched in March 1978, would continue to furnish data to more than 400 U.S. and foreign Earth-resources programs. NASA planned to launch a fourth and more advanced Landsat in 1981. (NASA Release 80-9)
ESA reported that representatives from Canada, France, India, Japan, and the United States, as well as ESA, met in Ottawa May 8-9 to discuss international cooperation in remote-sensing satellite systems. ESA would host a follow-up meeting in 1981. A series of regional meetings with nations planning to use remote-sensing data would bring the needs of user states to the attention of satellite operators and would help in preparing for a 1982 United Nations conference on exploration and peaceful uses of outer space. (ESA Info 11)
NOAA reported that it would submit to OMB by midyear a transition plan for NOAA to assume responsibility for operating a Landsat-type system to be launched in the late 1980s. Based on technology derived from NASA’s experimental Landsat program, the system would provide essential data from space for use in food production, mineral exploration, Earth resources inventory, management of rangeland, forests, and water resources, and environmental protection. NOAA had operated meteorological satellites for 14 years, developing the ability to process, disseminate, and archive “enormous qualities” of satellitegenerated data for users who need it for decision making. NOAA would also have to determine not only the data requirements of various sectors of society but also how quickly the information was needed and in what format. NOAA would hold a series of regional meetings with users of satellite data to develop a system meeting their needs. (NOAA Release 80-48)
NASA announced a change of date to April 1982 for completing orbital flight tests of the Shuttle. “Several factors” such as continuing engineering assessment and improvement of the thermal-protection system led to the decision. First operational flight of Columbia, now slipped from March to September 1982, would carry the tracking and data-relay satellite TDRS-A into a geosynchronous orbit. Other schedule adjustments would be discussed with users at KSC May 29-30. Changes in the manifests had been coordinated with DOD, NASA said; it would make use of Deltas during the transition to full Shuttle operations. Others set to use the Delta included Telesat of Canada, Hughes Aircraft, and Indonesia. (NASA Release 80-74; JSC Release 80-037)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) announced that it had filed with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) a 5% reduction of its basic charges to U.S. common carriers for international communications satellite services. It claimed frequent price cuts, most recently by 15 % in May 1979, since it began commercial service with Early Bird in 1965. (ComSat-Corp Release 80-3)
INTELSAT said that an “extraordinary session” of its signatories in Washington had authorized increasing the organization’s capital ceiling from $990 million U.S. to $1.2 billion to buy a follow-on to the Intelsat V series of satellites and launch vehicles that could fill “booming world demand” for international and domestic communications until the Intelsat VI is available around 1986. INTELSAT’s announcement said that the actual cost per unit of satellite communications was dropping steadily, in spite of the increased investment required; its charges were about a sixth of the level in 1965 when the first Intelsat went into service. (INTELSAT Release 80-18-1)
NASA reported that it was studying options for restructuring the Landsat D project because of persistent engineering and management problems in manufacturing the spacecraft instruments and ground systems. Fourth and most advanced of NASA’s experimental Earth-resources monitoring spacecraft, Landsat D was designed to carry an advanced scanner called a thematic mapper, to provide Earth images in more spectral bands and with twice the resolution (30 meters) of earlier Landsats. Hughes Aircraft problems with the mapper resulted in increased cost estimates and delivery delays. Mission-system contractor General Electric was also having problems and had projected schedule delays that would increase costs of both the flight system and the ground system it was building for Landsat D. Both sets of problems would effect Landsat D’s launch schedule, increasing the risk of a gap in data for present users. Landsat 3, launched in March 1978, was still operating but had had problems with its sensor, a multispectral scanner that collected data for conversion to images of Earth’s natural resources. NASA was considering three possibilities: launch Landsat D as soon as possible with a thematic mapper and a multispectral scanner like that carried on Landsat 3; launch Landsat D as soon as possible with only a multispectral scanner, following as soon as possible with another Landsat carrying the thematic mapper and a multispectral scanner; or launch Landsat D with Landsat D Prime (the backup) each carrying only a multispectral scanner. The decision weighing budget constraints against providing an ongoing Landsat data capability should take weeks, NASA said, including consultations with NOAA, which President Carter had designated to manage a follow-on remotesensing satellite system. (NASA Release 80-46)
The FCC authorized the ComSatCorp to begin construction of a $15 million ground station on Saipan, in the western Pacific Ocean, to bring the first satellite communications to the northern Mariana Islands. The ComSatCorp-owned and -operated station would provide direct communications between the northern Marianas and the United States, Hawaii, Guam, Japan, and other points in the Pacific. (W Star, June 12/80, B-7)
Press reports said that the FCC had voted 7 to 0 to approve construction and launching of 20 new communications satellites by 8 companies, tripling the number of commercial satellites providing domestic communications service, in what the New York Times called “in a single action the greatest impetus ever to the expansion of satellite service.” Besides alleviating a shortage of satellite capacity faced by cable television and other industries, FCC said that the decision would open the way for investment of more than $2 billion by the eight companies. This was their first chance to compete directly in the long-distance field with AT&T, instead of tying their local networks to the Bell System. Already operating their own satellite networks were three companies operating eight commercial communications satellites: Western Union Telegraph Company with three, RCA-American Communications, Inc., with two, and Comsat General Corporation with three leased entirely to AT&T and General Telephone & Electronics (GTE). Also Satellite Business Systems had finally launched its Sbs in November, making nine. All four current owners would expand operations under the new policy: AT&T and GTE as well as Hughes Communications and Southern Pacific Communications would build their own systems for the first time. Continental Telephone Corporation and partner Fairchild Industries would enter the field through purchase of 50% of WU’s Space Communications Corporation. (NY Times, Dec 5/80, D-1; W Post, Dec 5/80, E-2)
NASA reported studies by Western Union and U.S. Telephone & Telegraph warning of a fivefold increase in satellite video and data traffic by the end of the century. By the year 2000, executive telecommunications would be a substitute for business travel; 90% of the messages would need real-time (instantaneous) service and only 10% (such as electronic mail delivery) would be non-real-time. The demand for telecommunications would saturate domestic communications satellite capacity in the 4-6 GHz (C-band) and 11-14 GHz (Ku-band) frequencies. Having decided to resume advanced communications satellite research, NASA would work toward opening the frequency band at 20 -30 GHz for commercial use in the next two decades. This band had not yet been used in the United States. The 20-to 30-GHz (Ka-band) offered a far greater range than the C-or Ku-band; capacities of communications satellite systems using it would be 50 to 100 times greater than those working in C-band. (NASA Release 80-19)
NASA announced selection of Ball Aerospace Systems to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract estimated at $21 million for an Earth Radiation-Budget Satellite ERBS and mission operations support. The satellite would be integrated, tested, and delivered for Shuttle launch by April 1984. Working with NOAA-F and NOAA-G, it would become part of a three-spacecraft system using scanning and nonscanning radiometers to measure solar radiation received and reflected from various regions of Earth. NASA’s experimental Nimbus 6 and Nimbus 7 carried radiation-budget instruments, but the (ERBS) would offer for the first time measurement of radiation on a global basis 24 hours per day. (NASA Release 80-178)
The Washington Post reported that Great Britain’s postal service June 17 became the first international public service to send letters by satellite. In-telpost, the new system, used a satellite 25,000 miles above Earth to send documents and letters by facsimile, an electronic means of transmitting the written word from one place to another. The first letter using the new system took just over 1 minute to get from Great Britain’s Post Office chairman-designate Ron Dearing to a receiving center in Toronto. (WPost, June 18/80, C-2)
GSFC said that a team of its scientists and technicians had pioneered a stereo-imaging technique for studying hurricanes, using photographs of the top of the same hurricane taken by two spacecraft, geostationary operational environmental satellites Goes East and Goes West, hovering over the equator at 75 °W and 135 °W. The team combined time-lapse cloudcover photos of Hurricane Frederic over the Gulf of Mexico September 12 in a stereo display showing changes in the storm as seen from space and allowing estimates of its intensity. (NASA Release 80-181)
DOC reported that the Nimbus 7 satellite successfully tracked between October 16, 1979, and June 15, 1980, the 800-mile journey of a 2121-pound loggerhead turtle called Diane from a point south of Gulfport, Miss., past Louisiana and Texas to an area in the Gulf of Mexico near Brownsville, Tex., where Diane apparently shed the signal transmitter. (NOAA officials said that, after a break in transmission, a mystery developed when the signal resumed, moving inland to stop in Kansas—far from the turtle’s ocean or river habitat. A fisherman had found the 7-pound transmitter on a beach near Port Arthur, Tex., and had taken it home, where he used the $5,000 device as a doorstop.) Robert Timko, electronic engineer at NOAA’s Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) laboratory in Galveston, said that no technology except satellite tracking could have followed a wide-ranging and generally inaccessible animal like the loggerhead turtle (a threatened species) over so large an area. NMFS would use the data to identify feeding, nesting, and mating areas to help manage the stock of sea turtles. The test was inspired by previous work with polar bears, which were tracked from 60 to 90 days. (NOAA Release 80-102)
NASA launched SBS-A, the SBS spacecraft, from ESMC on a Delta at 5:49 p.m. EST into a transfer orbit. At 5:30 p.m. EST November 17, the apogee motor fired it as Sbs 1 into a circular geosynchronous orbit over 176 °W. The final station would be over the equator at 106 °W, south of Santa Fe, N.M., for coverage of the continental United States. Sbs 1, first of a new satellite series built by Hughes Aircraft, was a spin-stabilized 1,212-pound (550-kilogram) craft 216 centimeters (7 feet) in diameter, 282 centimeters (9 feet, 3 inches) high when stowed for launch. In geosynchronous orbit, extension of its telescoping solar-panel cylinder and communications antenna would make its height 660 centimeters (21 feet, 8 inches). Sbs 1 would also be the first U.S. domestic communications satellite to use the less congested 12- to 14-GHz (K-band) high frequencies. Its highspeed all-digital 10-transponder system could relay up to 480 million bits per second, equal to more than 10 million words. It would begin early in 1981 to provide integrated all-digital interference-free transmission of telephone, computer, electronic mail, and videoconferencing to SBS business and industrial clients. This launch was also the first use of a new McDonnell Douglas solid-fuel payload-assist module (PAM) as part of the SBS-A payload, to increase Delta capability on launches to geosynchronous orbit by 20 % over that of the usual Delta third stage. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Nov 19/80; NASA Release 80-167)
NASA announced that the GOES-D meteorological satellite, scheduled for early launch from KSC for NOAA, would carry a new type of instrument: the visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) atmospheric sounder. GSFC would join with the University of Wisconsin in long-term evaluation of the VISSR’s usefulness in predicting severe local storms, hurricanes, and other short-term weather phenomena. Earlier spacecraft in the series had provided 24-hour two-dimensional cloudcover photography; the new sounder would measure temperature and moisture in various altitude layers besides returning high-resolution images. The synchronous GOES satellites, useful in observing storms during development, required observation schedules, data processing, and data analysis markedly different from those for polar-orbiting satellites such as the TIROS series. GSFC, NOAA, and the University of Wisconsin had set up facilities over the past few years to handle the atmospheric sounder data. (NASA Release 80-137)
INTELSAT announced that Niger on April 14 had become the 103rd nation to join the organization. Niger was already linked to the INTELSAT system through a ground station at Niamey that operated with an Intelsat IV-A satellite over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-08-1)
DOC announced that it had upgraded the satellite division of NOAA and renamed it the National Earth Satellite Service (NESS), reflecting broader responsibilities for the former National Environmental Satellite Service. Earlier in 1980, NOAA became responsible for developing and managing a remote-sensing satellite system based on NASA’s experimental Landsat program. Since 1965, NOAA had managed operational weather satellites whose data served in navigation, commercial fishing, and water-resource management as well as weather forecasting. The greater resolution of the Landsat system should offer similar monitoring as well as data for uses such as farming, urban planning, and mineral exploration. (DOC Release 80-106)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) reported that it had bookings for 260 hours of international satellite television when the winter Olympic games opened at Lake Placid, N.Y.; a tally after the games showed that 448 hours had been used, nearly double the original demand. Countries receiving direct broadcasts of the games included the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Yugoslavia, Australia, Japan, Mexico, and Venezuela; these would have relayed many of the telecasts to a large number of other nations through Earth networks, INTELSAT said. (INTELSAT Release 80-02-1)
The Washington Star reported that SBS had bet its future on the launch of a $20 million satellite as the basis of a revolutionary long-distance telephone service. SBS had promised new communications at lower rates than those of AT&T; its network would be the first in the world to use satellites and ground stations alone to transmit voice, data, and video messages from one place to another. Telephone firms had previously transmitted messages by underground cable or microwave-relay towers. The system would connect a firm with its faraway offices without reference to local phone lines: it would use a 16- to 25-foot-diameter antenna installed on a roof or in a parking lot to signal the satellite, which would relay the signal to ground stations at distant company offices and give service not presently available. Computers at far locations could talk to each other at speeds 20 times faster than was now possible; facsimile pictures could be transmitted 200 times faster; and the system would allow customers to hold videoconferences with executives located all over the United States. SBS had had difficulty in selling its services, designed for companies or government agencies conducting a large amount of nationwide business. It estimated a need for 25 to 30 private-line customers to break even by 1983. Two of its owner companies, IBM and Aetna, were among its 10 customers, and General Motors had asked for three stations to link Detroit, Atlanta, and Dayton. SBS said that the launch, scheduled for November 15, should attract attention and more customers to the company. (W Star, Nov 14/80, B-5)
NASA announced signing of an agreement in Jakarta December 9 by Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, and Drs Suryadi, Indonesia’s director general of posts and telecommunications, for NASA launch of two Indonesian communications satellites. Satellites Palapa B-l. and Palapa B-2 in geosynchronous orbit would offer voice, video, telephone, and high-speed data service to member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) including, besides Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore. NASA would launch B-l between January 1983 and January 1984, depending on Shuttle availability, and B-2 between January and March 1984; it had launched earlier versions of Palapa in 1976-77. (NASA Release 80-183)
ESA observed the fifth anniversary of its first satellite, Cos B, designed for an operational life of one year. ESA commended the quality of the spacecraft and its subsystems, especially the spark chamber for which no space experience existed at the time of its construction. The eighth satellite built by European industry for ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization (ESRO), Cos B made the first complete detailed survey of the Milky Way in high-energy gamma-ray spectra and discovered a score of new gamma-ray sources. The spacecraft was made by the CESAR consortium led by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom with industrial firms of seven ESA member states: Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. (ESA Info 21)
NASA’declared the mission of Heao 3 successful in its prelaunch objectives. Launched September 29, 1979, the satellite had in its first six months of operation made a full gamma-ray sky survey and detected a wide range of cosmic-ray elements. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said Heao 3 should “continue to provide excellent scientific data.” (NASA MOR S-382-79-03 [postlaunch] May 13/80)
The Washington Post reported that AT&T would launch and operate its own satellites for use with its domestic satellite communications system. The firm filed with the FCC a plan to launch three satellites—one each in 1983, 1984, and 1986—to replace three Comsat satellites it had been leasing from Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of ComSatCorp). It would use its satellites to provide long-distance telephone service and specialized business services for 10 years in the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Each satellite would be able to handle up to 21,600 simultaneous telephone conversations. (W Post, Apr 30/80, B-4) During April: NASA announced appointment of Robert E. Smylie, deputy director of GSFC since December 1976 and acting director from June 1979 to February 1980, as Headquarters associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. He had joined NASA in 1962 at JSC, where he worked in various positions until assigned to Headquarters in 1973 as deputy associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology. He was previously employed by Douglas Aircraft Company. (NASA anno Apr 2/80; NASA Release 80-41)
FBIS reported launch of Japan’s second commun ications satellite CS-B from Tanegashima Island at 5:35 p.m. local time. CS-B would replace Ayame (Iris), whose signal was lost when it collided with its apogee motor 12 seconds after ignition February 5, 1979. Ayame 2 would reach sta tionary orbit over northern New Guinea by March 1CT First stationary comsat designed to use millimeter-wave transmissions in communications experiments, Ayame 2 was 1.4 meters long and 1.6 meters tall, weighed about DO kilograms, and cost 6 billion yen; it would be Japan’s fifth stationary satellite. [FBIS reported February 25 that, 8 seconds after firing an apogee motor to put the spacecraft into a circular orbit, Japan’s National Space Development Agency lost radio contact with Ayame 2 also. Willi 30 billion yen spent to build and launch llie two experimental comsats, llie successive failures were “a shock to llie agency and llie Science and Technology Agency.” Japan’s tracking stations continued to send radio signals in an effort to restore contact, officials said, but llie two failures would cast a shadow on future satellite-launching plans.] (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 22, 25/80)
an arrangement under which the initiating company would share the cost of satellite data gathering, but the technology developed would be available to all other timber companies. In 1977 St. Regis had begun a test program with NASA to see if Landsat data could improve the company’s data base on forest lands; it wanted to use the information to plan timber harvesting, leasing and buying new timber lands, and monitoring more than 2.3 million acres across the southern United States [see A&A77, Oct 25]. The success of the project led to the authorization by St. Regis Southern Timberland Division in Florida of more than $300,000 new capital investment for an information system using Landsat data to support its general operations. St. Regis was the first private company to participate in NASA’s test program on resource-observation applications. The program began a unique relationship between NASA and the private sector, because St. Regis (not NASA) initiated the project and the company shared in the cost. NASA said that the entire forest industry would gain by the venture because technology from the St. Regis experiment would be in the public domain, available to other firms. NASA and St. Regis planned to conduct a symposium in 1981 to demonstrate Landsat data interpretation to timber industry management. The program was managed by JSC and Purdue University’s Laboratory for Applications of Remote Sensing, as well as by St. Regis. (NASA Release 80-44)
Comsat General announced that it was providing consulting service to Alascom Inc., based in Anchorage, on a new generation of communications satellites to meet Alaska’s future communications needs. Alascom was now leasing 15 to 17 transponders on a domestic Satcom to relay communications throughout Alaska, but growth by the late 1980s should require double that number. Comsat General would help design a spacecraft to meet increased transponder demand. (ComSat Gnl Release 80-5)
ComsatCorp said that it had signed a contract with MultiVisions, Ltd., of Anchorage for the first commercial use of a new 10-meter multiple-beam torus antenna, a revolutionary design allowing a user to work with as many as seven geosynchronous satellites at the same time. The usual parabolic dish antenna could work with only one satellite at a time. The torus, scheduled to be in operation in Anchorage next year, would be equipped initially to receive television programs from three satellites simultaneously. With three dual-polarization receive-only feeds, the new antenna could receive up to 72 different programs from 72 different transponders from U.S. domestic satellites, and additional feeds would provide even greater capacity. Where access to more than one satellite was needed, the torus would be cheaper both to build and to operate than the two or more conventional antennas that would usually be required. It would also reduce the amount of real estate needed for several parabolic antennas and the amount of interference in congested frequency areas (of which Anchorage was one). ComSatCorp had asked the FCC for permission to locate torus antennas at Etam, W. Va., Andover, Maine, and Jamesburg, Calif. (ComSatCorp Release 80-30)
NASA launched the fourth geostationary orbital environmental satellite (GOES-D) for NOAA from ESMC on a Delta at 6:27 p.m. EDT. The Delta put Goes 4 into a synchronous transfer orbit close to nominal. Firing an apogee kick motor at 8 a.m. September 11 would put it into geosynchronous equatorial orbit over 90°W for flight testing, after which it would be turned over to NOAA for operational use of the VISSR [see August 29]. The 103-day gap since NASA’s unsuccessful launch of NOAA-B May 29 almost set a record for inactivity. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 11/80; Df Dly, Sept 12/80, 62; Spacewarn, Sept 30/80)
INTELSAT said that its board meeting in Bogota approved use of time-division multiple-access equipment with its global communications satellite system; the new devices, to be installed in the 1980s, would offer three times more telephone channels on INTELSAT satellites than available from frequency-modulation (FM) equipment now in use. (INTELSAT Release
The Washington Post reported that SBS was “having a hard time getting off the ground” with launch of its first satellite put off for the third time in a month. Technical problems with the Delta had delayed the launch of SBS 1, built by Hughes Aircraft, first of its kind to offer a high-frequency interference-free signal. Liftoff had been postponed to November 6 because of insulation damage, then to November 12 when a motor bolt broke. The latest problem was a leak in the liquid oxygen system. (WPost, Oct 31/80, E-3)
ESA reported that INMARSAT had awarded it a five-year contract at U.S.$1 million a year for leasing MARECS satellites A and B when located over the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The completed INMARSAT system would cover the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans by using those satellites with Intelsat Vs carrying maritime communications payloads, and with one of the MARISAT satellites already in orbit. For the first time a European-built satellite would let ships at sea dial shore-based subscribers directly and establish telephone and telex links with them, through the real-time highly reliable MARECS system operating in the 4- and 6-GHz band and on 1.5- to 1.6-GHz frequencies. (ESA Info 28)
NASA reported that astronomers using data from the international UV explorer were continuing to study the halo discovered around the Milky Way in early observations by the satellite. The halo material was found to be hot (about 100,000°), to extend 50,000 light-years from the galaxy, and to contain oxygen, sulfur, iron, silicon, and carbon. Iue launched January 26, 1978, was a joint mission of the United States, the United Kingdom, and ESA. For most of history, visible light was the only medium for studying celestial objects, but many types of electromagnetic radiation were now available for observation: radio waves, infrared, X-ray, gammEi rays, and ultraviolet rays. Earth’s atmosphere blocked most of these types of energy, which must be studied through spacecraft above the atmosphere. Iue, in a synchronous orbit keeping it in continuous touch with either the United States or the European ground station, could be used by astronomers located either at GSFC or the Villafranca station in Spain (Vilspa) much like a ground-based telescope but observing in the ultraviolet instead of visible-light spectrum. A scientific colloquium at GSFC during May heard 92 papers on Iue, findings; Prof. Robert Wilson, University College London, said “there is hardly an area of modem astronomy that hasn’t been affected.” Scientists from 25 countries were participating, and 478 astronomers had been assigned observing time on the satellite. (NASA Release 80-67)
Aerospace Daily reported that the Soviet Union today launched Cosmos 1176, possibly the first nuclear-powered ocean-surveillance satellite since radioactive fragments of Cosmos 954 crashed into Canada in January 1978. Orbit parameters were 265-kilometer apogee, 260-kilometer perigee, 89.6-minute period, and 65° inclination. Until the 1978 incident, the Soviet Union had routinely used radar-carrying satellites powered by nuclear sources traveling in pairs in similar orbits to detect ships; at end of mission, the nuclear source would be propelled into higher orbit to decay in outer space, but Cosmos 954 had malfunctioned. (A/D, Apr 30/80, 338)
INTELSAT announced that it would buy an additional Intelsat V satellite from Ford Aerospace and an additional NASA Atlas Centaur vehicle to launch it. The first Intelsat V launch had been scheduled for December 1980. The ninth in the Intelsat V series would help fill domestic and international demand until higher capacity comsats became available in the mid-1980s. INTELSAT’S decision would add about U.S. $70 million to the cost of the Intelsat V program, estimated at U.S. $650 million. (INTELSAT Release 80-19-1)
ESA announced the inauguration March 6 in Geneva of the Stella experiment using the Ots satellite to transmit scientific data at high speeds between high-energy physics laboratories. Participating in the ceremony would be Roy Gibson, ESA director general; J.B. Adams, executive director of the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN); L. van Hove, research director for CERN; and F. Braun, director general for the European communities commission on internal market and industrial affairs. Some 1,600 scientists from ESA member states used CERN’s accelerators and high-energy particle detectors for fundamental research into the structure of matter. Stella would transmit electronic data at speeds up to 1 megabit (1 million bits of data) per second from CERN to member-state laboratories at Hamburg, Germany; Saclay, France; Didcot, United Kingdom; Pisa, Italy; Dublin, Ireland; and Graz, Austria. The speed of transmission would be similar to the working speeds of computers in the participating laboratories, eliminating the delay of sending magnetic tapes through the mail. (ESA Info Bltn 6)
NASA issued a summary of Saturn encounter events for the period August 22 through December 15, beginning with “in-bound movie sequences” from Voyager 1 through Saturn-Titan close approach and ending with a postencounter movie sequence. Subjects of Voyager research at Saturn would be the planet itself, its rings, its satellites (especially the Mercury-size Titan), and Saturn’s magnetosphere; the summary listed points of special interest and the unique properties to be investigated. (NASA Release 80-145)
Responding to press reports on the Ariane, ESA issued a statement on its program of four flight tests, the second of which failed when the first stage malfunctioned. ESA had identified the trouble and taken steps to rectify it. Test 3 would now take place in June 1981 and test 4 in the autumn of that year, a timetable ESA said was compatible with its commitments to put scientific and communications satellites into orbit in late 1981 and 1982. Financing arranged at the outset, which included 20% for contingencies, would cover the additional studies and tests needed. (ESA Info 31)
The Washington Star reported that cable television operators awaiting a replacement for the lost RCA Satcom 3 had found that they would need big new dish receivers for signals from the Comstar satellite RCA planned to lease. {W Star, Feb 27/80, C-3)
The NY Times reviewed advances in phototypesetting technology, including satellite transmission, that had made it possible for publications to print identical copies simultaneously anywhere in the world. “Cold type,” the first generation of phototypesetting, replaced use of individual characters with a matrix of symbols on a transparent material. Light sent through characters produced an image on high-contrast photographic paper. The second generation of typesetting machines also used a photographic negative to generate characters, but used digital computer scan to produce the symbols, recreating them on a cathode-ray tube as a series of minute dots or lines reproduced on photographic paper. The third generation, developed in the late 1960s, encoded text on a disk and printed out entirely by computer, working 10 times as fast as previous machines. By the 1970s, publications such as U.S. News and World Report, Newsweek, and the New York Times had switched from either hot type or less sophisticated cold type to the third-generation technology, which was amenable to satellite transmission. Some of the machines could produce entire pages of newspapers and magazines, including advertisements, artwork, and text, reducing time and cost of publication. A fourth generation would abandon photographic imaging altogether: using lasers, it would produce characters directly on paper without use of a cathode-ray tube. One such unit had the advantage of producing its output on nonphotographic paper, made without silver, at a price a third that of conventional light-sensitive paper. (NY Times, Sept 8/80, D-5)
INTELSAT announced that its board of governors had decided to purchase three more Intelsat 5A satellites in addition to the nine already on hand for the Intelsat 5 series, the latter to be launched by the end of 1982. Launching of the 5A series would begin in 1984; basically similar to Intelsat 5, they would have increased reliability and 25 % more communications capacity, handling 15,000	telephone calls compared to 12,000. (INTELSAT Release 80-30-1)
NASA reported that France and West Germany signed an intergovernmental agreement today for joint development of a direct-broadcast television satellite to be launched on Ariane late in 1983. The two nations would split the cost of the initial three-satellite system, estimated at $250-$300 million. The sponsors said major return on the investment would come from sales of 15 to 20 such television satellite systems over the next 10 years to third parties such as Scandinavia’s Nordsat, Radio Luxembourg’s Luxsat, and People’s Republic of China. ESA would continue definition work on LSat, a parallel television-satellite effort without French and German participation. (NASA Actv Rpt, May 1/80)
MSFC said several companies had proposed definition studies to demonstrate performance of a large space antenna in low Earth orbit. Wide use of such a system could revolutionize satellite communications and radar and radiometry. Large space antennas might solve problems preventing expansion of satellite communications, Earth-resources survey, weather research, and other services. Dozens of small satellites, each with its own antennas, were now providing such services, but their growing number had crowded the transmission frequencies and filled up the orbital slots. The MSFC study would define the structure of a large antenna as well as packaging, transportation, and orbital deployment. (MSFC Release 80-54; NASA Release 80-48)
ESA said that Erik Quistgaard, its director general, would meet in London November 27 with Olof Lundberg, director general of INMARSAT, to sign a contract for lease to ESA of 2 Marecs satellites [see Nov. 20]. The contract, worth about U.S.$65 million, would go into effect in 1982. ESA was first of three entities expected to contract with INMARSAT for satellites to provide a new worldwide maritime telecommunications service for the international shipping community. (ESA Info 29)
INTELSAT announced that its “assembly of parties” in Florida last week had agreed to technical and economic coordination of the proposed Arabsat communications satellite system, as Arabsat would lack significant economic impact on, and would be technically compatible with, the INTELSAT system. It would be the third regional system coordinated with INTELSAT; others were the European and Indonesian systems. (INTELSAT Release 80-06-1)
