The New York Times said that the Soviet Union had assembled six, possibly eight, intelligence-gathering satellites over the south Atlantic to watch Argentine and British military movements around the Falkland Islands. U.S. sources said that they assumed information from the satellites was being relayed to the Argentine government but had no proof of this. A senior official at the State Department said that leaders in Argentina had told Security of State Alexander Haig that they would not accept such help from the Soviet Union. The United States had two satellites over the area and was passing information from them to the British. The Soviet satellites were communications interceptors Cosmos 1346 and 1354; radar-sensing craft Cosmos 1345 and 1351; and photoreconnaissance craft Cosmos 1347 and 1352, and possibly 1350 and 1353. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-14; AvWk, May 3/82, 22; W Post, Jun 7/82, A-20)
A JSC release described a space operations center (SOC) concept completed by a special JSC study team. A manned center in space to exploit the Shuttle and allow incremental growth was the “essential next step in exploitation of space”; it would become a space-base and marshaling yard for large and complex payloads, including an upper-stage propulsion system in low Earth orbit. It would serve as “garage space” for reusable cryogenic stages for easier access, lowering costs of geosynchronous space operations. It could be a manned base with Department of Defense (DOD) military capabilities or a manned platform for science and applications research. It could provide a manufacturing facility in a weightless environment. The JSC design was for an SOC operating continuously, with maintenance and resupply, for 10 years; parts would be delivered and assembled by the Shuttle orbiter in a low Earth orbit (230 to 280 statute miles). An 8- to 12-man center, about 435 feet long tip to tip, would weigh about 245,000 pounds. Initial launch would put into orbit an energy section, a short cylinder carrying two booms with solar arrays, antennas, reaction-control system, and radiators, weighing in total between 34,000 and 43,000 pounds. A second launch would bring a command module to be joined to the energy section, completing phase 1; this module would have one docking and nine berthing ports, airlocks, command station, guidance and control, data management, open-loop lift support, and accommodations for two (but able to support a crew of four, in an emergency). Weight would be between 40,000 and 50,000 pounds. The next launch would bring a second command module to the other end of the energy section. Each of the next two launches would bring a habitat module able to accommodate a crew of four; the two habitats would provide emergency accommodations and life support for a crew of eight. Each habitat would weigh between 25.000 and 28,000 pounds. After phase 3, the SOC would be ready for long-term manned occupations by eight to twelve persons; the platform could now handle full flight support, satellite servicing, and space construction. (JSC Release 82-009; AvWk, Feb 15/82)
The first Maritime European Communications Satellite, Marecs A, launched December 20, 1981, began service at midnight. The spacecraft and its payload, leased to the International Maritime Communications Satellite (INMARSAT), was working well and already improving communications between land and ships and oil rigs in the Atlantic. The Marecs program would lease two satellites to INMARSAT: Marecs A would cover the Atlantic ocean; Marecs B, the Pacific. Launch of Marecs B on an Ariane L5 had been put off to September 1982 to allow time for modifications reducing the effects of electrostatic discharge that had caused the Marecs A command system to malfunction during tests in February. (ESA Info 15)
NASA announced signing of agreements with Telesat Canada for launch of five Anik communications satellites, four on the Shuttle and one on a Delta. The launches would cost Canada’s domestic satellite communications corporation about $75 million; the spacecraft would be worth about $130 million. The third-and fourth-generation Anik C and Anik D communications satellites would be the backbone of Canada’s system until the 1990s, carrying new pay-television, voice, video, and data links, private business networks, and other special services. First of the D series would be launched in August from KSC; the next Telesat launch would be an Anik C, one of two communications satellites scheduled for the Shuttle’s fifth flight and first commercial mission. (NASA Release 82-101) and development, manufacture, and use of propulsion systems for aircraft and space, surface, and marine vehicles. Glenn, keynote speaker, received an award commemorating the 20th anniversary of his orbital flight. Representatives of European and Asian firms presented papers, and a group from the People’s Republic of China attended. Beggs, luncheon speaker, said that foreign competition in high-tech research required a new partnership between government and industry. Although NASA-industry cooperation over the past 25 years was a major factor in U.S. world leadership, many foreign firms had been able, with “far-sighted planning [and] government-industry cooperation,” to move from idea to manufacture to delivery in half the time the United States needed. The world edge once enjoyed by the United States in many high-tech areas has “been eroded,” he said: France was ahead in nuclear power; West Germany, in chemicals; Japan, in optics and metallurgy. “The Japanese have managed to capture some 70% of the American market for the 64K random-access memory, which can store 64,000 information units.” The Harvard Business Review had even suggested that U.S. firms look abroad—even to Iron Curtain countries—to tap foreign technology. What was needed, Beggs said, was a more balanced cooperation between government and industry, geared to investment in projects leading to speedy adoption of new technologies. “No one ever ran a race by standing still. And we are in a race, a dead serious one. The stakes are high. They include not only our own economic security but the economic security of the Free World,” he concluded. (LeRC Releases 82-30, 82-34)
NASA reported a happy ending to a search-and-rescue mission that began in July with the loss of a pilot somewhere in northern British Columbia. The Canadian government conducted an unsuccessful search that cost $2 million before it ended. The father of the missing pilot started to search with a pilot and another passenger and failed to return on September 9. They had crashed in a valley 3,500 feet deep where the Rockies hid their rescue beacon from passing planes. The Canadian rescue center had no data on their location. Canada had just joined in the SARSAT (search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking) program using Cospas 1, a Soviet satellite launched June 30, and asked for any data it might gather. Early September 10 the satellite 600 miles up detected an emergency locator-transmitter in the area; a search aircraft found the crash and called for a rescue helicopter. All three persons had been injured but had survived. Canadian authorities praised the timely rescue of the victims at minimal cost. (NASA Dly Actv Apt, Sept 16/82; W Post, Sept 30/82, A-3)
NASA launched Intelsat 5-F4 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) from Cape Canaveral at 7:23 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,953-kilometer apogee, 165. 8-kilometer perigee, and 24° inclination. INTELSAT would fire an apogee motor to put the communications satellite into a near-geosynchronous orbit for testing before moving it over the Indian Ocean to provide communications between Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East. This fourth of the Intelsat 5 series built by Ford Aerospace had a capacity of 12,000 voice circuits plus two television channels. INTELSAT’s global system consisted of a space segment (10 satellites in synchronous orbit) and a ground segment (295 communications antennas at 242 ground stations in 129 countries and territories). The combined system provided more than 800 links between ground stations, with about 8,500 international voice circuits in full-time use, plus telegraph, telex, and television. (NASA MOR-491-203-82-04 [prelaunch] Feb 25/82, [postlaunch] Mar 25/82; INTELSAT Release 82-4-1)
NASA launched RCA-E (RCA-Satcom 5) from ESMC at 9:28 p.m. on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit. It would be stationed on the equator at 143 °W over the Pacific to serve the continental United States, Alaska, and Hawaii. First of a series of second-generation domestic communications satellites made by RCA Astro-Electronics, it arrived at ESMC “slightly overweight” and carried no third-stage telemetry. Confirmation of third-stage burn and spacecraft separation was delayed until it passed over the tracking station in New Jersey to confirm that it was working satisfactorily. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Oct 29/82; NASA Release 82-155; NASA MOR M-492-206-82-06 [prelaunch] Oct 26/82)
NASA announced that ARC and LaRC were cooperating in the acquisition of data on the giant stratospheric cloud produced by the eruption of El Chichon volcano in March and April, now covering much of the Earth’s northern hemisphere, to define the cloud’s effect on global weather patterns. The centers were using satellites, U-2 aircraft, and lidar (light-intensification detection and ranging) for the study. The lidar equipment, mounted in a Lockheed Electra aircraft, would shoot laser pulses into the atmosphere and monitor reflections, “painting” the spatial and vertical extent of cloud layers above the aircraft. Lidar measurements in mid-July confirmed earlier findings of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) that the volcano had put up to 50 times (500 times in some areas) the normal amount of aerosols into the upper atmosphere; that the material layers had spread to different latitudes, depending on altitude; and that sunlight reaching Earth’s surface could be reduced several percent. The cloud, a mixture of dust and sulfuric acid, would offer “a once-in-a-lifetime chance” to form an information base for prediction of dispersion, changes in temperature, and dynamic and photochemical changes, according to Dr. M. Patrick McCormick, head of LaRC’s aerosol research branch. Dr. Brian Toon, atmospheric physicist at ARC, said that the most likely effect of the cloud would be a gradual reduction in northern hemisphere temperature over the next two years. (NASA Release 82-115; ARC Release 82-31; LaRC Release 82-57)
NASA launched Westar 4, first of a series of second-generation 24-transponder domestic commercial communications satellites built by Space Communications Company for Western Union, from ESMC on a Delta into a suborbital trajectory. An apogee kick motor would put it into orbit at 99 °W, 19,300 nautical miles over the equator to relay voice, data, video, and facsimile communications to an area covering the United States from Hawaii to the Virgin Islands. Westar 4, with a design life of 10 years would join three other Western Union communications satellites: Westar 1 and Westar 2, launched in 1974, and Westar 3 launched in 1979. It was twice their si2:e and had four times their capacity. (NASA Release 82-17; NASA MOR 0-492-203-82-06 [prelaunch] Feb 25/82, [postlaunch] May 13/82)
NASA reported the failure at 9 a.m. of a high-speed tape recorder on Nimbus 5 collecting Antarctic and Arctic radiometer data for the U.S. Navy. The loss of the last recorder on Nimbus 5 meant that future operations would have to be in real time, subject to the communications satellites view of the Alaska ground station. NASA had agreed to provide Nimbus 5 data through FY83, and the Navy had reimbursed NASA as a source of data for polar sea-ice calculations. NASA would review real-time operation with the Navy. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 30/82)
Press reports said that weather satellite Goes West, monitoring the Pacific Ocean and the western United States, had stopped functioning November 25, leaving more than 60° of Earth’s surface (an area responsible for most of the winter storms on the Pacific coast) with a “blind eye.” Efforts to revive it were unsuccessful; officials said that the problem was in the Goes radiometer. Launched in 1980, the satellite was designed for three-year operation; a replacement was to be launched in 1983. If further efforts failed, the National Weather Service planned to reactivate one of several older satellites that had been retired but were still in place. W Post, Nov 28/82, A-8)
NASA signed an $11.6 million contract with a 22-member Arab group of nations and organizations to launch a communications satellite from the Shuttle in 1984. Administrator James M. Beggs signed the agreement for NASA; Dr. Ali Al-Mashat, director general, signed for the Arab satellite group. Arabsat, a consortium, included both Libya and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO); some uproar ensued on Capitol Hill until senators were persuaded that the deal did not imply U.S. recognition of the PLO. The United States also had no diplomatic relations with Libya and had a policy of selling no military goods to its government. A State Department spokesman said that Arabsat members would “get no more than they already had through the existing INTELSAT satellite communications system.” The deal envisioned no transfer of technology, as the satellite would never be handled by its Arabsat owners. Saudi Arabia, which would be the center of operations, would control television programming for Arabsat use. NASA Associate Administrator James A. Abrahamson said that the Shuttle was a commercial service and that its launches “should not be considered a political activity.” (NASA Release 82-173; W Post, Nov 23/82, A-2)
Astronomers from JPL and the University of Hawaii on October 19 reported detection on two solar-system bodies—Pluto and Neptune’s largest satellite Triton—of frozen methane, a substance present on Earth as a product of living organisms ,and petroleum. Although the surfaces, mostly water ice, of Pluto and Triton differed from those of other bodies orbiting the Sun, the methane did not seem to come from biological activity. (NASA Release 82-157; JPL anno Oct 20/82)
NASA said that Cospas/SARSAT, an international search-and-rescue project of the United States, the Soviet Union, Canada, and France, had located four accident sites and saved seven lives in its first month of operation. The Soviet Union’s Cospas satellite, launched June 30, had located two downed planes in Canada during September, another in September in New Mexico, and a capsized catamaran off the coast of New England in October less than 24 hours after receiving the first signal. As part of the program the United States planned to launch in February 1983 a weather satellite, NOAA-F, carrying a search-and-rescue capability. GSFC managed SARSAT activities for NASA. (NASA Release 82-152)
