Japan launched today the BS-2A (Broadcasting Satellite) from Tanegashima. The apogee kick motor (AKM) firing occurred successfully on January 26 at 12:14 a.m. EST. Under NASA’s Space Tracking and Data Network (STDN) support for Japan, the STDN would provide continuous coverage for 30 hours after AKM firing and contingency support for another 30 days. STDN support to BS-2A had been nominal to date. Launch and early orbit support was provided by the STDN on a cost-reimbursable basis. (NASA Dly Act Kept, Jan 30/84; GSFC SSR) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
At the request of Switzerland and the Federal Republic of Germany, ESA reactivated the GOES-2 spacecraft. The two countries wanted use of the satellite to obtain data over a complete 11-year solar cycle and to support the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Experiment (AMPTE) project. GOES-2, launched in June 1978, completed its planned scientific mission in July 1980. It resumed operations in 1981, continuing these until the end of 1983. In January 1984, GOES-2 was moved from the densely occupied geostationary orbit into a higher and slightly asynchronous orbit, where it was drifting at a rate of about 3.5° in longitude per day and becoming visible to the European Space Operations Center station at Michelstadt, Germany, for 4 weeks every 3 Vi months. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84)
ESA’s Director, R. Bonnet, and Director General of Arianespace C. Bigot signed a contract for the launch of ESA’s scientific spacecraft Giotto, which was designed for observations of Halley’s comet, aboard an Ariane 1 launcher. They scheduled the launch for the first day of the July 1985 launch window. Giotto would go into a heliocentric transfer trajectory that would be very close to the ecliptic plane (the plane in which the planets orbit the Sun). During its flight, which would last eight months, Giotto would be under the command of the European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt, Germany. Ground-based telescopes would track Giotto, and course corrections would be made with the on-board propulsion system to ensure that the spacecraft passed as close as possible to the comet nucleus during the encounter phase, planned to last four hours. It was expected that the most important data from the mission would come from 10 scientific experiments on board Giotto within a few minutes before and after Giotto’s closest approach to the comet’s nucleus. It would be during that period that the spacecraft’s camera would photograph the comet’s nucleus in color, resolving surface structure down to 50 meters (150 feet). (ESA Release, July 16/84) —NASA and NOAA announced that the NOAA-8 environmental monitoring satellite appeared to have lost it latitude control system and was tumbling in orbit unable to relay its signal effectively to Earth. Launched board an Atlas E launch vehicle in 1983, the 1,700-kilometer (3,775-pound) satellite had six environmental monitoring instruments and a search-and-rescue payload, provided by Canada and France under an international cooperative space project with NASA known as SARSAT (search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking). Much of the environmental monitoring lost by NOAA-8 could be conducted by NOAA-6, launched in 1979. And although the SARSAT capability, which permitted the satellite to relay emergency signals from downed aircraft and ships in distress, was out of service, the SARSAT project would continue operations through use of three Soviet COSPAS search-and-rescue satellites in orbit. NOAA-8 first showed signs of problems on June 12, when it experienced a “clock interrupt” that caused the spacecraft’s gyros to desynchronize. Continued clock disturbances interfered with the meteorological instruments, preventing scientists and engineers from obtaining good data. The satellite was the first in a series of three Advanced TIROS-N (ATN). NASA planned the next launch of a TIROS-N, NOAA-F, for October 1984. (NASA Release 84-93; NY Times, July 14/84, 46)
NASA launched at 6:18 p.m. EDT the Hughes Communications, Inc., Galaxy-C communications satellite from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) by Delta 3920 vehicle. The satellite would relay business communications throughout the United States. It was the third in a series, with Galaxy-A dedicated to cable television programming and Galaxy-B (along with Galaxy-C) relaying video, voice, data, and facsimile communications for large corporations, long-haul carriers, and broadcasters. (NASA MOR No. M-492-215-84-03 [prelaunch], Sept. 19/84, [postlaunch], Oct 15/84; NASA Release 84-128)
Arianespace launched at 1:14 a.m. GMT Ariane VII varying Spacenet 2, for the GTE’s Spacenet, and the second ESA European Space Agency maritime communications satellite, Marecs B-2. Marecs B-2 was placed in geostationary transfer orbit with a perigee of 199.9 kiometers and an apogee of 36,022 kilometers. Following firing on November 11 of its apogee boost motor, Marecs B-2 was injected into a near circular orbit at 135.5 °E with a perigee of 35,600 kilometers, apogee of 35,900 kilometers, and inclination of 3.190°E. Ariane VII was the second flight of the more powerful version of the European launcer, Ariane 3, developed by ESA. Ariane 3 was 49 meters high and weighed about 237 tons at liftoof. It had three stages, the first povided with two strap-on boosters that ignited just after liftoff. Ariane 3 could place payload of up to 2,580 kilograms into geostationary transfer orbit. (ESA Release Nov 12/84)
