The Rome Air Development Center planned to award three contracts for work in support of the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's (DARPA) proposal to develop a multiple satellite system (MSS) consisting of several hundred low-cost, low-orbiting communications satellites in several orbits, Defense Daily reported. The satellites, expected to cost about $1 million each, would comprise a highly survivable, high-bandwidth global communications system through the combination of high bandwidth packet switches and burst radios with low-cost proliferated, low-orbiting satellites. Each satellite would carry a low-cost burst radio capable of instantaneous data rates on the order of 100 Mbps, along with digital controllers to do the packet switching and a suitable antenna system capable of both omni-directional and directive beams. The contracts would be for study of burst radio development, low-cost antenna design, and low-cost satellite integration. (D/D, June 11/85, 229)
Weather satellite engineers from the Shanghai Institute of Satellite Engineering in the Peoples Republic of China planned to visit the U.S. to seek technological help to complete within the next few years assembly and launch of China's first polar orbit weather satellite, Aviation Week reported. The institute was building a primary and backup spacecraft for China's first weather satellite mission and had started preliminary design of a Chinese geosynchronous orbit weather spacecraft planned for launch in the early 1990s. The Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics was working on the imaging system the weather satellites would use to take cloud photos and collect other data comparable to that from the U.S. Tiros weather satellite series. Ground test data from the Chinese-designed tape recorder system and elements of the gyro system for the new polar orbit weather spacecraft, however, had not achieved a high enough reliability standard. The weather satellite manager planned to visit the U.S. in late 1985 or early 1986 to try to procure a U.S.-built tape recorder that could fly in the satellite in tandem with a Chinese-built recorder to improve reliability of the spacecraft. A U.S. space team visiting the satellite engineering institute said the satellite was relatively large, about 4 feet tall and 4.5 feet wide. With solar arrays deployed, total spacecraft span was about 30 feet. The spacecraft would weigh 1,500 lb. at launch and be in a 500-mile-high orbit at 99° orbital inclination. The Chinese State Bureau of Meteorology, Beijing, supplied performance specifications and funding for satellite. The Chinese weather spacecraft, like U.S. weather satellites, would transmit data continuously. Any nation with the receivers used for U.S. weather data could pick up the Chinese data as well. (AvWk, Aug 5/85, 79)
NASA announced that personnel at Ames Research Center (ARC) would break ground March 14 for the numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) facility building to house the world's most powerful supercomputer system, which was intended to provide a national computational capability that would complement NASA's experimental facilities in maintaining national preeminence in aeronautical research. Researchers would use highspeed supercomputers in the system to solve complex aerodynamic equations describing the fundamental fluid physics and large scale aerodynamic flows associated with aircraft flying in earth's atmosphere. In effect, they would test aircraft configurations by "flying" them in the NAS supercomputer system, reducing both time and costs associated with development of new aircraft. NAS would also support other research, including computational materials and structures, chemistry, and astrophysics; weather predictions; and genetic engineering. ARC also intended to make the supercomputer network available to remote users in universities, private industry, and other government research agencies via satellite. Cray Research's Cray 2 supercomputer, with an expected operating speed of 250 million calculations per second when working aerodynamic problems, would be the heart of the initial NAS network when it became operational in mid-1986. NASA intended to incorporate even faster supercomputers as they became commercially available, with the aim of including supercomputers with up to one billion calculations per second in 1988 and 10 billion calculations per second in the 1990s. In an effort to create a partnership between people and machines that, in itself, would advance computer simulation, NASA had architects Hunt and Co. design the 90,500-sq. ft. concrete building so as to encourage scientists who would use the computers for research to work closely with the people who would operate, maintain, and develop the NAS system. Building contractor was Perini Co. (NASA Release 85-37)
NASA announced today the launch by Atlas/Centaur 64 from KSC of the Intelsat V-A (F-11), second in a series of improved International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) commercial communications satellites launched by that vehicle. Intelsat V-A had a capacity of 13,500 voice circuits compared with Intelsat Vthat had 12,000; Intelsat IV-A, 6,000; and Intelsat IV, 4,000. All satellites had two TV channels. Figures collected as a result of the INTELSAT-sponsored global telecommunications traffic conference indicated that an Intelsat IV-A satellite would have insufficient capacity by the early 1980s to cope with the traffic and load on the Atlantic Ocean primary satellite and on the Indian Ocean satellite. Although one solution could have been to orbit another Intelsat IV-A Atlantic Ocean and Indian Ocean satellite, subsequent planning proceeded toward the development of a high-capacity Intelsat V satellite. After an international bidding process, the INTELSAT Board of Governors at its September 1976 meeting awarded a contract for development and manufacture of seven Intelsat V satellites to Ford Aerospace and Communication Corp. as prime contractor and an international team of manufacturers as subcontractors. Since that time, the board decided to order two additional Intelsat V satellites and to order six higher-capacity Intelsat V-A spacecraft for launch in 1985 and beyond. Members of the international manufacturing team included Aerospatiale (France), GEC-Marconi (United Kingdom), Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (Federal Republic of Germany), Mitsubishi Electric Corp. (Japan), Selenia (Italy), and Thomson-CSF (France). (NASA MOR M-491-203-85-09 [prelaunch] May 27/85, [postlaunch] July 17/85)
The USSR today launched Cosmos 7667 intended for the continuation of research on the effects of spaceflight on living organisms, TASS in English reported. During the flight, there would be experiments to study processes of adaptation to weightlessness and to investigate opportunities for radiation shielding during spaceflight. The satellite carried two monkeys, Verny and Gordy, for studies on vestibular and hemodynamic responses of living organisms to weightlessness at the acute period of adaptation. Experiments carried out at that time would take quantitative measures of the excitability of the vestibular apparatus and to note increases in its reactivity. The experiments would also yield direct data on the outflow and inflow of blood to the head. Experiments with 10 male rats aboard the satellite were intended to determine the influence on all parts of a living organism of the acute period of adaptation to weightlessness and later readaptation. Ten tritons (mollusks) carried on the satellite previously had a portion of their front limbs and lenses amputated in order to study possibilities of regeneration and division of cells at zero gravity. And a biocalorimeter would monitor 1,500 Drosophila flies aboard the satellite to determine processes of energy exchanges during the emergence of the flies from nymphs and to study the flies' metabolism. Guppy fish, cornseeds, and crocuses were also experimental subjects. Scientists from the U.S., Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Poland, Romania, Czechoslovakia, and France cooperated with Soviet scientists in developing the experimental equipment for the flight and in pre- and postflight examination of the animals and plants abroad the spacecraft. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 10/85, July 13/85)
The European Space Agency (ESA) and the Department of Commerce's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced that the U.S. agreed to lend ESA its GOES-4 standby geostationary weather satellite as a temporary substitute for ESA's Meteosat-1 spacecraft. Meteosat-1, launched in 1977 with a planned 3-year lifetime, had run out of station-keeping fuel and would drift out of view of ESA's ground-station network in July. NOAA would move GOES-4, which had been at 140° W longitude over the Pacific Ocean, westward by 4° a day to bring it by mid-June to its new position at 10° W longitude above the Atlantic Ocean. Because ESA group equipment was not compatible with the GOES-4 command system, NOAA would operate the satellite for ESA from its satellite guidance facilities at Suitland, Maryland, and Wallops Station, Virginia. ESA's Meteosat ground facilities in Darmstadt would receive data from the spacecraft. When NOAA's Atlantic-area GOES-East Satellite lost its imaging capability in 1984, ESA's Meteosat-2 provided U.S. weather watchers with weather data, including information on the eastern Atlantic hurricane breeding grounds. (ESA Release, May 7/85)
In addition to TV programs, the satellite would transmit newspaper facsimile, educational programs, medical consultations, weather information, and computer linkages. (Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese, May 30/ 85)
The USSR today boosted the nuclear-reactor core of its Cosmos 1607 radar ocean-surveillance satellite (RORSAT) to a higher orbit, marking the end of its 92-day mission, Aerospace Daily reported. Some observers linked the maneuver to the failure the week before of Cosmos 1625, a solar-powered electronic ocean reconnaissance satellite (EORSAT). They believed that EORSATs and RORSATs worked together to monitor movements of potentially hostile ships and that, upon the failure of Cosmos 1625, the Soviets decided Cosmos 1607 was not worth maintaining. Others said the Soviets terminated the Cosmos 1607 mission because it had operated successfully for three months, and were therefore uncertain of the satellite's reliability if kept in operation any longer. (The Soviets had problems with RORSATs in the past—parts of the Cosmos 954 reactor came down in Canada in 1978, and the nuclear power-pack components of Cosmos 1402 reentered over the Indian Ocean and South Atlantic in early 1983. Cosmos 1266 lasted only about a week in 1981, and in that same year Cosmos 1299 only a little longer. In 1982 Cosmos 1412 was operational for only 40 days.) Cosmos 1607 was the second Soviet RORSAT of 1984; they safely boosted the power pack of Cosmos 1579, launched June 28, to a higher orbit on September 28. The Soviets boosted the power packs to high orbit so their decay would occur after half-life of the nuclear elements. (A/D, Feb 11/85, 1)
NASA announced it had scheduled the Spacelab 3 mission, a European-developed and NASA-operated space laboratory, for launch on STS 51 —B no earlier than April 29, 1985. Spacelab 3 was a microgravity mission with 15 investigations in five scientific disciplines: materials science, life sciences, fluid mechanics, atmospheric science, and astronomy. Two of the investigations—one in materials science, mercury iodide crystal growth [France], and one in astronomy, very wide field camera [France]—had flown aboard Spacelab 1. Scientists in the U.S. sponsored 12 of the investigations, and an ionization measurements investigation was from India. Important new hardware developments in materials science, fluid dynamics, and life sciences would be on the flight, and researchers had designed the experimental hardware for multiple flight use. NASA had selected two payload specialists with expertise in crystal growth and fluid mechanics for the flight. The Spacelab 3 configuration consisted of a long tunnel, a long module, and a mission peculiar equipment support structure (MPESS). The module PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	373 and tunnel would provide a pressurized shirtsleeve environment within which the crew could operate. The MPESS also supported experiments that did not require a habitable crew environment. Common payload support equipment used on Spacelab 3 was the scientific airlock that could extend from the module into space for experiments requiring exposure to the space environment and flight crew hands-on activities. There were three experiments on materials science: the fluid experiment system (FES), the vapor crystal growth system (VCGS), and the French materials science experiment. In fluid mechanics, the crew would perform fundamental experiments in the drop dynamics module (DDM) to test theoretical predictions of drop behavor in a near-zero gravity environment. The geophysical fluid flow cell (GFFC) experiment would study fluid motion in a microgravity environment. The six investigations in life sciences included four in the Ames Research Center's (ARC) life sciences payload system to verify a new facility for housing and studying animals in the space environment, observing the animals' reactions to that environment, and evaluating operations and procedures relative to in-flight animal care; the urine monitoring investigation to monitor crew water intake and to prepare urine samples for postflight analysis; and the autogenic feedback training experiment to test a technique to control space adaptation syndrome. The four investigations in atmospheric science and astronomy were the ionization states of solar and galactic cosmic ray heavy nuclei that would use a new detector system to determine the composition and intensity of ions emitted toward the earth from the sun and other galactic sources; the French astronomy investigation to make an ultraviolet survey of the celestial sphere in a study of large-scale phenomena such as clouds within our galaxy; the auroral observations experiment to observe and record the visual characteristics of pulsating and flickering auroras; and atmospheric trace molecules spectroscopy to examine on a global scale the composition and variability of the upper atmosphere. In addition to the Spacelab 3 experiments, NASA had scheduled two GetAway Specials for the flight—a Northern Utah University satellite (NUSAT) and a global low-orbit message relay satellite (GLOMR). NASA would enclose each in a canister mounted in the orbiter payload bay for deployment near the end of the mission following completion of Spacelab operations. (NASA MOR E-977-51-B-02 [prelaunch] April 17/85)
NASA issued a revision of its October 28 report on the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) [see Astronomy, Oct. 28], in which it noted a major IRAS survey discovery that many galaxies emitted far more energy in the infrared than in the optical band where normal stars emitted the bulk of their luminosity. Astronomers considered these galaxies to be of three distinct kinds. The first was "starburst galaxies," those that were presumably undergoing an active period of star formation leading to a large infrared luminosity and in which as much as 10 to 20 solar masses of gas and dust were being converted into new massive stars each year. Another class was sometimes called Seyfert galaxies, which astronomers believed were powered by matter falling into an accretion disk surrounding a black hole. The active regions of these galaxies had a great deal of interstellar dust, which absorbed the optical and ultraviolet radiation from the accretion disks, accounting for the large infrared luminosity. The third and most mysterious class of extragalactic objects discovered by IRAS was the extremely luminous infrared galaxies corresponding to very faint optical galaxies. Such galaxies produced 100 to 300 times as much energy in the infrared as in the optical, and the total luminosities of these galaxies were approximately 100 times those of ours. Astronomers believed the infrared radiation in these galaxies was probably from thermal dust emission, where the dust was reradiating energy absorbed from shorter wavelengths. Astronomers found a large fraction of the active infrared galaxies were interacting galaxies, that is, galaxies that were undergoing a collision or near collision with a neighboring galaxy. The IRAS survey demonstrated the profound effect such collisions had on galaxies, and it could well be that such events dominated the evolution of most galaxies. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [postlaunch] Oct 28/85, revised Dec 2/85)
In a commencement address today at the George Washington University School of Public and International Affairs, Charles Wick, director of the U.S. Information Agency, said that the "very survival" of the U.S. may depend on the extent to which its citizens use and master the tools of mass communications, the NY Times reported. "Through the explosion of global satellite communications, a technological 'genie' has been unleashed which will change forever the way that governments communicate ideas and information abroad," he said. However, he noted that". . . not all countries believe in freedom of ideas. Not all accept the Western tradition that free expression is a basic human right. These opposing forces are attempting to persuade other countries, particularly those in the third world, that the state, not the people, must decide which ideas circulate in their magazines and newspapers and on the TV and radio stations . . . "Since the 1970s, the Soviet Union has introduced resolutions at Unesco, in the guise of a 'New World Information Order,' to impose this control of the mass media on all nations of the world . . . "Unless you and I do a better job of explaining to the world how the free flow of information can benefit mankind, other nations will not be persuaded to open their borders to the ideas and opinions of others. This could have damaging, even fatal consequences for a dangerous world, in which cooperation—and survival—depend so heavily on mutual understanding," Wick concluded. (NYT, May 7/85, B8)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced it would hand over on February 5 MARECS B-2 to the International Maritime Satellite organization (INMARSAT) for commercial operation. The spacecraft, launched November 10 and operational since January 8, would complete INMARSAT'S first-generation satellite system, which would offer worldwide service covering three oceans: the Atlantic region with MARECS-A positioned at 26° W, the Indian Ocean with INTELSATMCS A at 63° E, and the Pacific Ocean with MARECS B-2 at 176.5° E. In preparation for future communications satellite services, ESA in cooperation with INMARSAT was conducting experiments with MARECS B-2 to design economically operated equipment compact enough for installation in small vehicles. (ESA release Feb 4/85)
NASA announced that the United Kingdom's contribution to active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE), the UK Subsatellite [UKS), did not respond to commands when it had passed over Chilton on January 16 or since. Efforts to contact UKS by Chilton and the Deep Space Network (with 10 kw-uplink power) were unsuccessful. British officials said they would continue periodic efforts to contact the satellite, but were not optimistic. In five months of operation, the UKS had supported three chemical releases and had met 70% of the UK-project objectives. (NASA announcement, Feb 13/85) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED PA6^Jl£LjH1INTI0NAtlf BLANI UNITED STATES
The Soviet Union signed a memorandum of understanding with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) to formalize its relationship with the 109-member nation global satellite consortium, the Washington Post reported. However, neither the USSR nor INTELSAT indicated that the understanding would lead to full-fledged membership for the nation that was the largest nonmember user of the satellite network. The understanding, which came after seven years of negotiations, laid the groundwork for increased use of INTELSAT'S network for global transmission of Soviet voice, data, and TV transmissions. If the Soviets increasingly used INTELSAT, experts said, it would be to expand their broadcasting system to reach Third World countries. In 1984 the USSR broadcast 441 hours of TV programming over INTELSAT'S satellites, representing 1% of the consortium's total TV traffic. By contrast, the U.S. used INTELSAT TV transmission capacity over 6,884 hours, 14% of the organization's TV traffic. INTELSAT had to accept the membership of any nation that belonged to the International Telecommunications Union, which included the Soviet Union. INTELSAT denied using the Soviet Union as a means to deflect competition the organization was facing from entrepreneurs seeking to launch their own satellite systems. (WPost, Aug 28/85, G1)
Colombia lodged a protest with the U.S. over placement of a private U.S. satellite in geostationary orbit over that country, FBIS, Bogota Emisoras CARACOL Network in Spanish reported, space that Colombia claimed as its own. Colombia's Foreign Minister Augusto Ramirez Ocampo said the satellite was placed there secretly, since the firm owning it had not presented a request to the interested nation in accordance with international legal procedures. Colombia's United Nations Ambassador Ernesto Rodriguez Medina denounced the situation before the U.N.'s Legal Subcommittee for Outer Space, saying his country planned to place its Satcol satellite in that same position in orbit. (FBIS, Bogota Emisoras CARACOL Network in Spanish, Apr 11/85)
NASA had brought under control a $5Q-mil!ion weather satellite, NOAA-8, that had tumbled helplessly in space for nearly a year due to a malfunctioning oscillator, the Washington Times reported. The defective oscillator gave out during April, allowing NASA and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) scientists to activate a backup oscillator and reprogram the satellite via remote control. NOAA was checking and calibrating the spacecraft's instruments before putting it July 8 into service to transmit daily weather photos and information. (IV Times, May 24/85, 3A; W Post, May 24, 85, A8)
During 1985 the Soviet Union launched 96 spacecraft, the U.S. 17, the Washington Post reported, reflecting what space specialists said was the fact that most Soviet spy satellites burned out within weeks while U.S. satellites often remained in orbit for years. The Soviets launched 33 photo reconnaissance satellites, amounting to more than one-third of the total Soviet launches from January 1 through December 26. In 1985 the Soviets continued to stress the ability to locate with satellites U.S. ships at sea, Navy officials commented. One type of Soviet ocean surveillance satellite, which had radar beams that could penetrate clouds, sought aircraft carriers and other big ships. The radar provided the location of ships below the satellite, forcing the Navy to resort to new methods to foil radar detection. Nicholas Johnson, advisory scientist to Teledyne Brown Engineering Co., kept a widely used log of U.S. and Soviet space launches, and he said that the Soviets launched in 1985 five ocean surveillance satellites, two carrying radar and three equipped with electronic eavesdropping gear. He added that Soviet launches included 19 communication satellites, two of a variety never seen before, and seven satellites designed to warn Moscow of a nuclear attack. Through espionage the Soviets had learned a great deal about U.S. spy satellite capabilities and had taken steps to mask some of their military activities, intelligence officials noted. Space specialists largely agreed that the U.S. was well ahead of the Soviets in the art of spying from space, although they indicated the Soviet's reconnaissance satellites were steadily improving. (IVPost, Dec 31/85, A4)
NASA announced that Harris Corp. successfully deployed on the ground a 50-foot antenna system, marking a milestone in NASA's program to demonstrate that large space antenna concepts were feasible. In the test, a hoop-column antenna unfolded, umbrella-style, from a compact package to a combination of thin structural members, quartz filament cords, and gold-plated mesh. The mesh, serving as a precision reflecting surface stretching across the diameter of the supporting hoop, was shaped like a dish but could be made flat, spherical, or conical, depending on the intended application. The antenna column was a precise telescoping hub, forming the central structure of the antenna, tensing the cords that shaped the antenna surface, and housing the electronic feed mechanisms. The size of potential large space antennas meant a significant boost in effective radiated power from space and an increased sensitivity to weak signals from the ground or from space. One potential application was in communications, because at that time each earth station had to have a large antenna to receive the weak signals transmitted through small antennas on satellites. Large antennas in space would greatly reduce the size and cost of the antennas required at ground sites. And a few super-antennas placed in high geosynchronous orbit could cover the globe, instead of the great number of smaller satellites otherwise required. Millions of inexpensive home rooftop or land mobile unit antennas could receive satellite signals then picked up only by a few very large ground stations. NASA believed the 50-foot antenna system was the largest precision antenna designed for space that could be accommodated in existing ground electromagnetic test facilities. However, the ultimate deployable space antennas might have 150- to 300-foot diameters. Studies showed that these larger antennas required space assembly. (NASA Release 85-76)
On October 27, Hughes engineers ignited the satellite's engines to take it up to its intended orbit 22,300 miles above the Pacific Ocean, then Hughes and Navy engineers completed a month of testing. Following the certification, Hughes president Steven Dorfman commented, "We are meeting all our specifications. Six months later than originally intended, we are going into service." The successful repair turned around a loss for Hughes and its insurance carrier, which had paid the company $85 million. Dorfman said the insurer would get back $65 million by sharing revenues with Hughes over the satellites's ten-year lifespan. (IVPost, Dec 1/85, A3) SEARCH FOR EXTRATERRESTRIAL INTELLIGENCE
Under pressure from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to define its requirements in the internationally authorized 1,544 to 1,660.5	MHz-frequency band and to make allocations in this band for commercial mobile-user communications and surveillance systems, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) indicated satellites might play a key role in air navigation, surveillance, and communications in its follow-on generation, air-traffic control system. Therefore the FCC was trying to protect the radio spectrum required for such services, Aviation Week reported. In addition, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) would review at the 1987 World Radio Conference the earlier-assigned band, seeking to assure sufficient spectrum availability for civil aviation operators' future global needs. The Special Committee 155 of the Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics said it would report at an April 26 ICAO meeting results of its yearlong study intended to define future spectrum operational requirements for the year 2010 and beyond for all classes of airspace users. The report called for service over both land and water, from the surface to a 70,000-foot altitude, a requirement most easily met by spaceborne systems. The FAA had considered spaceborne systems for air traffic communications for nearly two decades, but had rejected them as not cost-effective replacements for terrestrial-based facilities (except for transoceanic communications). However, at the urging of the Air Transport Assn. (ATA), the FAA had initiated in the early 1970s a joint program with the European Space Agency (ESA) to explore satellite use for oceanic aircraft communications, resulting in contracts with Comsat Corp. for the service and GE to build a satellite; the FAA had terminated the program when ATA lost interest. More recently, Aviation Week said, the FAA had responded cooly to DOD's push for FAA adoption of its Rockwell Navstar Global Positioning System, partly because of Pentagon-imposed signal accuracy limits of 500 miles (1,640 ft.) for civilian users. Currently, commercial applications to the FCC for authorization to offer domestic communications- and surveillance-satellite services to users, ranging from trucks to aircraft, had raised serious FAA concerns. FAA officials doubted the technical suitability of some of the proposed systems to meet airspace users' demanding requirements. The government traditionally had owned and operated the surveillance, navigation, and communications facilities the FAA used for air-traffic control. If the FCC, under the Reagan Administration policy of commercializing space activities, should allocate spectrum currently assigned for aviation to nonaviation use, this could preclude a future optimum global spaceborne-avia-tion system. Therefore, the FAA task force was studying spectrum needs for several types of spaceborne systems, including multifunction satellites, and expected to have recommendations ready for submission to the Future Air Navigation System Committee and the National Telecommunications and Information Agency, which addressed government frequency-allocation issues. (AvWk, Feb 4/85, 36)
A conflict between industrial and developing countries over the use of space would likely be the dominant issue at the five-week World Administrative Radio Conference that would open August 9 in Geneva, the NY Times reported. The meeting was intended to negotiate a plan to avert traffic jams in the space used by orbiting communications satellites. The conflict existed as a result of the desire of industrial countries to gain an advantage from their technical lead with a flexible approach to assigning orbital slots and the desire of some developing countries to reserve orbital slots years before they might be used. Communications experts around the world said the increased use of low-cost satellites to expedite domestic, regional, and world communications was leading to a virtual traffic jam in the satellite belt, 22,300 miles above the equator. The radio frequencies that gave the clearest signals also were rapidly filling. The U.S. and INTELSAT used most of the orbit space and radio spectrum. Reagan Administration officials said they would offer a proposal that the U.S. refrain for 10 years from using parts of the radio spectrum opened to satellite use by a 1979 conference. By staying out of the expanded spectrum, U.S. officials said, the U.S. would reassure less-developed nations that there would be radio room for them when their satellite-launching plans matured. The U.S. plan would let a country ask for radio frequencies 15 years in advance against the current five years. The U.S. plan would also establish a requirement that countries with a satellite in operation made compensatory payments to countries forced to put satellites in less desirable orbits or forced to use less desirable radio frequencies. The most persuasive aspect of the U.S. proposal was the prospect that between 50 and 100 U.S. satellites were at some stage of planning, development, or scheduled for launch over the next three years. Less-developed countries, particularly those in the tropical zone, wanted rigid assignments of radio bands, including the lower frequencies then dominated by the developed nations, because the bad weather common in the tropics did not noticeably disturb those frequencies. (NYT, Aug 7/85, D1)
The satellite carried search and rescue (SARSAT) equipment that would resume operation as part of an international program begun in September 1983 to use satellites to save people in downed airplanes or on ships in distress. During the 11 months NOAA-8 malfunctioned, three USSR and one U.S. satellite were picking up distress signals and relaying them to ground stations. The reactivated NOAA-8 would assume weather data collection that NOAA-6 had been doing. NOAA-6 had no search and rescue equipment and its infrared radiometer for taking temperature measurements was not working. (NASA Release 85-81)
Observers had anticipated seeing the world's first man-made comet 72,000 miles above earth (over the Pacific Ocean west of Lima, Peru) the morning of December 27, 1984, the JPL Universe reported. Although clouds obscured viewing from official ground-observation sites, scientists called the artificial comet a success, marking another milestone in the active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE) program sponsored by the U.S., West Germany, and the United Kingdom. Mission goal was to inject, from a satellite tracer, ions of lithium and barium inside, outside, and just within the earth's magnetosphere (creating the comet appearance) and to detect and monitor these ions with two other satellites as the ions convected and diffused through the inner magnetosphere. Scientists hoped that this new data would improve understanding of the influence and mechanisms of interaction of the solar wind with earth's magnetosphere, including formation of the van Allen Belts. A NASA Convair 990 reported a six-minute viewing; an Argentine Boeing 707 an eight-minute view. Overall intensity of the "comet" was lower than expected; the 12,000- to 20,000-km tail was somewhat shorter than expected. Experimenters withheld other canisters of chemicals aboard the German ion-release module (IRM) for AMPTE experiments later in the year. GSFC managed the U.S. portion of the project; a JPL mission control team operated the charge composition explorer (CCE) spacecraft to observe the cloud. GPL Universe, Jan 11/85, 1; GSFC News, Jan 85, 3)
NASA announced that it would launch Intelsat V-A (F—10), first in a series of improved INTELSAT commercial communications satellites, by an Atlas-Centaur (AC-63) from KSC no earlier than March 19, 1985. The Intelsat V-A series had a capacity of 13,500 two-way voice circuits and two TV channels. Aerospace manufacturers around the world, under the direction of prime contractor Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., had contributed to the design, development, and manufacture of Intelsat V-A. These contractors and their responsibilities were: Aerospatiale (France)—designed the main member for the spacecraft's modular construction and supplied the main body structure thermal analysis and control; GEC-Marconi (United Kingdom)—produced the 11-GHz beacon transmitters used for earth station antenna tracking; Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (Federal Republic of Germany)—designed and produced the satellite control subsystem and the solar array; Mitsubishi Electric Corp. (Japan)—contributed the six-GHz and four-GHz earth coverage antennas and manufactured the power control electronics and the telemetry and command digital units; Selenia (Italy)—designed and built the six telemetry, command, and ranging antennas, two 11-GHz beacon antennas, and two 14/11-GHz spot-beam antennas and built the command receiver and telemetry transmitter that combined to form a ranging transponder for determination of spacecraft position in transfer orbit; and Thomson-CSF (France)—built the 10-w, 11-GHz traveling wave tubes. The Intelsat V-A spacecraft would weigh about 4,402 lb. at separation from the Centaur, including the solid-propellant apogee kick motor (AKM) for circularization in the geosynchronous orbit. The separated spacecraft weight of 4,389 would include 1,963 lb. of AKM expendables and nine lb. of transfer orbit propellants. NASA would use spin-stabilization during the transfer orbit coast to geosynchronous altitude. After burnout of the AKM, NASA would despin the spacecraft and deploy the antenna and solar array. In this configuration the spacecraft would be about 51 feet wide (measured across the solar panels) and 22 feet high. In orbital operation, the spacecraft would be three-axis stabilized with the body-fixed antenna pointing constantly at the earth and the solar array rotated to point at the sun. The INTELSAT global satellite system comprised two essential elements: the space segment, consisting of satellites owned by Intelsat, and the ground segment, consisting of earth stations owned by telecommunications entities in the countries in which they were located. The space segment had 16 satellites in synchronous orbit at an altitude of about 25,780 km (22,240 miles). There were 424 communications antennas at 334 earth station sites in 134 countries and territories in the ground segment. The combined system of satellites and ground stations provided more than 800 earth station-to-earth station communications pathways. (NASA MOR M—491-203-85-08 [prelaunch] Mar 18/85)
M. Peter McPherson, head of the Agency for International Development (AID), said a U.S.-financed and -built satellite weather-alert system may have given Bangladesh up to 24 hours notice of a devastating cyclone that killed approximately 10,000 people, the Washington Times reported. The advance notice may have saved "a substantial number of lives," along coastal areas of the Bay of Bengal, McPherson said. McPherson pointed out that the satellite system in Bangladesh, developed in phases since 1978 by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and AID warned of the storm. He said Bangladesh technicians had tracked the cyclone for four days and had the capability of predicting landfall and wind speed within 18 to 24 hr. (IV Times, May 29/85, 5A)
Comsat Corp. announced unaudited year-end results showing a $29 million decrease in income from continuing operations in 1984 compared to 1983 income, the Washington Post reported. Comsat reported consolidated 1984 operating revenue of about $442 million, with consolidated net income of about $51 million and income from continuing operations of about $45 million. The company attributed $13 million of the decline to a write-off associated with Satellite Television Corp., the direct satellite-to-home TV company, and to the write-down of inventory from Comsat's equipment manufacturing business. Comsat officials said they would release final figures and per share earnings later in the month (IVPost, Feb 1/85, F5) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED m**MLjmmrtAu.r Bum
President Reagan informed Congress that the U.S. planned shortly to conduct the first test of an antisatellite weapon (ASAT) against a target in space, which a spokesman said would provide an "incentive" to the USSR to negotiate limits on such weapons, the Washington Post reported. Reagan promised the U.S. was bargaining in good faith with the Soviets to limit ASATs, although the White House repeated the administration's opposition to a Soviet proposal for a moratorium on ASAT development and testing. Officials said they expected the test of an ASAT fired from an F—15 at an obsolete U.S. satellite to take place in September or early October. Technical problems with both the antisatellite weapon, called the miniature homing vehicle, and the intended target, an instrumented balloon to be inflated in space, delayed the first test. Since the original target was still experiencing problems, the test would use an obsolete satellite. That same day Presidential spokesman Larry Speakes read to reporters a lengthy statement criticizing Soviet advances in antisatellite weapons and technology and said this provided justification for the first U.S. test against a target in space. Speakes added that a moratorium on antisatellite weapons tests would "perpetuate" a Soviet "monopoly" on antisatellite systems. (W Post, Aug 21/85, A1)
The Arab League's Arabsat 1 telecommunications satellite, launched February 8 by an Ariane 3 from Kourou, French Guiana, experienced control problems during initial in-orbit checkout, but was reported stabilized with all systems functioning normally, Aviation Week reported. Anomalies in the spacecraft's gyro package caused the problems, detected March 16 by operators at Arabsat's Dihrab, Saudi Arabia, ground station when the satellite was at its final on-station location at 19° E longitude. Investigators were attempting to pinpoint the problem. An electrostatic discharge may have caused one of the gyro package anomalies. Although the gyros provided pitch, roll, and yaw information, "we never lost control of the satellite," said Michel Duigot, Aerospatiale's Space and Ballistic Systems Division communications satellite system manager. "There is redundancy in the satellite because we have two packages of three gyros each," he pointed out. The satellite experienced solar array deployment difficulties soon after launch, but the arrays eventually extended successfully. Program officials said the two problems were unrelated. The solar array deployment problems had resulted in minor modifications to the solar panels on the No. 2 Arabsat, originally scheduled for launch by NASA from KSC in May, but rescheduled for June. The 22-member Arab Satellite Communications Organization would use the Arabsat 1 for national and regional communications and TV broadcast requirements. The schedule called for an operational satellite by the end of April, and program officials believed this might still be possible. (AvWk, Mar 25.85, 22)
INTELSAT'S Assembly of Parties, representatives of INTELSAT member nations, rejected a proposal by 21 nations that all INTELSAT parties and signatories boycott interconnection discussions with private companies planning to launch international satellites and that the U.S. reconsider its favorable policy toward non-INTELSAT satellites, Aviation Week reported. INTELSAT signatories, telecommunications organizations that operated ground facilities and represented INTELSAT member nations in organization management, had resolved in April 1983 that diversion of international traffic would threaten INTELSAT'S viability. A resolution adopted by the assembly urged all signatories and parties to "take into account" the boycott and the signatories' economic-viability resolution and to express opinions on separate systems to the U.S. and at the upcoming INTELSAT assembly. U.S. officials had joined the consensus after objectionable language was deleted, but said naming a specific nation in the resolution could set a bad precedent. As one official noted, "The criticism of the U.S. we expected turned out to be expressions of concern by developing countries that competition could mean increased rates for them." PACTjlL __INT£NTtONAHt SUNK The assembly asked the Board of Governors to submit recommendations for separate-system coordination to the assembly as soon as possible, as the U.S.'s Federal Communication Commission was processing five applications for private satellite launches. (AvWk, Feb 11/85, 29)
Sources inside and outside the Reagan Administration said the Department of Defense (DOD) was developing for constant surveillance of all objects in deep space a new generation of navigation, communications, and spy satellites, which would orbit 22,000 miles high and be aided by a nearly completed network of ground stations, the Washington Post reported. DOD would harden the new satellites against radiation and laser attacks and give them some small jet engines for maneuvering away from attack. DOD was also determining if the satellites could be armed to defend themselves. DOD was completing Spacetrack, a worldwide U.S. network of five spacewatching facilities, that would provide adequate time to take defensive actions if the USSR launched weapons at U.S. deep-space satellites. DOD's FY 86 budget reportedly would contain $20 million to complete a fully operational Spacetrack sensor system by 1988. The Soviets had had for 10 years a rudimentary weapon that could knock down low-level U.S. satellites. The Pentagon was beginning tests on its own antisatellite weapon, which would knock down low-level Soviet satellites as they passed over the U.S. (IV Post, Feb 18/85, A1)
The Commerce Department and Eosat, which was selected the previous fall to operate the system, had not yet finalized the contract, but a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) official told Congress the contract would be signed within two weeks. Eosat was proposing to provide two satellites and a new ground station for a fixed price of $250 million, satellite hardware continuing present capabilities with improvements, greater data processing capabilities at the new ground station, and a program covering 10 years. Government funding would occur in the first five years. (A/D, June 21/85, 1)
NASA said that the GOES—6 weather satellite turned its eye toward space for about four and a half hours today before NASA personnel reversed it, the Washington Post reported. Located at a fixed point about 22,000	miles above earth, the satellite transmitted weather photos widely used by TV stations and newspapers across the nation. NASA repositioned the satellite in a reprogramming effort that required transmission of 14 groups of 256 commands each, retiming the revolving satellite so that its instruments would come on when facing the earth. Since August 1984 when GOES-5 lost its ability to transmit photos because a light in it failed, GOES-6 was the lone fixed-point satellite making transmissions. NASA had scheduled for launch in spring 1986 a replacement for GOES-5. If a failure like the one that occurred on August 25 were to last longer, it could have a serious impact on the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) ability to monitor severe storms. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A8)
Adm. James Watkins, speaking to reporters after a ceremony during which astronaut Thomas Mattingly was promoted to commodore and named to head the Navy Space Program Office, said that a Navy oceanographer who had traveled on a Space Shuttle flight the previous fall had brought back "some fantastically important" information that would make it easier for U.S. submarines to hide in the world's oceans, the Washington Post reported. Watkins said the oceanographer, whom he would not name but was known to be Paul Scully-Power, a civilian who worked at the Naval Underwater Systems Center, New London, Connecticut, said the information was vital in trying to understand the ocean depths. When asked if satellite technology might not be hastening the day when submarines could be tracked from space, Watkins acknowledged that technology was opening some doors on submarine tracking. However, he pointed out that the question was whether doors opened on detecting submarines faster than doors opened on learning about the oceans depths. He added that "we're still ahead of the game in the latter category. "So the ability to track submarines—we don't see that as being a threat to our forces until the turn of the century or later, depending on what kind of breakthroughs we might find at the end of this decade or into the next," Watkins concluded. (W Post, Mar 22/85, A10)
