Dr. Albert Boggess was awarded the Herschel Medal, by the Council of the Royal Astronomical Society of the United Kingdom, for his contribution to the success of the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE). The IUE satellite was designated to study Comet Halley's evolution as it approached and receded from0*the Sun. Boggess was named corecipient of the award with University of London Professor R. Wilson. (NASA Release 8628)
was 1 in 1,000 launches as compared to NASA's 1 in 100,000 firings. The panel was created because 19 missions carrying potentially hazardous plutonium power sources (were an accident to occur within the Earth's atmosphere) involved the Shuttle. Two other nuclear powered satellites were scheduled for launches from the Shuttle later in 1986. (WSJ, Mar 5/86; C Trib, Mar 6/86)
A weeklong exercise to upgrade the Search and Rescue Satellite System got underway at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, expanding coverage to the Southern Hemisphere. (LA Times, Nov 12/86)
A joint venture of Hughes Aircraft and RCA, the Earth Observation Satellite Company said that the Reagan administration was withholding funds for the Landsat program it managed. The $65 million not released was earmarked for new satellites, receiving stations, and support operations. The Landsat satellite was launched in 1972 as a data gathering operation for the government and public, but its monopoly for providing detailed services to companies and private individuals was broken by the French satellite, SPOT. Elimination of the program, warned a representative from the company, "would destroy the first U.S. attempt to commercialize space." (W Post, Dec 5/86)
A Tracking and Data Relay Satellite lost transmitting capability on an Sband singleaccess antenna, SA1, which provided voice and data links to low Earthorbiting satellites, including the Shuttle. Services were switched to the remaining antenna, SA2, and little or no data loss to customers occurred. (NASA Release 86175)
Three government agenciesthe National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)proposed a longterm plan for the study of human effect on the Earth's environment. The project envisioned cooperation from other scientifically advanced nations and would use the disciplines of geology, meteorology, oceanography, forestry, agriculture, and computer and satellite technologies to study the Earth as an integrated system. NSF director, Erich Bloch, noted that "for the first time in history we have the capability to observe the entire Earth from the outer reaches of its atmosphere to its molten inner core." NASA's Earth System Sciences Committee predicted that the program, enlisting satellites from countries around the globe, would be in full swing by the middle 1990s. (B Sun, Jun 27/86; CSM, Jun 30/86)
Remote sensing via satellite, combined with a computer technology that could provide a simulation of the properties and processes in the soil, related Dr. Elissa Levine, would allow shortterm prediction of changes that occur in soils over a period of time and the ability of the soil to support different types of plant life. Advancing her theory at an annual meeting in New Orleans, Levine noted, "We can obtain critical environmental data which will help us understand how changes brought about by both nature and humankind will affect the total ecosystem over time." (NASA Release 86170)
NASA planned for a display of current and future technologies at the 34th Annual EAA International FlyIn Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition, with an exhibit entitled "21st Century Aviation," August 18 in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Featured would be hypersonic cruise vehicles and high altitude aircraft that could fly from the U.S. West Coast to Tokyo five times faster than subsonic flyers and have the capability of taking payloads and passengers to Earth orbit. In addition, NASA also planned advanced cockpit displays in which aircraft controls reacted to voice commands, and presentations of a supercomputer capable of one billion computations per second, rotocraft research and potential applications, aeronautical art, and the Search and Rescue Satellite (SARSAT) system. The latter display was intended to show how using a satellite saves time in rescuing air and maritime casualties. (NASA Release 8690)
Using data collected between June 1978 and summer 1986, from NASA's costal zone color scanner on board the Nimbus7 satellite, scientists from many international institutions completed a computergenerated color image that shows the distribution of microscopic plant life, phytoplankton, in surface waters over the North Atlantic Ocean. This image was generated by measuring sunlight reflected from the sea surface at five wavelengths to determine ocean color. The most striking feature of the study for understanding man's role in carbon dioxide and other important cycles is the "spring bloom," high phytoplankton concentration extending across the Atlantic and into the North Sea. (NASA Release 86147)
Administration sources said that President Ronald Reagan might delay funding for a new orbiter until 1987. Because budget restraints made any commitment to a replacement impossible, many advisors were in favor of producing expendable launch vehicles for private satellites. (W Post, Jul 30/86; P Inq, Jul 30/86; WSJ, Jul 31/86)
COSPAS/SARSAT, an international search and rescue system, was scheduled to monitor the aroundtheworld, nonstop and unrefueled flight of the Rutan Voyager airplane. The SARSAT system uses four satellites, three from the Soviet Union and one'90*from the United States, to locate downed aircraft and ships at sea by picking up their emergency signals. The Rutan Voyager aircraft, designed by aeronautical engineer Burt Rutan and piloted by his brother Dick and Jeana Yeager, carried a 11/2pound prototype beacon that could transmit on a 406 Mhz frequency for location determination and a 121.5 Mhz frequency on which rescue workers could hone in. The signals could also be recorded by a satellite if the aircraft was not in immediate range of a ground station. Since the initiation of the program in September 1982, 606 lives had been saved, by September 1986, in 251 emergencies worldwide. (NASA Release 86132)
NASA issued a request for proposals to various contractors for a satellite for use in a joint venture with the French Space Agency, Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, in the Topex/Poseidon oceanographic mission. The satellite would map the'+0*circulation of the world's oceans by using a precise radar altimeter to measure height variations on the sea surface. Contingent upon congressional approval of funds, a launch of the satellite in late 1991 was planned. (NASA Release 8686)
Fairchild Space Company proposed a lightweight refueling device to be attached to the Space Shuttle's bay that could service satellites with the fuel required for keeping them in orbit. The refueling device would extend the maximum life span for a satellite about 15 years. Fairchild was in a race with Rockwell International and Martin Marietta for the lightest weight and best functioning design; submission of the designs to NASA was to be no later than November 7. (W Post, Sep 15/86)
Six days after launch and 24 hours after being put into operation, the Search and Rescue Satellite Aided Tracking satellite (SARSAT) picked up its first distress signal from 4 downed Canadians in a remote area of Ontario. Rescue workers were easily able to locate the downed Cessna, and all four Canadians were taken to safety. Canada, France, the United States, and the former Soviet Union all shared in the search and rescue program known as COSPAS/SARSAT aboard the NOAA10 satellite. (NASA Release 86144)
A lightweight transmitter for sending messages to weather satellites was placed on polar bears and caribou in the spring of 1985, and had so far functioned very well, said biologist Steven Amstrup. Because of the satellite's ability to track these animals, biologists could determine whether the animals were walking, running, sleeping, or foraging for food. (B Sun, Mar
NASA scheduled five expendable launches in 1986 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, employing Delta rockets, used in joint management with the McDonnell Douglas launch team, and Atlas Centaur rockets, jointly managed launches with General Dynamics Convair. Of the five satellites, two were for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The Geosynchronous Operational Environmental Satellites were designed for weather forecasting and collecting data on various environmental effects. The other three were for the Department of Defense. Two Fleet Satellite Communication satellites would provide secure communications between landbased facilities and ships, submarines, and aircraft, and one other was for support of the Strategic Defense Initiative. (NASA Release 8632)0*March 20: The U.S. Government considered plans for replacing the Challenger by allowing private investors to raise the money and lease the new Shuttle to NASA, stretching out payments for perhaps 15 years. The plan called for NASA to order a replacement shuttle from Rockwell, but Willard Rockwell's new firm, Astrotech, would buy it. Furthermore, investors would be reimbursed by NASA for any accident loss, and Astrotech would market the launches to commercial customers. (WSJ, Mar 20/86; W Post; Mar 30/86; B Sun, Apr 1/86)
Boeing Aerospace was selected to supply NASA with Shuttle upper stages to place two Tracking and Data Relay Satellites into geosynchronous Earth orbits. Engineering support and integration of the upper stages with the satellites were also to be provided. The contract was expected to run from March 1886 through April 1990 at a price of approximately $93 million. (NASA Release 8614)
