NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced that a Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOESH) would be launched sometime after February 23, 1987. The satellite would provide cloud cover images and atmospheric temperature profiles, collect space environment data, and conduct an experiment for detecting emergency distress signals on the ground from a geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release
General Dynamics Space system Division was awarded a contract by NASA and the Department of Commerce for expendable launch vehicle transportation services for meteorological spacecraft GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellites). The GOES spacecraft provided nearly continuous, highresolution visual and infrared imaging of weather systems over large areas of the Earth. (NASA Release 87156)
General Dynamic Corporation announced it had been awarded a contract to launch between one and three European satellites by the European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT). The 26nation European consortium selected General Dynamic's AtlasCentaur rockets for the launching of its satellites because of their cost and reliability. The agreement called for a launch of a EUTELSAT2 communications satellite in early 1990 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with options for two additional launches. (LA Times, Sept 26/87)
The Transportation Department announced that it has granted approval for Martin Marietta Corporation to launch private communications satellites. Within hours of the announcement,h)0*0*0*Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization to launch two Intelsat6 satellites into orbit on Martin Marietta's Titan 3 rockets. Launchings were scheduled for 1989 and 1990. The agreement between two private companies to launch private communications satellites was the first instance of the implementation of the Reagan administration's space commercialization policy. (B Sun, Aug 11/87; W Times, Aug 11/87)
Soviet and Japanese scientists confirmed the first positive detection of Xrays from an exploding supernova. Soviet scientists, using Xray telescopes aboard the Soviet astrophysics module Kvant, made the detection on August 10, 1987. Japanese scientists, using smaller Xray instruments aboard their Ginga satellite, first observed the Xrays from the supernova on August 15, 1987. (W Post, Oct 4/87)
NASA selected General Electric Company, Space Systems Division, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and Harris Corporation, Government Communication Systems Division, Melbourne, Florida, to negotiate contracts for Phase I system design studies of the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) ground terminal. (NASA Release 8729)
