A report from a panel convened by the National Research Council and released to the White House recommended smaller and simpler satellites to monitor the Earth's climate, as opposed to the $30 billion, six large satellites being planned by NASA. The expense of the Earth Observing System (EOS) could take funds away from other important studies and future budgets. It could result in a delay in launching the EOS spacecraft, the report warned. Noting that at least one large platform was necessary for a number of scientific instruments to be grouped together, the panel recommended that three of the large satellites be replaced by smaller ones. (NY Times, Aug 22/90; W post, Aug 22/90)
During January: NASA completed a facility to house the second ground station for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) system. Located at White Sands, New Mexico, near the existing terminal, the station was predicted to be fully operational by 1993. The equipment that the new terminal would house was to be technically superior to the communications network in the original building, but the two were to work together in a combination meant to reduce the likelihood for any loss of contact with the two TDRS satellites in orbit. (CSM, Jan 30/90)
NASA said it had received the go ahead from Intelsat to rescue the Intelsat 6 satellite put into a low orbit three months earlier. Plans called for lifting the satellite into a higher orbit sometime in 1992; sources said that the mission would probably be carried out during the inaugural flight of Shuttle Endeavor. (B Sun, Jun 14/90; W Times, Jun 14/90)
China launched a communications satellite, AsiaSat 1, from Sichuan Province for an Australian firm and became the first thirdworld country to enter the commercial satellite launching business. China promised to follow fair pricing practices after President George Bush lifted a sanction, brought on the country for human rights violations, that barred them from launching the U.S.built satellite. The launch still drastically undercut U.S. and Ariane fees. (FBIS China, China Daily, Apr 7/90; CSM, Apr 9/90; W Post, Apr 8/90)
The military reconnaissance satellite launched from Atlantis in February malfunctioned and was slowly spinning from orbit, said White House intelligence officials. The satellite, "vital for START (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) verification," was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere in April. (W Times, Mar 19/90; W Post, Mar 19/90)
Contel Federal Systems transferred title of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System to NASA, effective July 1, 1990. Contel transferred the system 42 months earlier than called for, saving the Government $16 million. (NASA Release 9086)
The United States and the Soviet Union signed an agreement in which NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) would fly on a Soviet Meteor3 spacecraft sometime in 1991. A TOMS instrument had monitored ozone concentrations from a Nimbus7 satellite since 1978, focusing on the southern hemisphere and the development of the Antarctic ozone hole. This satellite, however, had already performed well beyond its designed lifetime, and the TOMS/Meteor3 mission was slated to replace it. Another TOMS satellite was scheduled to be aboard a U.S. spacecraft in 1993; two or three years subsequent to that mission another TOMS was scheduled for a Japanese ADEOS satellite. (NASA Release 90105)
NASA said that it would rescue the uninsured communications satellite that Martin Marietta Corporation boosted into a useless orbit last March 14. The cost was set at $1 million to either retrieve it or attach rockets, that would send it into a higher orbit, in 1991 or 1992. Intelsat said that it would consider the cost at its next board of governors meeting. W Times, May 16/90)
The Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico issued a report concerning an electric gun, the coil gun, that could thrust payloads into orbit. Hoping one day that the device would launch small satellites, Bill Cowan, director of the project, predicted that objects could be hurled into space at 2.8 miles per second at 1 percent of the cost of conventional rockets. The gun accelerates projectiles by pulling them through successive, interacting magnetic fields created by electric currents passing through coils of wire. According to Cowan, obstacles such as damage to the payloads and launchers themselves and the heat generated by projectiles rapidly propelled through the atmosphere would eventually be overcome. (NY Times, (Jan 30/90)
President George Bush said he would allow U.S. commercial satellites to be launched by Soviet rockets. The rockets would be fired from a projected site in Australia, an advantageous position for orbits, located just 12 degrees south of the equator. (FBIS Sov, Jul 9/90; NY Times, Jul 9/90)
