NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) had discovered a new, distant object that astronomers described as the most luminous object ever seen in the universe. Findings were published in the British science journal Nature, indicating it was a massive dust cloud that radiated 99 percent of its light in  the infrared part of the spectrum. Astronomers speculated it might be a massive galaxy in the process of formation or a quasar in a massive galaxy. (NASA Release 91-98; P Inq, Jun 29/91)
NASA announced that its newest Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, launched from Atlantis on August 2, 1991, was operational. This expanded the communications capability required by the increasing number of scientific spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-164; Business Wire, Oct 9/91)
NASA solicited proposals for establishing additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These centers were to specialize in the commercialization of advanced satellite communications technologies and other space-based telecommunications technologies. NASA's current CCDS specialize as follows: materials processing, 5; life sciences, 3; remote sensing, 2; automation and robotics, 2; space propulsion, 1; space structures and materials, 1; and space power, 2. (NASA Release 91-58)
The rocket-launching site at Poker Flat, Alaska, is near the North Pole, has a high success rate for suborbital, scientific launches, and lacks military red tape, being university owned. These factors caused commercial ventures to inquire about possible commercial satellite launches into polar orbits from Poker Flat. Glenn Olds, Commissioner of the state Department of Commerce and Economic Development, believed a launch might occur in 1993. (AP, Apr 29/91)
AP quoted President Bush's science adviser, D. Allan Bromley, as saying that declassification of Star Wars technology would enable NASA to begin a $30 billion study of Earth's environment earlier and cheaper. Bromley added that the Defense Department and the Department of Energy would allow the use of some of their inventions for non-military purposes. The most important was a technology that allowed pointing an instrument from space with greater accuracy to a given spot on Earth and holding it, as well as a technique to fly individual satellites, bring them together, and lock them into formation so several satellites can look at the same spot on Earth. (AP, Oct 22/91)
According to Florida Today, a group of Florida universities hoped to attract a five-year, $5 million NASA grant to set up a commercial space development center. The center would focus on the commercial potential of advanced satellite communicatios technology. (Fla Today, Jun 16/91)
Hughes Aircraft Company said its Space and Communications Group had signed a $300 million contract to build three communications satellites for Alpha Lyracom, a private global communications satellite operator. The first satellite was scheduled for launch in May 1994 and is to serve the Pacific Ocean region. (WSJ, Nov 5/91)
The media reported the launch of the Soviet Meteor-3 weather satellite carrying the NASA-built Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS). The Meteor was to view the hole in the ozone over Antarctica in September and October; the United States and the Soviet Union were to share ozone information gained. (AP, Aug 15/91; UPI, Aug 15/91; P Inq, Aug 16/91; W Post, Aug 16/91; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
The Los Angeles Times quoted National Hurricane Center director Robert C. Sheets as being concerned about the "precarious situation" with regard to hurricane forecasting. The GOES-7, the only U.S. weather satellite in orbit, was nearing the end of its five-year life expectancy and no replacement was available in the near future. Among possibilities were buying a satellite from Japanese or European makers. (LA Times, Jul 16/91)
Scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico developed a new technique of "clustering" to speed the analysis of satellite images. The technique was being adapted for use in crop forecasting, land-use studies, pollution monitoring, and mineral and oil prospecting. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
According to the Washington Times, Eosat, based in Lanham, Maryland, a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Company and General Electric Company, defeated its competitor and gained the contract for distributing images from the new Soviet Almaz satellite. (W Times, Aug 9/91)
According to the New York Times, the Space Studies Board of the National Research Council recommended that NASA move quickly to develop and deploy a system of Earth-monitoring satellites with the intention of studying climate. The proposed Earth Observing System called for six large, heavily instrumented orbiting platforms and smaller supplemental satellites, to cost $30 billion over the next 30 years. (NYT, Jul 14/91)
A Journal of Commerce editorial analyzed the factors relating to NASA and the Federal Communications Commission's licensing of a private communications consortium joint venture to develop a mobile satellite to provide clear voice communications in remote U.S. areas. In early 1991, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia challenged the FCC's authority to form the joint venture and license it, with the result that Congress cut NASA's proposed $56 million contribution to the project. The companies feel cheated and the editorial advised that NASA should not be involved. (Journal of Commerce, Jun 21/91)
According to the Wall Street Journal, Telesat Canada planned to file a $240 million insurance claim because of the failure of its Anik E2 communications satellite launched in April to deploy one of its two antennae. (WSJ, May 24/91)
NASA Combined Release and Radiation Effects satellite released a barium canister to gain data about the magnetosphere and more reliable predictions of magnetic disturbances in space. (AP, Feb 17/91; W Times, Feb 18/91)
Steve Piacente, Washington correspondent for the Charleston Post-Courier, wrote "Weather Service Modernization: No Goes" describing problems of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA with launching new weather satellites. Lack of effective supervision of contractors and poor engineering workmanship were among the shortcomings. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
According to AP, two congressmen, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, and Sherwood Boehlert, Republican of New York, urged that the United States "borrow" or buy a GMS-5 weather satellite being built by the U.S. firm Hughes for Japan. This would allow NASA time to fix the problems with the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-Next. In connection with GOES, Washington Technology reported in some detail on the "troubled history" of the weather satellite and its contractors and congressional criticism of the program. The Christian Science Monitor reported on lessons learned from GOES-Next, including not to cut corners in developing sophisticated technology and the importance of sharing weather data globally. (AP, Aug 7/91; Washington Technology, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 20/91; H Post, Aug 21/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to Discovery's maneuvers as it conducted missile-detecting experiments for the Pentagon. The scientific satellite, which it launched previously, captured with infrared sensors and television cameras engine exhaust plumes and plumes from smaller steering jets. (B Sun, May 2/91; W Post, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; USA Today, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91 AP, May 2/91; UPI, May 2/91; CSM, May 3/91)
Representative Howard Wolpe wrote in a space trade journal concerning the GOES-NEXT weather satellites. He commended Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher's statement that although GOES-NEXT would not be launched on schedule, it would meet original specifications. He continued to be concerned about a possible five-year gap without a weather detection system and stated that firm commitments of assistance must be obtained from Europe and Japan. He also criticized NASA for lacking a planned prototype instrument for GOES and for its ineffective cost controls. (SP News, Oct 14-20/91)
NASA announced it would resume active space physics experiments by conducting several chemical releases in July and August with the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite. Barium vapor releases in the Caribbean area were involved. (NASA Release 91-107)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the National Weather Service's one weather satellite was nearing the end of its life. However, NASA's next generation of satellites, one of which was to replace it, were three years behind schedule and $500 million over budget. The atmospheric sensor of the new model reportedly tested poorly, but NASA planned to launch it nevertheless. AP quoted Joan A. Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as saying that meanwhile there were contingency plans to use both NOAA and Defense Department polar orbiting satellites and a European weather satellite to watch hurricanes in the Atlantic and Caribbean.(P Inq, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91)
Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science announced that Japan had successfully launched a solar flare observation satellite, designed to analyze X-rays and gamma rays from solar flares. (DPA, Aug 30/91)
The first release of barium vapor, creating a green cloud, by the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite occurred the evening of January 12, NASA announced. The second release consisted of lithium vapor the night of January 13, causing a red cloud. (P Inq, Jan 14/91; USA Today, Jan 14/91; NY Times, Jan 14/91; AP, Jan 13/91; UPI, Jan 12/91; W Post, Jan 13/91)
NASA announced that the Ohio State University's Center for Mapping, Columbus, one of 16 NASA Centers for the Commercial Development of Space, had developed a system that would reduce the amount of time and money needed to gather information on highway conditions. The system uses both positioning data from the Defense Department's Navstar Global Positioning Satellite Systems and images taken from a pair of video cameras mounted in a standard van. The system would help locate roads needing repair and other hazardous conditions, including the location of fatal accidents. The 18-month project, called the Global Positioning System for Transportation Planning, involved the Federal Highway Administration, 38 state transportation departments, and the Canadian province of Alberta. The states had contributed $565,000 to the project, and NASA had given $280,000. The system also is ideal for mapping and the mobile unit enables digitizing to be done immediately. (NASA Release 91-16)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with Columbia Communications Corporation, Honolulu, to delay for up to six months the start of operations under Columbia's lease of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) C-Band capacity. NASA leased to Columbia the C-Band transponders on two geostationary TDRSS satellites to serve commercial international telecommunications customers in the Atlantic and Pacific coastal regions. (NASA Release 91-181)
The U.S. Space Surveillance Network, inside Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado, originally designed to serve as an early warning system against missile attacks, was described. The organization now mainly is engaged in tracking 7,000 pieces of orbiting space debris, to which some 240 new pieces were added each year. Efforts were being made internationally to develop new technologies to track space debris. In all, more than 100 spacecraft fragmented while in orbit, including at least 12 satellites deliberately destroyed by the United States and the Soviet Union during weapons testing. (P Inq, Dec 26/91)
The Christian Science Monitor discussed the cases of Ulysses, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), and Hipparcos, an ESA satellite. Ulysses, which was designed to study the environment over the north and south poles of the sun, developed a wobble that threatened its usefulness, but the problem was resolved. Hipparcos was designed to measure the positions, motions, and distances of more than 100,000 stars. It also developed orbit problems but to date measured more than 1 million stars. (CSM, Feb 13/91)
UPI reported that the NOAA-D spacecraft developed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA was scheduled for launch on May 14. The satellite, which was to measure temperatures on Earth's surface, including oceans, and gathering data on solar radiation, might help scientists better predict floods and understand the causes of droughts. (UPI, May 10/91)
The Baltimore Sun commented at length on an article on galactic studies appearing in the April 20 issue of The Astrophysical Journal. The article described work done by a group of scientists using the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), a scientific satellite operated by NASA and the European Space Agency. The yearlong work required 60 observations with the IUE studying the cores of rare galaxies. (B Sun, May 19/91)
According to the New York Times, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration was completing arrangements to get exclusive use of the European weather satellite Meteosat-3. The purpose would be to move it further west to cover the United States more thoroughly if the U.S. weather satellite, GOES-7, were to fail. NASA was several years behind in the development of new U.S. weather satellites, the GOES-NEXT, originally scheduled to begin operating in 1989 but now probably late 1992 at the earliest. Subsequently, several newspapers reported arrangements made for the United States to borrow at least one and possibly more European weather satellites. (NY Times, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91)
A senior U.S. trade official, on condition of anonymity, stated that Japan had drafted a plan to subsidize the entry of several Japanese companies into the commercial satellite-building industry but abandoned the plan under U.S. pressure. Hiroshi Hirabayashi, economics minister at the Japanese Embassy in Washington, confirmed the existence of such a plan but said if implemented it would probably be limited to research satellites. (NY Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91)
The findings of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite have caused astronomers to question part of the Big Bang theory, according to a report by Dr. Will Saunders of Oxford University and his colleagues in the journal Nature. The cold dark matter model cannot explain the giant superstructures and companion supervoids found in galactic surveys. These structures appear too vast to have formed since the Big Bang. (NY Times, Jan 3/91; W Post, Jan 6/91; LA Times, Jan 4/91)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite appeared to confirm aircraft and ground-based research about the chemical processes leading to ozone depletion. (NASA Release 91-155)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the NIMBUS-7 satellite, indicated that a 4,800-mile-long cloud of sulfur dioxide was spread across the tropical Northern Hemisphere from the major eruption of Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines. (NASA Release 91-96; UPI, Jun 26/91)
A solar flare, a strong release of energy from a small area of the sun, created the most intense geomagnetic storm on Earth since 1989. Such events increase radiation levels near Earth and affect electrical power systems, satellites, space missions, and communications and navigation systems. (UPI, Mar 27/91)
The European organization EUTELSAT selected the Ariane launch vehicle of Arianespace, Inc. for the fifth telecommunications second generation satellite EUTELSAT II-F5. This satellite is a Spacebus 100 spacecraft developed by Aerospatiale and MBB in Germany, with a payload provided by Alcatel. The satellite would provide full coverage of the European continent, parts of North Africa and the Middle East. (PR newswire, Mar 27/91)
The Wall Street Journal discussed the January 1989 offer by Nikolai Ponomarev-Stepnoy, leader of a Soviet design team that built a top secret military spy satellite, the Topaz-2, to sell, for a few million dollars, the Topaz-2 with the satellite's lightweight nuclear reactor. Moscow had no money to develop the reactor for commercial use but the paper deplored the U.S. delay in taking up the offer. The above discussion followed up on a statement by the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Office, reported on December 11, that the office stopped its share of funding for a space-based nuclear reactor projected to cost $1.6 billion by 2002. The reactor program, called SP-100, was shared by NASA and the Department of Energy. Instead the Pentagon office was inclined to go with the Soviet-style process represented by the Topaz, for which it earmarked $15 million. (WSJ, Dec 11/91; WSJ, Dec 17/91)
NASA announced that in January 1991, it would conduct experiments from an orbiting satellite to test the possibility of creating an artificial aurora. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) was to release clouds of barium and lithium vapor in the Earth's magnetosphere, the region above the atmosphere.
An ongoing NASA project released a lithium canister from a satellite, producing a red sphere. Rick Howard, one of 40 scientists working on the project, said the purpose was to try to inject an artificial lithium plasma cloud to see if precipitation can be increased. (AP, Feb. 12/91)
Orion Network Systems of Rockville, Maryland, has been gradually creating a private satellite communications network for businesses in the United States and Europe. It was awaiting approval for its financing from the Federal Communications Commission. The satellites were to be built by British Aerospace Limited and the launch was to be handled by General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services of San Diego, which would use Atlas rockets. (W Post, Feb 2/91)
In repositioning one of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites, TDRS-3, on October 22, it came near a Hughes Communications' Galaxy 1. On October 23 it disturbed GE Americom's Satcom 1R. The result was that cable television nationwide was disrupted. NASA Associate Administrator Charles T. Force said engineers suspected a hardware failure on TDRS caused the problem. (AvWk, Nov 4/91)
Paul Hays, scientist in charge for NASA of one of 10 instruments on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS), launched by Discovery on September 15, said the UARS discovered surprisingly violent, continent-size 200-mile-per-hour windstorms in a rarely studied part of the atmosphere known as the mesosphere. (AP, Dec 12/91; C Trin, Dec 13/91; P Inq, Dec 14/91; W Post, Dec 16/91; LA Times, Dec 16/91; NY Times, Dec 17/91)
The media covered extensively final preparations leading up to the evening launch of Discovery in its 13th flight, a record. Biographic data were given concerning members of the mission as well as descriptions of the satellite to be launched to gather ozone information. (B Sun, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 12/91; USA Today, Sep 12/91; P Inq, Sep 12/91; LA Times, Sep 12/91; AP, Sep 12/91; UPI, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91; B Sun, Sep 13/91; P Inq, Sep 13/91; W Post, Sep 13/91; WSJ, Sep 13/91; USA Today, Sep 13/91; W Times, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 13/91; AP, Sep 13/91; UPI, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 14/91)
An editorial in a space publication criticized NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for its handling of GOES meteorological satellites. The magazine maintained that the two agencies failed "in their effort to balance the risk of buying new technology with the need to provide assured satellite service." (SP News, Oct 7-13/91)
NASA announced that the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) would resume experiments after four successful chemical releases in the past week. The releases should aid in studying the way that charged particles interact with the Earth's magnetic and electric fields by creating artificial auroras. (NASA Release 91-9; Time, Jan 21/91)
