Scientists studying data from the Magellan radar-mapping satellite around Venus concluded that Venus is not a twin of the Earth. Magellan has produced images 10 times sharper than any seen before of more than 97 percent of the planet's surface. Magellan's images show Venus to be as geologically active as the Earth, but whereas Earth's crust is shaped by continuous recycling, Venus' surface appears to evolve by building crust vertically as lava flows out of volcanoes or meteorite craters. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
NASA said the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite Conference '92, co-sponsored by NASA, Comsat Laboratories, Harris Corporation, and MITRE Corporation, scheduled for November 18-19 in Washington, D. C., would focus on pioneering communications technology developments to provide better service, lower cost, greater convenience, and improved reliability. The conference marked another of NASA's partnerships with industry in developing advanced technologies that create new markets and commercial applications. (NASA Release 92-206)
Weather satellite officials at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration expressed concern about the heightened danger from hurricanes because of delays in modernizing the U.S. weather satellite system. The delays forced the use of antiquated and poorly positioned satellites that raised the risk of forecasting errors. Two hurricanes, Andrew and Iniki, showed the limits of the antiquated satellites. Replacement satellites were stymied by a series of technical failures, delaying the first launching from 1989 to 1994. In the meantime, the United States was borrowing surplus satellites from Europe. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Nov 15/92)
NASA announced that satellite measurements showed that the ozone hole over Antarctica was now the largest on record, being almost three times as large as the area of the United States. Measurements by the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer instrument aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite last Wednesday showed that the south polar territory under the depleted ozone area extended to about 8.9 million square miles, about 15 percent larger than the ozone hole measured in 1991. (NASA Relese 92-159; W Post, Sept 30/92; Time, Oct 5/92; AP, Sept 30/92; UPI, Sept 30/92)
NASA announced that astronomers using a new NASA satellite had detected a powerful, exotic object 2 billion light-years beyond the Milky Way Galaxy. The radiation source was observed by the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Spacecraft launched on June 7. (NASA Release 92-169)
Reuters reported that two telecommunications satellites worth more than 350 million dollars were placed into oribt for Japan and the Arab League after launch from a European base in French Guiana. (Reuters, Feb 26/92)
According to a released congressional study, a three billion dollar U.S. space agency satellite programme to monitor the environment would be useless without massive new computer technology. The study said that NASA would need the new technology to store and distribute the information its satellite programme gathers. The Earth Observing System (EOS) was designed to take continuous measurements of ozone depletion, global warming, polar ice melt, depletion of rainforests, and other environmental developments. But the study also indicated that the data collected by EOS would require vast new ways to store information and make available to a wide range of researchers. (Reuters, Feb 25/92; AP, Feb 25/92)
NASA announced that its Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite had detected an object emitting extreme ultraviolet radiation located outside the Milky Way galaxy through interstellar dust and gas, once thought to block this source of radiation. EUVE also had detected a new source of extreme ultraviolet radiation coming from the corona of a star much like the sun located about 16 light-years from Earth. The EUVE satellite, now six weeks into a survey of the entire sky in extreme ultraviolet wavelengths, was intended to provide astronomers with their first detailed maps in multiple extreme ultraviolet energy bands. (NASA Release 92-138)
NASA announced that more than 200 scientists from 13 countries were participating in a science expedition, spearheaded by NASA, to investigate newly discovered concentrations of harmfull ozone over large regions of southern Africa and Brazil. The ozone pollution was recently uncovered by satellite analysis. (NASA Release 92-155)
A satellite launched to study oceans and global climate was maneuvered into position Monday for months of tests before beginning its mission. The Topex-Poseidon, the first major space mission conducted jointed by the United States and France, was launched August 10 from French Guiana. (AP, Sept 21/92)
Congressional investigators said that the space agency's Earth-observing satellite program was flawed because of risky plans for gathering information from the satellites. (NY Times, Feb 27/92)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported last week that Hermes, the ESA's spaceplane program, already scaled back to an unmanned demonstrator, would have to be downgraded to a technology development program because of budgetary constraints. On another project, ESA's scientists were evaluating data from a test of inter-satellite communications conducted by Eureca, ESA's large, retrievable satellite. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
The Pentagon, bowing to congressional pressure, revealed the existence of the super-secret agency that buys and operates the nation's spy satellites and its other airborne espionage systems. The National Reconnaissance Office's mission is to ensure that the United States has the technology and spaceborne and airborne assets needed to acquire intelligence worldwide, according to the Pentagon. (P Inq, Sept 1992; C Trib, Sept 18/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, said it had won a $13.5 million contract from Brazil's civilian space agency to launch a remote-sensing and date-relay satellite in 1992. (W Times, Sept 2/92)
NASA ground controllers said they had reactivated two key scientific instruments aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and hoped to revive the other eight in coming weeks following two major glitches with the motors that drive the solar power array. The problems had sent the satellite into a quiescent safe mode June 1 and 2. The Microwave Limb Sounder, which helps measure ozone depletion, and the Cryogenic Limb Array Etalon Spectrometer, which has a limited lifetime, were restored to service.  (Space News, Jul 7/92)
NASA announced that it expected to launch a radar satellite in August that would sweep above the Bering Sea off Alaska and beam down a detailed radar snapshot giving the location of every fishing vessel. The project was intended to be the beginning of a foolproof system to police the world's fishing grounds against pirate trawlers. NASA expected to spend $650,000 as its share of a program to transfer its sophisticated technology to commercial uses. (P Inq, Jul 9/92)
NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Company to build a data and information system for the Earth Orbiting System. The program, which would collect environmental data from satellites, was expected to cost NASA about $3 billion. (NASA Release C92-16; NY Times, Sept 30/92; WSJ, Sept 30/92; W Post, Sept 30/92; AvWk, Oct 5/92)
The first meetings of the National Space Policy Assessment Task Group took place on October 1 and 2 in Washington, D. C. The group was considering policy changes to military, civilian, and commercial space efforts and ways to make them work more in tandem now that the Cold War had ended. At the meetings, government officials urged the group's members to privatize the weather satellite system, to call for revamping commercial space rules, and to decry missile proliferation. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
NASA announced that it had selected 31 experiments from the public and private sectors for inclusion in the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Program. Scheduled for launch in early 1993, this national communications facility was to operate as an orbiting testbed for the next generation of commercial communications satellites. A two-year experiment, the ACTS program was designed to offer a unique opportunity for commercial, governmental, and academic organizations to experiment with and to validate new communications satellite technologies. (NASA Release 92-134)
Milton B. Ames Jr., 78, an aeronautical engineer who was mission director for the Pegasus satellite launches using Saturn rockets and who was a recepient of numerous NASA awards, died of heart failure at Mount Vernon Hospital, Alexandria, Virginia. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
Thomson Consumer Electronics, owned by the French electronics concern Thomson SA, said that it would help launch a satellite-to-home television broadcasting system through a venture with the Hughes Electronics division of General Motors Corporation. The system, called DirecTV, would be capable of providing more than 100 channels to 18-in-diameter outdoor satellite dishes. (B Sun, Feb 5/92)
A TRW unit was served with a whistle-blower lawsuit alleging that the firm made fraudulent claims for payments on government satellite contracts. The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, alleged that TRW's Space and Technology group in Redondo California Beach, used improper design standards for the spy, communications, and scientific satellites, then billed the government for the cost of correcting the errors. (LA Times, Mar 26/92)
