NASA announced that a 12-member panel of experts from NASA and NOAA had been named to investigate the failure of the NOAA-13 meteorological satellite. (NASA Release 93-154)
Satellite research supported by NASA found that far fewer trees had been cut in the Amazon rain forest than previously assumed. However, the same study also found that three times as many animal and plant species were being killed or were near extinction than previously had been estimated. (AP, June 6/25; W Post, June 25/93; RTw, June 24/93; NY Times, June 29/93)
French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said that European countries should attempt to cooperate on space projects because progress in technology was a way to assert themselves on the world stage. He made the comment after talking by satellite link with a French cosmonaut who was on a joint Franco-Russian mission.  (RTw, Jul 7/93)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chantilly, Virginia, unveiled the Orbcomm communications satellite, which was  designed to provide global personal communications service.  The company said it planned to initiate Orbcomm service in the United States by mid-1994 and planned worldwide service by 1995.  The Orbcomm system planned to provide low-cost, two-way data communications to users worldwide through a constellation of 26 small satellites. (W Times, Aug 26/93)
NASA said that the U.S.-French Topex-Poseidon satellite had revealed that sea levels dropped 12 inches off the East Coast during the period between October 1992 to March 1993 as cold winter air chilled the Atlantic Ocean and made the water contract. The satellite also found that sea levels rose 12 inches in parts of the Southern Hemisphere, where warm summer air heated the oceans and made the water expand.
Brazil was scheduled to begin a campaign in July  to fight the burning of the Amazon rain forest.  The months from July  to November make up the dry season in the Amazon, and clearing of the rain forest through burning largely occurs in that period.  NASA has agreed to monitor fires through its satellites and other equipment.  (Reuters, Jul 16/93)
NASA reported that the new joint U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite  had observed giant waves measuring up to 40 feet high in the North Atlantic on March 14. The satellite's mission was "to study the dynamics of the currents of the world's oceans by measuring the sea level using a radar altimeter." (W Post, Apr 5/93)
Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, George Smoot, an astrophysicist at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley, California, described his cosmic research work  Using the space-time ripples that were discovered a year ago, Smoot and his group want to explore backward in time toward the universe's origin and forward to the universe of today. In its investigation, the group uses one of the instruments on the Cosmic Background Explorer Satellite to study the microwave radiation that permeates the cosmos. Cosmologists now have what Smoot compares to "a baby photograph of the universe at about five hours into a human lifetime."  That snapshot contains enough information to allow investigators to work backward and forward in time. (CSM, Mar 3/93)
NASA announced that flight tests with a NASA research aircraft last week had demonstrated the first precision automatic approaches and landings using Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) navigation satellite signals.  The procedures were carried out without using complex processing techniques. (NASA Release 93-165)
The 1993-94 season of NASA's Update for Teachers telecasts was scheduled to feature presentations on astronomy, life sciences, research, high-speed aeronautical research, and the environment and global change. The telecasts, a series of four, one-hour, live and interactive education television programs, were broadcast via satellite to schools in all 650 states, Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico between 3-4 p.m. Eastern time.  (NASA Release 93-150)
NASA said that satellite controllers had lost contact with the NOAA-13 satellite on August 21, and preliminary indications were that the spacecraft's power system was not working.  NOAA was the newest in a series of polar-orbiting weather satellites. Designed to monitor the Earth's ocean and atmosphere, it collects meteorological and ocean data for direct transmission to users around the world and to central data processing centers. (NASA Release 93-151)
Government officials reported that a high-altitude weather satellite borrowed from Europe had been positioned to monitor the weather over the United States. It joined the GOES-7 U.S. weather satellite, which had been working alone since its companion satellite failed in 1989. The addition of the European satellite  restored the normal system of having two weather satellites in orbit, one each over the East and West Coasts. (NY Times, Feb 25/93)
NASA announced that during the first six months of their mission scientists using the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanographic satellite had recorded the most accurate measurements to date of global sea level changes. Oceanographers would use the data to calibrate computer models that help forecast future climate changes. (NASA Release 93-122)
NASA announced that the location of a third radiation belt of cosmic rays had been pinpointed several hundred miles above the Earth. A NASA satellite, orbiting 375 above the Earth, had mapped a portion of the new belt. (NASA Release 93-94; AP, May 25/93; B Sun, May 26/93)
Analysis of measurements from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE) satellite confirmed that Mount Pinatubo's eruption in the Philippines in June 1991 had resulted in a temporary cooling of the Earth that equated to a decrease in global surface temperature of approximately 1 degree Fahrenheit (0.5 degree Celsius). The data provided the first conclusive evidence of a significant change in global energy caused by a volcanic eruption. (NASA Release 93-41; P Inq, Mar 5/93; B Sun, Mar 5/93; NY Times, Mar 9/93)
The Danish industry ministry announced that Denmark was scheduled to take part in a scientific satellite project in cooperation with NASA in 1995. The project involved the launch of a small Danish satellite into orbit to study Earth's magnetic field. (RTw, June 21/93)
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology( MIT) and NASA reported that water that evaporates on the equator flows towards the Earth's poles in airborne "rivers" of vapor that can equal the volume in the Amazon. Reginald E. Newell of MIT said that researchers were trying to determine how and why these atmospheric rivers occurred and what role, if any, they played in cyclones and other phenomena. The rivers were discovered using data collected in 1984 and 1991 by NASA's Measurement of Atmospheric Pollution by Satellite program and analyzed by the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. (LA Times, Jan 22/93; B Sun, Jan 22/93; AP, Jan 22/93; W Post, Jan 25/93; NY Times, Jan 26/93)
WorldView Imaging of Livermore, California, received a government license to launch small, inexpensive spy satellites. Worldview claimed that it could take super-sharp photos from 250 feet up and sell the photos for about half the $4,000 charged by the government's Landsat and France's SPOT Image. Possible uses included traffic monitoring, urban planning, and corporate spying. (USA Today, Feb 12/93; NY Times, Feb 12/93)
Callers jammed switchboards at Cape Canaveral, Florida, reporting that a fiery object had lit up the night sky over the Southeast. People in Georgia, Alabama, North Carolina, and Tennessee reported seeing an object streak across the sky about 10 p.m. Tuesday. Some observers said the object hit the ground and exploded. NASA confirmed that it had launched a navigation satellite at that time, but the boosters fell into the Atlantic Ocean as planned, said Gary Peltier, a spokesman at Cape Canaveral. (AP, Feb 3/93; B Sun, Feb 4/93)
Martin Marietta Corporation, which in one three-week period in August, saw one of its rockets explode soon after launch and two of its satellites lose contact with Earth, announced on September 3 that it was undertaking an internal investigation of all phases of its space division. (W Post, Sep 4/93)
A $67 million weather satellite to track storms, floods, and environmental damage went into orbit aboard an Atlas-E-rocket.  It also was scheduled to be used to pinpoint the sites of plane crashes and shipwrecks.  The NOAA-13 satellite reached its 541-mile-high orbit on schedule.  The new satellite, which eventually was scheduled to replace the aging NOAA-11 satellite, was to circle Earth every 103 minutes and view the entire planet twice daily. (NY Times, Aug 10/93; RTw, Aug 10/93
NASA announced that sea surface measurements taken by the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite have confirmed that conditions are ripe for development of an El Nino even in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean this winter. (NASA Release 93-205; USA Today, Nov 10/93)
NASA announced that it had restructured the agreement under which Columbia leases the commercial C-band capacity on board two of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS)
August marked the tenth anniversary of the first use of NASA's Tracking Data and Relay Satellite System (TDRSS).  The system consists of several satellites plus a ground station at White Sands, New Mexico. (Onset Magazine, Aug 2/93)
A two-ton chunk of a Chinese reconnaissance satellite launched earlier this month fell into the Pacific Ocean 1,000 miles west of Peru, the U.S. Space Command said. (USA Today, Oct. 28/93, Oct 29/93; P Inq, Oct 28/93, Oct 29/93; W Post, Oct 28/93, 29/93; NY Times, Oct 26/93)
After making a final series of engine maneuvers that brought it within reach of the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca), a free-flying platform of science experiments, the commander of Shuttle Endeavour plucked the satellite out of space and stowed it in the Shuttle's cargo hold for return to earth.
A $220 million Landsat 6 Earth Observation satellite was launched into the wrong orbit, and ground controllers were unable to make contact with the satellite, according to a mission spokeswoman for Earth Observation Satellite Company (ESAT). The satellite was supposed to go into orbit over the poles during a five-year mission studying the Earth's environment. An ESAT official said that the company hoped to get the satellite into the proper orbit by the end of the week.  (W Post, Oct 6/93; USA Today, AP, Oct 6/93)
New software, the New Spectral Imaging Processing System (NEWSIPS), was giving researchers a remarkably improved look at data from NASA's International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), the space agency's longest-running astronomical satellite in Earth orbit. (NASA Release 93-164)
NASA announced that new information on the El Nino ocean current would be discussed at a briefing on the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite mission on February 26. The satellite was launched in August 1992 to map circulation of the world's oceans and study the oceans' role in climate. (NASA Release N93-08)
Europe's Arianespace Inc announced that it had signed a launch contract for two intelsat VIII satellites. The satellites were to be built by General Electric Corporation's Astro Space Division and launched in 1996 from a site in French Guiana. (W Times, Mar 5/93)
The AP reported that the nonprofit group SatelLife, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, last year had launched a low-orbiting satellite that "talks" to the Internet and coordinates the Healthnet message-relay service connected with the satellite. The service makes it possible for remote regions of the world to receive much-needed medical advice. (AP, May 24/93)
At a recent meeting in St. Louis, astrophysicists discussed the mystery of blasts of gamma rays that appear every few days from somewhere, but never from the same place. After reviewing new satellite observations and discussing various theories, experts could not even determine where the gamma ray bursters, as they are called, were coming from.
