NASA announced that the 12-member panel investigating the failure of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)-13 meteorological satellite in August 1993 had concluded that the probable cause was a short circuit that prevented the solar array current from powering the spacecraft and recharging the batteries. The short circuit probably resulted from a 1.25 inch screw that extended too far below an aluminum plate and penetrated the insulation. The board made recommendations for future NOAA spacecraft; NASA supervised the design and construction of the weather satellites. (NASA Release 94-157; P Inq, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
NASA was commended for raising the problem of debris mitigation in space to a high policy goal and for being in the process of drawing up a detailed rule book for its spacecraft designers, launchers, and operators to avoid creating debris. The commercial sector was the unknown in this regard, particularly with reference to communications satellites. The matter was a vital one because over the years several satellites were lost for unknown causes and may have been victims of "space junk." (NY Times, May 17/94)
NASA announced that the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-8 had successfully completed basic engineering testing and was beginning to provide more precise data for improved weather forecasting. The older GOES-7 was to be shifted further west to cover storms approaching from the Pacific. (NASA Release N94-77; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 9/94)
An article on electronic navigation and the Global Positioning System (GPS) using 24 satellites described the advantages of GPS and its uses. The article reported that using GPS and a sophisticated flight computer aboard a 737 aircraft owned by NASA, more than 36 "hands-off" precision landings were completed at Wallops Island airfield in Virginia. (C Trib, Aug 7/94)
A dispute of possible long-term import with hundreds of millions of dollars at stake appeared to be brewing between NASA and the television industry over local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), pitting the satellite industry against proponents of this low-cost alternative to cable television. Further, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was approaching an auction of some airwaves for a new generation of wireless communications services. Charles Force, NASA Associate Administrator for space communications, stated that "It appears that there is a significant possibility for interference with LMDS from satellite uplinks; this was no secret to the FCC." He suggested a four-year delay in LMDS service to deal with interference in the disputed 27.5-to-30-gigahertz spectrum band. The FCC believed that LMDS can coexist with satellite use and was preparing to authorize nationwide deployment of LMDS. (LA Times, Jan 12/94)
China recently suffered a fire at its Xichang Long March launch facility, damaging a Fengyun II weather satellite and adjacent work areas. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
The Paris-based Euroconsult organization assessed world space markets through the year 2004. The European think tank studied U.S., Asian, and European space and communications companies, agencies, and analysts. It concluded that new communication programs would result in a $95 billion to $115 billion global market for satellites, ground stations, and launch services during the period and that U.S. industry was increasing its share of that market. (AvWk, Aug 29/94)
An article highlighted the benefits satellite reporting could provide for various earthly activities. An example given was the way in which Frank Lamb, president of Eastern Oregon Farming Company and Cropix, Inc., who had a grant from NASA's Earth Observation Commercialization Applications Program, used satellite observations to check on the health of plants in his Oregon farm by determining the rate of photosynthesis. The images enabled a farmer to detect problems such as irrigation-equipment failure, drainage problems, and pest infestation. Satellite images were also used by the South Florida Water Management District to update its maps and identify illegal tampering of wetlands, as well as to create maps of Midwest flood areas for damage and rebuilding plans. (USA Today, Aug 9/94)
The Hughes Network Systems telecommunication firm contracted with the Hawaiian corporation ITTI to install a high-speed satellite link dubbed "Teleport Asia" between the Eastern and Western hemispheres on the island of Oahu, with twin Earth stations facing toward Asia and North America. (W Times, Jan 19/94)
NASA agreed to launch in January 1996 South Africa's first satellite, Sunsat, which was developed at Stellenbosch University near Cape Town. A four-member NASA team evaluated the Stellenbosch project and offered the university a free launch in return for minor additions of U.S. equipment. Stellenbosch project leader Garth Milne said the satellite would deliver high-resolution multispectral stereo images of the Earth and would carry amateur radio equipment that would allow children to talk to the satellite. NASA structural engineer Marisa Achee said NASA was keen to launch Sunsat because it could carry a U.S. Global Positioning System receiver and a laser reflector needed to monitor variations in the Earth's gravitational field. The university was scheduled to control the satellite during its four-year life. (Reuters, Jul 29/94)
The government announced that it would allow companies to market sophisticated spy satellite technology worldwide. U.S. firms could build and operate for-profit satellite systems powerful enough to take photographs from 22,300 miles above the Earth and show objects on the ground as small as one square yard. (NY Times, Mar 11/94; USA Today, Mar 11/94; W Post, Mar 11/94; WSJ, Mar 11/94)
NASA announced that it had selected eight projects that could lead to new private sector applications of space-based and airborne sensing technologies. Named Earth Observations Commercial Applications (EOCAP) '94, the projects represented the fourth cycle in a continuing program designed to increase use of NASA-developed technology for gathering and analyzing valuable data about Earth and ocean resources through remote satellite or aircraft observations. (NASA Release 94-203)
The matter of space science research--its cost and its usefulness--was discussed in a feature article. Such research developed more or less as an afterthought, but it had already proved valuable in such ways as making precise measurements of the thickness of clouds and dust to enable automated weather satellites. Assessing the legitimacy of the high costs involved was more difficult, but valuable scientific findings had resulted, such as changing ideas about how different levels of compression at the top and bottom of the lung affected the way the lung functioned and contradicting expectations about how the circulation of blood in the body worked. (Boston Globe, Sep 19/94)
Systems Integration Group, TRW's Fairfax, Virginia-based subsidiary, was awarded a NASA contract for $173 million to manage a network of computerized ground stations receiving data from government satellites that observe the earth's environment and climate changes. (W Post, Jan 6/94)
China's space agency said that the April 2 blast that killed one person and injured 20 would not delay the launching of three foreign communications satellites from the Xichang Satellite Launching Center in southwestern China. The three satellites were manufactured by Hughes Space and Communications Company for Hong Kong and Australian customers. (NY Times, Apr 27/94)
Observations from Space Shuttles and other vehicles revealed a clearly visible line stretching for hundreds of miles across the Pacific Ocean. The dark green line, from one to several miles wide, was attributed by scientists to an abundance of microscopic plants that thrived where cold, nutrient-rich water from polar seas met warm equatorial currents. New observations of the interaction between these two currents were made from the NOAA-11 weather satellite and NASA's P-3 research aircraft flying 500 feet above the water. (NY Times, Oct 25/94; AP, Oct 31/94)
