Scientists at the University of Texas at Dallas revealed their discovery of an ancient river channel buried beneath the Sahara Desert in Africa, publishing their findings in Science magazine. The discovery offered an answer to a question that had long perplexed the scientific community, why does the Nile River, as it flows through the world’s largest desert (in Sudan) make a huge, looping bend in its course? The Nile generally flows toward the north, except at the Great Bend’s turning, where the river flows toward the southwest for more than 200 miles (320 kilometers). After this detour, the Nile resumes its course toward the Mediterranean Sea. The researchers had used the images taken by the Spaceborne Imaging Radar C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR), which had flown with Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59 in 1994, to study the ancient structures in the Precambrian rock, guiding the river’s course. The SIR-C/X-SAR radar waves had penetrated the sand to reveal unseen structures, not visible without the satellite images. Diane L. Evans, SIR-C Project Manager at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), called the discovery “one of the most exciting discoveries from the SIRC/XSAR mission to date.” JPL was managing the program as a part of NASA’s Mission to Planet Earth initiative.(Robert J. Stern and Mohamed Gamal, “The Origin of the Great Bend of the Nile from SIR-C/X-SAR Imagery,” Science 274, no. 5293 (6 December 1996): 1696−1698; NASA, “Space Radar Unearths Secrets of the Ancient Nile,” news release 96-251, 6 December 1996.)
With the push of a button at GSFC, NASA discontinued use of the International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite, which had been in orbit since 1978. When NASA sent a signal to the satellite to empty its fuel, the satellite effectively went to sleep, spinning off into space. Although NASA had originally designed the satellite to spend only three years in space, scientists continued to use it to gather data far beyond the spacecraft’s anticipated lifespan. NASA ended control of the satellite to save between US$1 and US$2 million annually in operating costs. GSFC had operated the satellite as part of a three-way agreement with the European Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom. More than 2,000 researchers from around the world had made observations from the satellite, research that had directly led to the publication of more than 3,200 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals.
crew intended to retract the tether until the satellite was about 2 miles (3 kilometers) from the
to jam. The U.S.- Italian satellite had cost US$443 million to produce. The satellite, extended on
mission’s priorities was to place in flight the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS), which
other spacecraft. NASA planned to fly the satellite for 22 hours. To retrieve the satellite, the
