NASA’s Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft captured a video of a “short-lived but extremely bright explosion in the atmosphere of the sun.” The explosion was 55,000 miles (89,000 kilometers) long, 200 miles (322 kilometers) wide, and traveled at a rate of 2 million miles (3.2 million kilometers) per hour. The explosions overlapped each other and “snapped,” releasing “vast amounts of energy” as solar flares. Solar flares cause magnetic disturbances that disrupt satellites and power supplies if directed at Earth. In April, NASA had launched the TRACE spacecraft, with a telescope 10 times more powerful than any other telescope focused on the Sun. The telescope studied the transitional region of the Sun’s atmosphere, between the relatively cool surface of the lower atmosphere, with temperatures of 6,000°C (11,000°F), and the corona or upper atmosphere, where temperatures reach 1.7 million°C (35 million°F). The telescope was able to photograph ultraviolet light and to show temperature variations using false colors.(Mark Prigg, “Photos Reveal Sun’s Power,” Sunday Times (London), 7 June 1998; Leonard Novarro for Reuters, “Solar Flare May Disrupt Worldwide Communication,” 8 June 1998.)
The PanAmSat-owned Galaxy IV, a five-year old communications satellite, “lost its bearings” so that its antennas were not directed toward Earth, causing the “worst outage in 37 years since communications satellites first entered service.” Most of the 45 million pagers in the United States were unable to function during the outage, which “severed electronic links vital to thousands of retailers, news organizations, and broadcasters.” PanAmSat officials said that an attitude-control mechanism failed for an unknown reason and a backup processor failed to turn on, causing the satellite to rotate. At that point, hundreds of thousands of satellite dishes in the United States lost contact with Galaxy IV.(Mike Mills, “Satellite Glitch Cuts Off Data Flow,” Washington Post, 21 May 1998.)
NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration awarded a US$423 million contract to Hughes Space and Communications of El Segundo, California, to manufacture and launch up to four weather-monitoring Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). The basic contract covered the manufacture and launch of two spacecraft. Separate fixed-price options for two additional spacecraft would cost US$190 million and US$185 million. The spacecraft would carry instruments to provide regular measurements of the Earth’s atmosphere, cloud cover, and land surfaces. Two spacecraft would also carry the Solar X-ray Imager and Space Environment Monitor instruments. These four spacecraft, known as GOES-N, -O, -P, and -Q were to continue, enhancing the services of the current GOES-I through -M series, a “mainstay of modern weather forecasting.” The GOES series provided meteorologists and hydrologists with “visible and infrared images of weather systems, and precise atmospheric soundings.” The positions of the spacecraft in orbit would allow scientists to monitor storms when they were first forming in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.(NASA, “Hughes Selected To Build Weather Satellites,” contract announcement release C98-B, 28 January 1998. 404 Robyn Suriano, “Atlas Launches on Fourth Try: Classified Craft Likely To Serve as Orbital Switchboard,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 January 1998.)
A month after its launch, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) began activating the weather satellite, Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-10 (GOES- 10), a backup to the failing GOES-9 satellite. The momentum wheels on GOES-9, similar to a gyroscope, which maintain the satellite’s stability, were “showing signs of impending failure.” GOES-9 was responsible for monitoring weather on the west coast of the United States. GOES- 10, placed in storage mode above the center of the country, would need about 30 days, moving approximately 1o of longitude each day, to move to the west coast location. GOES-10’s well- timed placement in storage mode would ensure data continuity, saving NOAA a 12- to 15-month wait for a time slot for launch, following the imminent failure of GOES-9.(Associated Press, “Failing Weather Satellite Replaced,” 10 July 1998.)
Satellites survived the annual Leonid meteor storm with no major damage. Astronomers had predicted the storm would be the most intense in three decades, because Comet Tempel-Tuttle had swung closer to the Sun in February, as it does every 33 years, creating a greater-than- average amount of comet dust. Scientists had feared that particles traveling at 43 miles (69 kilometers) per second could shred satellites’ solar arrays, damage sensitive instruments, or cause circuits to short.
PanAmSat Corporation announced the impairment of a critical subsystem of its Galaxy VII spacecraft. A spokesperson for the company said that engineers had not yet determined whether the problem was the same as that which caused the failure of the Galaxy IV spacecraft on 19 May. Both the primary and backup systems keeping the Galaxy IV correctly pointed toward Earth-bound controllers had failed, but although the Galaxy VII had lost its primary system, its backup system had continued to function properly. Hughes Electronics Corporation’s Space and Communications Company, the manufacturer of the two satellites, was investigating the failures. Both satellites were HS601 models, the world’s “best-selling large communications satellite,” with customers including the U.S. Navy, NASA, the government of Mexico, and communications companies throughout the world.(Robert Covington for Reuters, “Second PanAmSat Satellite Encounters Problems,” 2 July 1998.)
NASA announced that astronomers had located the “wayward” SOHO satellite after losing radio contact on 24 June, when a programming error on the ground caused its solar panels to switch positions. Two U.S. radio telescopes had located the satellite rotating slowly near its original position, approximately 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth. Engineers had calculated its exact location after NASA’s Deep Space Network in Goldstone, California, “intercepted the echo of a radio signal transmitted by the giant radio telescope of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center in Arecibo, Puerto Rico.” The spacecraft’s slow rotation on its axis indicated that it had incurred only minor damage and that its solar panels would soon face the Sun again.(Agence France-Presse, “U.S.-European Satellite Located by Engineers,” 28 July 1998.)
Officials from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported that they had placed GOES-8, the weather satellite responsible for monitoring the East Coast, in a “safe hold shutdown,” after it had developed problems with its attitude sensors. GOES-10 was then required to watch the entire country, although it could provide images only every 30 minutes, instead of every 15 minutes, as it did when each of the two satellites was able to monitor half of the United States. NASA officials were especially concerned about monitoring East Coast weather, because of worry that winds from Hurricane Mitch, located over the coast of Central America, could interfere with the upcoming launch of the Space Shuttle carrying veteran astronaut, U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr.(Randolph E. Schmid for Associated Press, “East Weather Satellite Shuts Down,” 28 October 1998.)
Hughes Electronics Corporation concluded its investigation into the 19 May failure of PanAmSat’s Galaxy IV satellite and the similar problems that later had affected two other satellites. Metallic crystals growing in space, “less than the width of a human hair,” had caused tin-plated electrical switches to short, disabling navigational devices that kept the satellites oriented toward Earth-based controllers. However, the investigation had failed to uncover the source of the failure of Galaxy IV’s backup system, which led to the widespread blackout on 19 May.(Aaron Pressman for Reuters, “Tiny Crystals Waylaid Satellites, Hughes Says,” 11 August 1998.)
Hughes Global Services Inc. announced the success of its salvage mission to a stranded Asia Satellite Telecommunications Company Ltd. communications satellite. The 3.8-ton (3,500- kilogram or 3.5-tonne) AsiaSat 3 had remained stranded in a useless orbit since its December 1997 launch. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had received US$200 million from insurers. The insurers had told Hughes Global Services to find a new customer, if the salvage mission was successful. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had originally intended AsiaSat 3 to provide television and telephone service in Asia, but the Russian-built launcher had malfunctioned, and the satellite’s orbit had gone awry, rendering it useless. Hughes Global Services had taken possession of the satellite, implementing a “seemingly improbable” mission to salvage the spacecraft. Hughes had sent the satellite around the Moon twice, using the Moon’s gravity to help correct the satellite’s orbit around the Earth, and declared the salvage mission a success, even though the satellite was not stationary, which would limit the number of customers who might lease or buy it.(Andrew Pollack for Associated Press, “Rescue Effort Puts a Satellite in Viable Orbit,” New York Times, 19 June 1998; Associated Press, “US Satellites,” 19 June 1998.)
NASA announced that experts from the ESA and Matra Marconi Space, the prime contractor for the SOHO spacecraft, had met at GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to assess the situation of the noncommunicating spacecraft and to analyze the satellite’s status in the event that ground controllers reestablished contact with it. Participants at the meeting named as cochairs of a joint inquiry board to investigate the incident, Professor Massimo Trella, the ESA’s Inspector General, and Michael A. Greenfield, Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters.(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Inquiry Board Co-Chairs Named,” news release 98- 118, 30 June 1998.)
