NASA announced that the WIRE Mishap Investigation Board had concluded that NASA’s Wide- Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) satellite had failed after its 4 March 1999 launch, “because of an incorrectly designed electronics box.” The premature firing of explosive devices⎯the pyrotechnics⎯had caused the instrument’s telescope cover to eject too early in the mission, thus exposing the instrument’s frozen hydrogen to the Sun. The frozen hydrogen was necessary to cool the telescope’s infrared detectors. The satellite had lost the frozen hydrogen within 48 hours of its launch, rendering the instrument incapable of carrying out its scientific mission. Darrell R. Branscome, Deputy Associate Administrator (Enterprise Development) for NASA’s Office of Space Flight and chairperson of the eight-member investigation team, emphasized that there had been no component failure, but “simply a case of a design error that allowed power to get to the explosive charges before it should have.” The board’s report also concluded that engineers had failed to identify the design errors in the circuitry controlling the pyrotechnical functions. Unlike the other systems in the satellite, the electronics box design had received no peer review.(NASA, “Investigation Finds Design Errors Caused WIRE Spacecraft Failure,” news release 99-74, 25 June 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-074.txt (accessed 11 February 2008).)
Mario Dario Grossi, radio physicist and engineer, died at the age of 74 in Boston, Massachusetts. Grossi developed the concept of tethered satellites and the hardware to make them possible. Together with a colleague, Grossi had conducted most of his work at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Grossi had first approached NASA with his concept in 1972, and in 1982 NASA had issued a contract to build a system. In July 1992, NASA had tested the tether in space when astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-46 “reeled out a half-ton [450- kilogram or 0.45-tonne] satellite of the Italian Space Agency dangling on a spaghetti-thin cord 12 miles [19 kilometers] long.” The successful test had provided data that would assist engineers in applying the tether satellite technology to build space stations or in “operating instrument- laden satellites far from the [S]huttle.”(Wolfgang Saxon, “M. Grossi, 74; Created Tether for Satellites,” New York Times, 18 January 1999.)
Brazilian space officials, having lost contact with their country’s Saci-1 satellite days after its launch, asked NASA to help them rescue the US$4.6 million satellite. Saci-1 had launched on 14 October from China along with another satellite, the CBERS-1, which the two countries had built jointly. Brazil asked NASA to photograph the satellite, check its condition, and devise a plan for its recovery. President of the Brazilian Space Agency Luis Meira Filho remarked that Brazil had not given “the satellite up for lost,” because space officials knew its location. The CBERS-1 satellite was functioning normally and had returned images of Brazil.(Reuters, “Brazil Asks NASA Help To Rescue Lost Satellite,” 21 October 1999.)
NASA announced that its new orbiting SeaWinds radar instrument, flying aboard the QuikSCAT satellite, was successfully tracking Iceberg B10A, which had broken off the Thwaites glacier of Antarctica in 1992, drifting into a shipping lane. Earlier in 1999, Iceberg B10A had disappeared when conventional methods of tracking sea-surface ice⎯ships’ radar, shipping reports, optical images from satellites, and microwave sensor data⎯were unable to track it. David G. Long of the SeaWinds science team at Utah’s Brigham Young University remarked that, although “a ship was dispatched to the iceberg’s last known position, we were unable to find it until we started receiving data from the SeaWinds instrument in July.” During its first pass over Antarctica, SeaWinds had spotted the iceberg, and the National Ice Center in Suitland, Maryland, had confirmed that the iceberg was B10A. Scientists had continued to track it as it moved through the Drake Passage and headed northeast between Tierra del Fuego, at the southern tip of South America, and the Antarctic Peninsula. At that time, the National Ice Center had issued an iceberg navigation warning to Argentina.(NASA, “New NASA Ocean Radar Watches for Breakup of Giant Iceberg,” news release 99-102, 3 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-102.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA announced its selection of three very small satellites, each about 16 inches (41 centimeters) across and 8 inches (20 centimeters) high, to conduct the Nanosat Constellation Trailblazer mission, the fifth mission in NASA’s New Millennium program. NASA had developed the New Millennium program to test technology for future missions, with the goal of dramatically reducing the weight, size, and costs of missions, while simultaneously increasing science capabilities. NASA scheduled the US$28 million Nanosat Constellation mission to launch in 2003 as a secondary payload on an expendable launch vehicle.(NASA, “NASA Selects Miniature Spacecraft To Test Space Technology,” news release 99-95, 19 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-095.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA announced the end of the scientific mission of its WIRE satellite, after the craft released into space its entire supply of frozen hydrogen, a critical element of the mission. Preliminary reports indicated that the satellite had released the primary telescope cover three days earlier than planned, exposing the telescope’s cryostat to sunlight. The sunlight had warmed the frozen hydrogen in the cryostat, which was supposed to maintain the telescope’s temperature, causing the hydrogen to vent into space at a much higher rate than planned. Ground controllers believed the fast venting of the hydrogen had caused the satellite to spin, but they did not yet know what had caused the release of the telescope cover.(NASA, “Wire Spacecraft Instrument Runs Out of Hydrogen,” news release 99-37, 8 March 1999.)
