NASA announced that its Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS) had detected water vapor throughout interstellar space. However, in the very coldest areas, where temperatures are only 30° above absolute zero, the satellite had detected far less water vapor than most theories had predicted. In those areas, SWAS measurements had indicated water vapor concentrations of only a few parts per billion. Ronald L. Snell of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst remarked that the finding presented a “real puzzle to our understanding of the chemistry of interstellar clouds.” In warmer regions, such as those within star-producing gas clouds, SWAS had measured water concentrations as much as 10,000 times greater than in the coldest regions. The new results were the product of 18 months of observations using the compact radio observatory, launched in 1998 on a mission to “study the composition of interstellar gas clouds and their collapse to form new stars.”(NASA, “Cosmic Gas Clouds Yield Puzzling Concentrations of Water,” news release 00-126, 16 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-126.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
NASA made data from its Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) available to the public. ASTER, a general-purpose imaging instrument featuring 14 spectral bands, extremely high spatial resolution, and stereo-imaging capabilities, had launched aboard NASA’s Terra satellite in December 1999. One of ASTER’s primary goals was “to acquire a one-time cloud-free image of the entire land surface of Earth,” intended as a baseline image for monitoring environmental change.(NASA, “Terra Satellite’s ASTER Data Now Available to the Public,” news release 2000-124, 5 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/terra.html (accessed 7 April 2008).)
The ESA signed a four-year contract with two industry groups⎯Sarcom, led by Spot Image of Toulouse, France, and the Emma consortium, led by Eurimage of Rome⎯granting the two groups “priority access to the Envisat radar remote-sensing satellite” scheduled for launch in 2001, as well as imagery from the ERS-2 spacecraft, already in orbit. About the new business relationship, a major policy shift for the ESA, Acting Envisat Mission Manager Günther Kohlhammer remarked that the ESA had realized that it needed to change so that it could develop new markets. The contract gave commercial orders for the satellite images priority over scientific requests, setting new limits on the type and number of users ESA would grant access to data without paying commercial prices.(Peter B. de Selding, “ESA Hands Radar Satellite Responsibility to Industry,” Space News, 30 October 2000.)
Iridium Satellite LLC announced that the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York had approved its bid to purchase the operating assets, property, and intellectual property of Iridium LLC. Iridium Satellite LLC would continue providing commercial satellite communication services to the U.S. government.(Iridium LLC, “Statement for Iridium Satellite LLC,” news release, 15 November 2000. 299)
In the second on-orbit failure of Hughes Electronic Corporation’s HS601-model satellite, the Spacecraft Control Processor (SCP) of Mexico’s Solidaridad I communications satellite malfunctioned, disrupting television, radio, and pager services. The first incident had occurred on the Galaxy IV satellite, causing similar communications disruptions in the United States during 1998. In the current malfunction, operators in Iztapalapa and Hermosillo received a series of alarms indicating that the only functioning SCP on board the Satmex-owned craft had turned itself off. The satellite had two SCPs on board and needed only one to carry out its communications relay properly, but Solidaridad I already was running on its backup SCP, having lost its first processor a year ago. Engineers suspected that the cause of the incident was the growth of a tiny crystalline structure that leads to electrical shorts. Hughes investigators had identified this type of malfunction in their satellites containing tin-plated relay switches and, therefore, had begun to use nickel-plated switches in new satellites to prevent future occurrences of such electrical shorts. However, Solidaridad I, designed for 14 years of service in space, had launched in 1993 before the conversion to nickel-plated switches. The Solidaridad series, comprising two satellites, provided service to all of Mexico, also extending to the southwestern United States, the Caribbean, and Central and South America. The malfunction led to the loss of educational television programming in 12,000 schools in Mexico, mostly in remote rural areas where some students rely entirely on televised courses. Satmex was transferring Solidaridad I users to the three other satellites in its fleet.(Justin Ray, “Satellite Failure Causes Communications Blackout,” Spaceflight Now, 29 August 2000. 280)
The National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Integrated Program Office (IPO) selected Raytheon Company to provide imaging-sensor instruments for the new NPOESS craft, which would replace the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Polar- Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellites (POES) and the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites. Under a contract valued at US$152.8 million, Raytheon would design, develop, and test the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) instrument and develop the algorithms to produce environmental data records from VIIRS data.(Associated Press, “Raytheon Awarded $152.8 Million Contract for Meteorological Satellite Imaging Sensor,” 28 November 2000.)
After detailing only a few computer glitches, which had occurred during the dreaded Y2K transition, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA had narrowly avoided a Y2K data flaw that might have redirected the orbit of its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. According to NASA’s Chief Information Officer, the software that transmitted the commands directing satellite orbits had automatically reverted to 1 January 1999 commands, when it should have used 1 January 2000 commands. Attentive operators caught the potential problem before the software had sent the faulty data to any satellites. Although the episode accentuated the seriousness of the Y2K computer transition, it was notable that, in spite of the risks, very few computer crashes actually occurred during the changeover.(Paula Shaki Trimble, “NASA Discovered Last-Minute Y2K Glitch,” Federal Computer Week, 4 January 2000. 859 NASA, “Mars Program Independent Assessment Team Begins Work,” news release 00-6, 7 January 2000.)
The board appointed to investigate the mishap that had damaged the High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) spacecraft in preflight testing announced its findings. The investigators had discovered that the computer controlling the vibration device had sensed an abnormally high level of static friction and had responded by delivering approximately 10 times the exertion of gravity suitable for the test. A slight misalignment of the shaker mechanism had proved just enough to throw off the preflight testing. The board had determined that the accident had been avoidable. Routine maintenance and a pretest of the testing device itself would have caught the problem before any damage had occurred. NASA planned for the HESSI satellite to undergo repairs at the University of California at Berkeley.(NASA, “Board Finds Cause of HESSI Mishap,” news release 00-80, 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “NASA Identifies Causes of Test Accident that Broke Spacecraft,” 12 May 2000.)
The Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000) officially commenced in South Africa’s Northern Province, with the gathering of scientists from 14 nations and six South African universities. NASA, alongside the University of Witwatersrand, led SAFARI 2000, their goal to “determine how the region’s natural ecosystems and human land use affect air quality and atmospheric conditions.” The initiative would use specially equipped planes to make four scientific flights each week, over a six-week period, through September 2000. A modern ER-2 version of the U-2 spy plane would fly directly under the Terra satellite as it passed over various regions of southern Africa, to verify the satellite’s data. Three other aircraft would also fly with the ER-2 “like a stack of pancakes,” with the ER-2 flying at about 65,000 feet (19,800 meters) to conduct remote sensing, a Convair 580 aircraft collecting air and gas samples just below the ER- 2, and two Aerocommander 690A aircraft conducting similar tests at between 5,000 and 12,000 feet (1,500 and 3,700 meters).(Justin Arenstein for Africa News Service, “Africa’s Biggest Science Experiment Kicks Off,” 14 August 2000; Africa News Service, “NASA Project Off to a Flying Start,” 14 August 2000.)
