The International Astronomical Union announced that astronomers had found 11 new moons around the planet Jupiter. The discovery increased the total number of known satellites around Jupiter to 39, more than any other planet in the solar system. Using the Canada-France-Hawaii telescope, astronomers from Cambridge University and the University of Hawaii had first detected the moons in December 2001. At 1- to 2-miles (1.6- to 3.2-kilometers) across, the newly discovered moons were far smaller than some of Jupiter’s other moons, which are thousands of miles (or kilometers) wide. In addition, the astronomers had discovered that the satellites have irregular orbits and, unlike the planet’s largest moons, spin in the opposite direction of Jupiter. The moons’ irregular orbits around Jupiter indicate that they may have originally orbited the Sun.(Usha Lee McFarling, “11 New Moons of Jupiter Found,” Los Angeles Times, 17 May 2002; NASA JPL, “Astronomers Discover 11 More Small Moons of Jupiter,” news release, 17 May 2002.)
Engineers succeeded in returning NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) spacecraft to full operational status. Some of the satellite’s guidance components had failed in December 2001, and engineers had feared that the mission would terminate prematurely. Mission engineers on Earth had been able to revive FUSE with a new, innovative guidance system, which used the satellite’s electromagnets to push and pull on Earth’s magnetic field, thereby pointing the satellite in the desired direction. Engineers had originally developed the innovative guidance system as a contingency for a failure of this type, but NASA had never before used the system to navigate a satellite with the accuracy required for scientific observations.(NASA, “NASA’s FUSE Satellite Lit Again,” news release 02-45, 6 March 2002; Johns Hopkins University Department of Physics and Astronomy, “Fuse Mission Status Report” (mission status report no. 56, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 25 March 2002), http://fuse.pha.jhu.edu/facts/ miss_rep56.html (accessed 10 August 2008).)
NASA and the USGS announced a partnership to acquire data from the Earth Observing-1 (EO- 1) satellite and to provide that data to the private sector for applications such as land-cover analysis, ecosystem monitoring, and petroleum prospecting. NASA and the USGS made the announcement one year after the launch of EO-1, a year in which the spacecraft’s nine breakthrough instruments had all successfully satisfied test objectives. The instruments included Earth-viewing technologies, such as a hyperspectral imager that could view Earth’s surface with unprecedented spectral discrimination and an Advanced Land Imager that could provide better views of Earth than NASA’s Landsat, at a lower cost. Under the terms of the agreement, NASA would maintain command and control of the EO-1, and the USGS would take orders for spacecraft data at prices set to cover the nearly US$5 million annual cost of operating the satellite, processing data, and interacting with customers.(NASA, “Technology Mission Accomplished, NASA Goes for More,” news release 02-12, 18 January 2002.)
The National Weather Service Aviation Weather Center in Kansas City, Missouri, placed in operation a computer-based warning system called the Current Icing Potential (CIP), designed to alert aviation controllers to the potential for icing along flight routes. The National Center for Atmospheric Research had developed the warning system with funding from the FAA. The CIP used information from satellite data, ground observations, and other sources to produce information on the likelihood of airplanes experiencing icing along flight routes. The FAA had supported the development of the CIP to improve flight planning and aircraft safety.(Federal Aviation Administration’s R&D Review, Spring 2003, 2, 6, 11, http://www.airporttech.tc.faa.gov/RD/2003_spring.pdf (accessed 3 March 2009).)
Data from NASA’s Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) satellite provided support for a decades- old, unproven theory that winds converge in two large areas near Earth’s equator, driving ocean circulation south of the equator. The two areas, known as the northern and southern portions of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, are part of a belt circling Earth near the equator, where trade winds of both the northern and southern hemispheres converge. The region affects north-south atmospheric circulation, significantly influencing precipitation and temperatures in many regions of the globe. Previously, researchers had identified the double Intertropical Convergence Zone as a limited seasonal phenomenon. However, since 1969 the zone’s existence, location, and seasonality had remained controversial. The QuikSCAT data confirmed, not only that the double Intertropical Convergence Zone exists all year long, but also that it is more extensive than scientists had suspected. The finding provided important information about how Earth’s atmosphere and oceans interact near the equator, data that could assist scientists in climate modeling and weather forecasting.(NASA JPL, “Satellite Sees Double Zone of Converging Tropical Winds Around the World,” news release, 9 July 2002; W. T. Liu and X. Xie, “Double Intertropical Convergence Zones―A New Look Using Scatterometer,” Geophysical Research Letters 29, no. 22 (30 November 2002): 2072.)
With the aid of NASA’s High Energy Transient Explorer (HETE), scientists were able to capture the first images ever taken of an unusual gamma-ray burst (GRB) that signals the birth of a new black hole. With the exception of the Big Bang, GRBs are the most powerful type of explosion known. The bursts last for only a few seconds, yet their afterglows can last for days or even longer. However, scientists had been unable to detect an optical afterglow produced by a fast- fading type of dark GRB―until the HETE indicated that such a burst was occurring. NASA had created the satellite to alert ground-based observatories to GRBs. On 11 December 2002, HETE had detected a GRB and, within 22 seconds, had notified observatories of the event’s location. In the following minutes, ground-based telescopes captured images of the burst’s afterglow, which disappeared in 2 hours. The event was a rare subcategory of dark GRBs known as a transitional bursta burst with an afterglow lasting longer than that of the short-duration type, but shorter than that of a long-duration burst. Moreover, these transitional bursts are the rarest type of GRB. Scientists hoped the images would help them learn more about the causes of GRB in general, as well as providing specific data indicating the reason that dark bursts have no detectable afterglow.(NASA, “Scientists Catch Their First Elusive ‘Dark’ Gamma-Ray Burst,” news release 02-257, 23 December 2002.)
U.S. Navy officials announced that the Navy had been using NASA satellite data in combat, the first time the military had done so. The officials stated that the Navy had used unclassified NASA data to help guide ships and planes engaged in combat operations in Afghanistan. Major media reported that members of Congress had voiced mixed reactions to the announcement, with some members expressing their concern that the cooperation between NASA and the military would overstep the bounds of NASA’s civilian charter.(Houston Chronicle, “NASA Satellite Guides Navy Warplanes, Ships,” 12 April 2002.)
ESA reported research indicating that the universe might be older than scientists had previously estimated and that a common method of estimating the age of celestial bodies might be incorrect. A group of scientists had analyzed the XMM-Newton satellite’s x-ray observations of the distant but exceptionally luminous quasar APM 08279+5255 and found that the quasar contains three times more iron than the Sun. Because exploding stars release iron, which increases across the universe over time, the scientists had expected APM 08279+5255 to have less iron than Earth’s relatively older solar system. The scientists noted that the surprising quantity of iron in the distant quasar could be the result of an unknown phenomenon that produces iron very efficiently. However, they suggested that the more likely explanation for the finding was that the conventional method of measuring the age of celestial objects by estimating the objects’ redshifta property of the light emitted by such objectswas flawed.(ESA, “Is the Universe Older Than Expected?” ESA news release, 10 July 2002; Günther Hasinger, Norbert Schartel, and Stefanie Komossa, “Discovery of an Ionized Fe K Edge in the z=3.91 Broad Absorption Line Quasar APM 08279+5255 with XMM-Newton,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 573, no. 2 (10 July 2002): L77–L80.)
