A team of researchers led by scientist Marc L. Imhoff of NASA’s GSFC published research indicating that increasing urbanization in the United States had reduced the amount of fertile land available for agriculture. Using data from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) and NOAA’s polar-orbiting satellites, the scientists had discovered that cities covered 3 percent of the land area in the continental United States. Moreover, the team found that the urbanized areas were capable of producing an amount of food and fiber rivaling that produced on agricultural lands, which covered 29 percent of the land area in the continental United States. Furthermore, they found that the urbanized land areas had the potential to produce enough food to meet the caloric requirements of 16.5 million people, nearly 6 percent of the U.S. population. The authors explained that, throughout history, human settlement has tended to occur on lands best suited for growing food. The research results, which were consistent with this trend, strongly suggested that urbanization should occur in conjunction with agricultural and environmental considerations.(NASA, “Cities Built on Fertile Lands Affect Climate,” news release 04-059, 11 February 2004; Marc L. Imhoff et al., “The Consequences of Urban Land Transformation on Net Primary Productivity in the United States,” Remote Sensing of Environment 89, no. 4 (29 February 2004): 434–443.)
The State Council of the People’s Republic of China appointed Sun Laiyan as Administrator of the China National Space Administration (CNSA). Laiyan had become the CNSA’s Vice Administrator in 1999 and had served as Deputy Director of the Beijing Institute of Satellite Environment Engineering. Laiyan replaced Luan Enjie, who was retiring as head of the CNSA.(China National Space Administration, “Mr. Sun Laiyan Appointed as Administrator of CNSA,” news release, 12 May 2004, http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620682/n639462/54319.html (accessed 19 March 2009); China National Space Administration, “Resumes of Leaders: Prof./Dr. Sun Laiyan,” http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620681/n639436/53299.html (accessed 19 March 2009).)
Scientists published research demonstrating that changes in Earth’s gravitational field can affect the planet’s climate and weather. Experts described the findings as an important advance in climate research. Bryon D. Tapley of the University of Texas at Austin led the team of scientists, who had discovered that changes in Earth’s gravitational field are associated with changes in the distribution of water and ice masses. Their findings demonstrated that scientists could use satellite measurements of Earth’s gravitational field to measure changes in the distribution of Earth’s mass and to determine the causes of those changes―changes that included variations in climate and weather. In their analyses, the scientists had examined data from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), consisting of two spacecraft that measure variations in Earth’s gravitational field―a project of NASA and the German Aerospace Center.(NASA, “NASA’s GRACE Gravity Mission Weighs In on Earth’s Changing Climate,” news release 04-286, 9 September 2004; Bryon D. Tapley et al., “GRACE Measurements of Mass Variability in the Earth System,” Science 305, no. 5683 (23 July 2004): 503–505.)
Scientists reported that they had produced the first three-dimensional views of the large solar eruptions known as coronal mass ejections, or CMEs. CMEs, the most powerful eruptions in the solar system, can disrupt power systems, radio communications, and satellite links with Earth. Although uncertain of the origin of these eruptions, scientists know that CMEs occur when billions of tons of electrified gas explode from the Sun’s atmosphere into space at speeds of millions of miles per hour. The team had used data from ESA and from NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to construct the images, which they hoped would help scientists learn more about the structure of CMEs and the manner in which they affect Earth.(ESA, “First 3D View of Solar Eruptions,” ESA news release SNR 13-2004, 2 July 2004; Thomas G. Moran and Joseph M. Davila, “Three-Dimensional Polarimetric Imaging of Coronal Mass Ejections,” Science 305, no. 5680 (2 July 2004): 66–70.)
A NASA-funded study found that some climate-forecasting models might have incorrectly estimated future increases in Earth’s temperatures. Scientists Kenneth R. Minschwaner of the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology and Andrew E. Dessler of the University of Maryland had determined that some climate models might have incorrectly estimated the amount of water vapor that enters Earth’s atmosphere as the planet warms. For years, scientists had debated the extent to which water vaporthe most important heat-trapping greenhouse gas in Earth’s atmosphereinfluences Earth’s surface temperatures. Using data from NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, the scientists had found that, although the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere had increased with surface warming, the increase had not been as high as previous researchers had assumed. The findings also cast doubt on research suggesting that Earth’s temperatures would decrease because of a lack of water vapor in the atmosphere.(NASA, “Satellite Finds Warming ‘Relative’ to Humidity,” news release N04-090, 15 March 1990; New York Times, “Study Disputes Idea of Global Warming,” 18 March 2004.)
The European Union (EU) and the United States signed a cooperative agreement on their satellite navigation services―the EU’s planned Galileo system and the United States’ GPS. According to the agreement, the Galileo and GPS satellites would broadcast a common civil signal. They also agreed not to discriminate in commercial trade of satellite-navigation goods and services. In addition, the agreement stipulated that Galileo signals would not interfere with the efforts of the United States to prevent its adversaries’ accessing satellite-based positioning signals. European Commission Vice President Loyola de Palacio, Irish Foreign Minister Brian Cowen, and U.S. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell signed the agreement in Dublin, Ireland.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2004 Activities (Washington, DC, 2004), p. 95, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2004.pdf (accessed 7 April 2009); United States Mission to the European Union, “U.S., EU Reach Agreement on Satellite Navigation Services,” news release, 27 June 2004, http://useu.usmission.gov/Article.asp?ID=E195E969-EFF9-4EE3-8E7B-58D02983E7C3 (accessed 7 April 2009).)
Scientist Menglin Jin of NASA’s GSFC published research based on the first use of satellites to create a multiyear record of Earth’s land-surface temperatures. Jin had used remote-sensing data, which satellites had collected from 1981 to 1998, to develop an 18-year record of global land- surface temperatures more comprehensive and detailed than data derived from ground-station measurements. According to the satellite data, average global land-surface temperatures had increased by 0.43 ̊C (0.77 ̊F) per decade, whereas ground-station data had indicated an increase of 0.34 ̊C (0.61 ̊F). The different findings produced different measurements because satellites measure actual land-surface temperatures―also known as skin temperatures―and ground stations measure air temperatures 6.6 feet (2 meters) above land surfaces. However, Jin also noted regional variations in temperature changes, with the central regions of North America and Asia experiencing some declines in temperatures.(NASA, “Satellites Act as Thermometers in Space,” news release 04-121, 20 April 2004; Menglin Jin, “Analysis of Land Skin Temperature Using AVHRR Observations,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 85, no. 4 (April 2004): 587–600.)
A NASA study revealed that clouds that form from small haze particles do not reduce Earth’s temperatures as much as previous research had suggested. Scientists had thought that low-lying clouds cool Earth by reflecting sunlight away from the planet’s surface, and that the reflectivity of clouds increases as their volume of water increases. However, NASA scientist Andrew S. Ackerman led a group of researchers who found that polluted, low-lying clouds neither hold more water nor reflect more solar energy than do cleaner clouds. Using measurements from polar-orbiting satellites and from NASA aircraft flying through clouds, the scientists discovered that water tends to decrease in polluted clouds, rather than to increase. Because most predictions of climate change had incorrectly assumed that polluted clouds counteract greenhouse warming, this finding could significantly influence how scientists predict changes in climate.(Andrew S. Ackerman et al., “The Impact of Humidity Above Stratiform Clouds on Indirect Aerosol Climate Forcing,” Nature 432, no. 7020 (23–30 December 2004): 1014–1017; NASA, “NASA Finds Polluted Clouds Hold Less Moisture and Cool Earth Less,” news release 04-404, 23 December 2004.)
NASA and NOAA announced that the two agencies would extend the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) by five months, effectively reversing an earlier decision to terminate the weather satellite’s mission. NASA and NOAA also announced that they had requested the National Academy of Sciences to evaluate the utility of extending the satellite’s mission for an additional 18 months. Launched in 1997, the TRMM―designed to measure rainfall―was a joint project of NASA and JAXA. NASA and JAXA had originally planned for the satellite’s mission to last three years, but meteorologists and climate researchers, who continued to find the satellite’s data highly valuable, particularly for analyzing tropical storms, had advocated to prolong the mission.(Guy Gugliotta, “Weather Satellite Gets Reprieve for Hurricane Season,” Washington Post, 8 August 2004. 673 Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Plans Robotic Fix for Hubble,” Washington Post, 11 August 2004.)
vehicle manufacturing, satellite services, and remote sensingaffect economic activity, employee earnings, and the amount of employment in all major industry sectors. Based on data from 2002, the FAA had found that the commercial space-transportation industry had contributed US$95 billion to economic activity in the United States, including US$23.5 billion in employee earnings. The report also stated that demands for commercial space transportation and its products and services had resulted in the employment of nearly 600,000 people. In addition, the FAA had found that much of this economic impact was the result of increased demands for satellite services and ground-equipment manufacturing, which includes satellite-related hardware and consumer electronics used with satellite services.(FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation, “The Economic Impact of Commercial Space Transportation on the U.S. Economy: 2002 Results and Outlook for 2010” (study, Washington, DC, March 2004), 1–6.)
Scientists published the first direct evidence of one of the fundamental elements of Einstein’s theory of general relativity: an effect known as frame dragging. Frame draggingthe distortion of space and time around rotating celestial bodies, such as Earthoccurs because the gravity of those objects pulls space and time along with them. Ignazio Ciufolini of the University of Lecce in Italy and NASA scientist Erricos C. Pavlis of GSFC had measured distortions in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellites, LAGEOS and LAGEOS2, to obtain the evidence of frame dragging. They had discovered that, although irregularities in Earth’s surface account for some of the variation in the satellites’ orbits, the remainder of the variation is the effect of space-time distortions.(NASA, “As the World Turns, It Drags Space and Time,” news release 04-351, 21 October 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Theory of Relativity Evidence Found,” Washington Post, 22 October 2004.)
