ESA and JAXA performed the first bidirectional, optical, interorbital communication, a form of communication in which satellites use lasers to transmit and receive commands and data over long distances. Laser-based communications have numerous advantages over communications using radio waves, including freedom from interference and higher data-transmission speeds and volumes. ESA and JAXA performed the communication between ESA’s Advanced Relay and Technology Mission satellite and JAXA’s Optical Inter-Orbit Communications Engineering Test Satellite. Previously, ESA and JAXA had conducted unidirectional, optical communications between their satellites, but this event was the first bidirectional form of this type of communication.(ESA, “Successful Optical Data Relay Link Between OICETS and Artemis,” http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMIJVVLWFE_index_0.html (accessed 27 July 2009); JAXA, “Toward the Era of Optical Communications in Space,” news release, 9 December 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/12/ 20051209_oicets_e.html (accessed 27 July 2009).)
Astronomers announced the detection of the most distant explosion ever observed, at approximately 12.6 billion light-years from Eartha gamma-ray burst (GRB) occurring after a massive star’s collapse and transformation to a black hole. The explosion, which astronomers had named GRB 050904, had occurred nearly 1.1 billion years after the Big Bang, which itself had happened 13.7 billion years ago. The astronomers used ground-based telescopes and NASA’s Swift satellite to detect GRB 050904’s emitted infrared light. Because the event had occurred so far away, the infrared light had just begun to reach Earth. However, the explosion was not the most distant object or event that astronomers had ever observed. Scientists had detected a quasar and a galaxy located 12.7 billion light-years from Earth.(Guy Gugliotta, “Satellite Detects Massive Explosion,” Washington Post, 13 September 2005; NASA, “Most Distant Explosion Detected, Smashes Previous Record,” news release 05-259, 12 September 2005.)
NASA announced it had accepted an invitation to join the National Invasive Species Council (NISC), a cabinet-level council established in 1999 to coordinate federal responses to harmful invasive species. As a member of the council, NASA would provide data acquired using Earth- observation spacecraft and predictive models to assist 12 other federal agencies’ efforts to combat invasive species nationwide. The council had extended the invitation because of NASA’s previous work monitoring invasive species: NASA had provided data, predictive models, and systems engineering to the USGS, information that had helped the USGS build predictive maps of invasive species in Utah’s Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. With NASA’s assistance, USGS had converted data from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer aboard NASA’s Terra satellite, as well as other data, to create predictive maps of plant species distribution. USGS had used the National Invasive Species Forecasting System to help improve the nation’s response to invasive species.(NASA, “NASA Research to Aid Federal Invasive Species Council Efforts,” news release 05-035, 2 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05036_Invasive_Species.html (accessed 19 August 2009). 739 Warren E. Leary, “Repair Costs for Hubble Are Vexing to Scientists,” New York Times, 3 February 2005; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Repair Could Hinge on Who Pays at NASA,” 3 February 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Options for Hubble Science, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 2 February 2005.)
NASA announced that scientists analyzing images from the its Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and from the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had discovered that Earth’s northern and southern auroras are not mirror images of each other, as previously thought. Images from the two spacecraft showed that auroras move and change, depending on the tilt of Earth’s magnetic field toward the Sun and on solar wind conditions. Knowing more about how auroras react to the solar wind could help scientists predict space weather. Timothy J. Stubbs of the Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics at NASA’s GSFC remarked that the analysis was the first to track the locations of the auroras using simultaneous observations, in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, of the auroras in their entirety.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Earth’s Auroras Are Not Mirror Images,” news release 05-089, 5 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05089_aurora_images.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched its Cartosat-1 Earth- mapping and remote-sensing satellite aboard a Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle-C6 (PSLV-C6) from the newly built launchpad at Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The 1.56-tonne (1,560-kilogram or 1.72-ton) Cartosat-1, the heaviest payload that the PSLV had ever ferried to space, carried two f/4.5 Panchromatic cameras, which together would enable the production of a stereoscopic image at a resolution of 2.5 meters (8.2 feet). ISRO planned to use the images to generate digital terrain-elevation maps, which would aid in assessing and monitoring land use, forest cover, and river flow. The launch vehicle also carried into orbit HAMSat, a 43-kilogram (0.043-tonne or 0.047-ton) microsatellite designed to relay amateur VHF radio communications.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619, 1 June 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx619.html (accessed 17 September 2009); K. S. Jayaraman, “India Launches Cartosat-1 Satellite,” Space News, 6 May 2005.)
NASA and NOAA announced their joint development of procedures to improve the accuracy of medium-range weather forecasts in the Northern Hemisphere. NASA and NOAA scientists had incorporated into weather prediction models the data from the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) on NASA’s Aqua satellite, improving the accuracy range of experimental six-day weather forecasts of the Northern Hemisphere by 6 hours. Observers called this improvement of 4 percent a significant development in weather forecasting. NASA had launched Aqua on 4 May 2002, enabling the AIRS to produce three-dimensional maps of air and surface temperature, cloud properties, and water vapor. Moreover, the instrument had a spectral resolution more than 100 times greater than that of other infrared sounders.(NASA, “NASA/NOAA Announce Major Weather Forecasting Advancement,” news release 05-231, 24 August 2005; NASA JPL, “AIRS: Overview,” http://airs.jpl.nasa.gov/overview/ overview/ (accessed 2 July 2009).)
