The Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) successfully launched four spacecraft aboard its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C7 (PSLV-C7), from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre at 9:24 a.m. (IST). The PSLV-C7 carried the 680-kilogram (1,500-pound) Cartosat-2, an Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellite; ISRO’s 550-kilogram (1,213-pound) SRE-1 (Space Capsule Recovery Experiment-1); the Indonesian microsatellite Lapan-Tubsat; and the 6-kilogram (13-pound) PehuenSat-1, an Argentinean nanosatellite. Cartosat-2, designed to provide scene-specific spot imagery, joined six IRS satellites already in service. ISRO planned to keep SRE-1 in orbit for 11 days before testing its reentry technology. While in orbit, the craft would conduct microgravity experiments. Lapan-Tubsat, the first Indonesian-built satellite, was a technology-demonstrator craft carrying two color cameras. The University of Comahue of Argentina, the Amateur
Orbital Express successfully captured the ASTRO servicing satellite, and its client spacecraft NextSat, after the two spacecraft had flown apart for nearly eight days. ASTRO’s primary sensor flight computer AC-2 had failed during a test on 11 May, causing the craft to lose its relative navigation. During the test, the pair of craft had undocked and separated as planned, moving apart to a distance of 10 meters (33 feet). After the failure of its AC-2 computer, ASTRO had behaved according to the protocol of its programmed fault-protection software, flying 120 meters (394 feet) away from NextSat to avoid inadvertently colliding with the satellite. However, thereafter, ASTRO had drifted approximately 6 kilometers (3.7 miles) away from NextSat, requiring ground observers’ intervention to help the two craft remate successfully. DARPA planned to conduct a technical review of ASTRO’s sensor- and navigation-performance lessons and to conduct an investigation into the cause of the AC-2’s failure. The technical review would assist DARPA in planning the remaining set of Orbital Express demonstration activities, scheduled for the following weeks.(U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, “Orbital Express Spacecraft Successfully Rendezvous, Remate,” news release, 21 May 2007, http://www.darpa.mil/news/2007/oe_remate.pdf (accessed 6 April 2010); Kelly Young, “Estranged Satellite Pair Reunited at Last,” New Scientist, 21 May 2007; Stephen Clark, “Computer Problem Interrupts Satellite Servicing Demo,” Spaceflight Now, 15 May 2007.)
The People’s Republic of China ended its silence regarding a reported test of antisatellite technology, confirming that, on 11 January, China had fired a guided missile into space to destroy one of its own weather satellites. U.S. monitors had detected the test shot, and observers in the United States had protested, based on concerns that U.S. military satellites might be vulnerable to attack from China. China’s Foreign Ministry spokesperson Liu Jianchao stated that China had informed the United States and other governments about the classified test through diplomatic channels and had “emphasized that the use of anti-satellite technology” did not mean that China had “abandoned its opposition to the militarization of space.” The United States and Russia had tested antisatellite technology in the 1980s but had ceased those tests, partly because of concern that debris created during the tests could damage satellites in nearby orbits. Analysts stated that China’s test had created several hundred thousand debris fragments in a region containing as many as 125 satellites.
NASA announced that images about the Japanese Hinode satellite, collected by NASA-funded telescopes, had provided new information about the Sun’s magnetic field and the origins of solar wind. Hinode’s high-resolution x-ray telescope had revealed a record number of x-ray jets—up to 240—in the corona at the Sun’s poles, contrary to previous research that had detected only a few such jets daily. Based on observation of these solar jets, a team led by solar physicist Jonathan W. Cirtain, of NASA’s MSFC, concluded that a magnetic reconnection occurring in the low solar corona was forming Alfvén waves and bursts of energized plasma in the x-ray jets. Alfvén waves form when convective motions and sound waves push magnetic fields around, or otherwise allow magnetic fields to change shape or to reconnect. Previously, researchers had been unable to observe Alfvén waves because of the limited resolution of available instruments. Yet, in their search to identify the forces responsible for the formation of solar winds, scientists had long considered Alfvén waves the leading candidate. Alfvén waves are capable of transferring energy from the Sun’s surface up through its atmosphere (corona) and into the solar wind. Cirtain explained that the team’s observations had revealed a clear relationship between magnetic reconnection and the formation of Alfvén waves in the x-ray jets, and that “the large number of jets, coupled with the high speeds of the outflowing plasma, lends further credence to the idea that x-ray jets are a driving force in the creation of the fast solar wind.” The team published its findings in the 7 December issue of the journal Science, a special issue focusing on Hinode.(NASA, “Spacecraft Reveals New Insights About the Origin of Solar Wind,” news release 07-264, 6 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07264_Hinode_Waves.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Jonathan W. Cirtain et al., “Evidence for Alfvén Waves in Solar X-ray Jets,” Science 318, no. 5856 (7 December 2007): 1580−1582, http://www.sciencemag.org/content/318/5856/1580.abstract (DOI 10.1126/science.318.5856. 1571; accessed 1 December 2010).)
NASA announced that, on 25 May 2007, its AIM satellite had captured the first occurrence that season of mysterious iridescent polar clouds. AIM had been the first satellite mission dedicated to the study of these unusual clouds, known as Polar Mesospheric Clouds (PMCs) when viewed from space and as noctilucent clouds (NLCs) when viewed from Earth. NLCs form in the Northern Hemisphere, beginning in mid-May and remaining through the end of August. They appear in the Southern Hemisphere between mid-November and March. AIM’s mission was to observe two complete PMC seasons over both poles, documenting for the first time the complete, complex life cycle of PMCs.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Captures First View of ‘Night-Shining’ Clouds,” news release 07-145, 28 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07145_AIM_First_Light.html (accessed 13 April 2010).)
NASA announced that it had tested the first nanotechnology-based electronic device to fly in space—the Nano ChemSensor Unit—demonstrating that the device known as a nanosensor could monitor trace gases inside a spacecraft. NASA had launched the device into orbit on 9 March 2007 as a secondary payload experiment on board the U.S. Naval Academy’s MidSTAR- 1 satellite. Scientists had conducted the sensor test on 24 May, successfully showing that the nanosensors could survive in space conditions, as well as in the extreme vibrations and gravity changes that occur during launch.(NASA, “NASA Nanotechnology Space Sensor Test Successful in Orbit,” news release 07-140, 18 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07140_Nanotech_Sensor_Test.html (accessed 13 April 2010); United Press International, “NASA Nanotechnology Tested in Orbit,” 19 June 2007.)
NASA and NOAA launched an Aerosonde Mk3, an unmanned aerial system (UAS), into Category 1 Hurricane Noel for the Aerosonde Hurricane Boundary Layer Mission, marking the first time they had successfully flown such an aircraft into the inner core of a hurricane. Launching from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility (WFF), the UAS flew into the eye wall of the hurricane at altitudes as low as 300 feet (91 meters). Winds reached 80 miles per hour (129 kilometers per hour) in the core of the storm. Flying for 7.5 hours inside the storm, the craft allowed scientists to make detailed real-time observations of areas known to be too dangerous for human-piloted aircraft. Combining mission data with data from recent NASA and NOAA field missions that had used conventional aircraft and satellites, scientists planned to develop a valuable new set of observations for air-sea interaction and tropical cyclone research.(Daily Times, “Wallops: Launch into Hurricane Friday Is Historic,” 6 November 2007.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a US$695 million contract to Boeing Satellite Systems of El Segundo, California, to design, develop, and fabricate two new Tracking and Data Relay Satellites—TDRS-K and TDRS-L. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would also integrate, test, ship, provide launch support, conduct in-orbit checkout operations, and provide sustaining engineering support for the satellites. In addition, Boeing would design, assemble, test, install, and verify modifications necessary to making the ground terminals at NASA’s White Sands Complex in New Mexico fully compatible with the new TDRS spacecraft design. The period of performance for the contract, which had a value of up to US$1.22 billion, could extend through April 2025 if NASA exercised its options. These included two additional spacecraft, TDRS-M and TDRS-N. The contract would extend the lifetime of the TDRS system, the primary source of voice, data, and telemetry for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs, and would provide those services for NASA’s Constellation Program.(NASA, “NASA Awards Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Contract,” news release C07-064, 20 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_C07064_TDRSS_Awards.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Clinton Parks, “Boeing Satellite Systems Wins $695 Million TDRS Contract,” Space.com, 21 December 2007.)
NASA released a study finding that, in 2005, the Arctic had replaced very little of the thick sea ice that it loses and replenishes annually. The findings complemented an earlier study showing a 14 percent decrease in perennial ice between 2004 and 2005. That study had provided the first reliable estimates of the annual variation of perennial ice replenishment at the end of summer. Ron Kwok of NASA’s JPL had used data, including data that NASA’s QuikSCAT satellite had collected, to study six annual cycles of Arctic perennial ice coverage. The results of the study indicated that only 4 percent of the thin, seasonal ice that had formed during the winter of 2005 had survived the summer, leaving perennial ice coverage in January 2006 14 percent smaller than in 2005. The 2005 replenishment was the smallest seen in any study to date. Kwok had also studied the 2005–2006 temperature records, comparing them with records dating back to 1958. The temperature records demonstrated a gradual warming trend during the first 30 years after 1958, with a rapid acceleration after the mid-1980s. Kwok remarked that “the record doesn’t show any hint of recovery from these trends,” adding that, “if the correlations between replenishment area and numbers of freezing and melting temperature days hold long term, it’s expected the perennial ice coverage will continue to decline.” Geophysical Research Letters published the study, “Near Zero Replenishment of the Arctic Multiyear Sea Ice Cover at the End of 2005 Summer,” in its 2 March 2007 issue.(NASA, “NASA Finds Arctic Replenished Very Little Thick Sea Ice in 2005,” news release 07-77, 3 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07077_Arctic_Sea_Ice.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Ron Kwok, “Near Zero Replenishment of the Arctic Multiyear Sear Ice Cover at the End of 2005 Summer,” Geophysical Research Letters 34 (2 March 2007): L05501−L05506, http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2007/2006GL028737. shtml (accessed 24 March 2010).)
The ISRO SRE-1 space capsule reentered Earth’s atmosphere and splashed down in the Bay of Bengal at 9:47 a.m. (IST), successfully completing India’s first test of reusable vehicles and satellites. The SRE-1 had launched on 10 January. The Spacecraft Control Centre of ISRO’s Telemetry, Tracking, and Command Centre (ISTRAC) in Bangalore, India, guided the reentry of the craft, which splashed down at approximately 40 kilometers per hour (25 miles per hour). A U.S. Coast Guard ship recovered the craft and brought it to a container port, amid tight security. From that port, ISRO sent the SRE-1 to the launching station at the Sriharikota Space Centre, to determine how well the craft had carried out its microgravity experiments while in orbit.(Indo-Asian News Service, “India Brings Satellite Back to Earth,” 23 January 2007.)
A team of researchers comprising members from NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, the NSF, and the British Antarctic Survey unveiled a new map of Antarctica—the Landsat Image Mosaic of Antarctica—that scientists expected would revolutionize the study of the continent’s frozen landscape. The researchers pieced together more than 1,000 images, primarily selected from the Landsat observations of 1999−2001. The result was a realistic, nearly cloudless satellite view of Antarctica at a resolution 10 times greater than that of any previous image captured by Landsat 7. Robert A. Bindschadler, Chief Scientist of the Hydrospheric and Biospheric Sciences Laboratory at NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, explained that the map did not provide a mere snapshot of the continent, but rather a time-lapse historical record of how Antarctica had changed. The map would also enable scientists to observe changes unfold. Scientists anticipated that, among its uses, the map would help with planning scientific expeditions, because its higher resolution would enable researchers to interpret changes in land elevation in hard-to-access
DARPA’s Orbital Express mission successfully executed a maneuver to demonstrate a satellite- servicing technique. Orbital Express consisted of a robotic servicer called ASTRO and a fuel depot and client satellite called NextSat. The mission aimed to demonstrate in-orbit refueling and servicing. The test marked the first time the two craft had maneuvered separately, flying apart at a distance of approximately 10 meters (33 feet). After the two craft had flown apart for 1 hour, ASTRO directed on-board guidance and navigation instruments to close in and to dock with NextSat, completing the mission’s objectives without input from ground controllers. The test was the third of nine increasingly complex procedures DARPA had planned for the mission.(Stephen Clark, “Orbital Express Duo Split Apart, Rejoin Autonomously,” Spaceflight Now, 7 May 2007.)
