ISRO launched seven satellites, placing all seven in orbit within a period of 20 minutes, to mark ISRO’s first successful mission following the abrupt end of the Chandrayaan-1 project. The seven satellites, including ISRO’s Oceansat 2, launched from Sriharikota at 6:21 (UT), aboard India’s Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) C14, a 44.4-meter (145.67-foot) four-stage launch vehicle. The 960-kilogram (2,116-pound) Oceansat 2 carried three instruments. One of these was the Ocean Color Monitor (OCM), an eight-band multispectral camera, designed to capture data in the visible and near-infrared spectrum. The OCM would observe algae, fish populations, sediment distribution, and water pollution. Another instrument was the Ku-band Scatterometer, designed to operate at 13.52 gigahertz, covering a swath of 1,400 kilometers (870 miles). It would measure near-surface wind vectors over the ocean, for use in forecasting weather. The third instrument was the Italian-designed Radio Occultation Sounder for the Atmosphere (ROSA), which would observe distortions in GPS signals passing through the upper atmosphere. ROSA would build temperature and humidity profiles, determining the electron density in the ionosphere. The rocket also carried six nano satellites: two German Rubin satellites; Beesat, of the Technical University Berlin; UWE 2, of the University of Würzburg in Germany; ITU pSAT, of Istanbul Technical University in Turkey; and SwissCube 1, of the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in Switzerland.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 671; Associated Press, “ISRO Launched 7 Satellites in 20 Minutes,” 23 September 2009. 54)
ESA successfully launched its Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Explorer (GOCE), the first of seven planned ESA Earth Explorer satellites, aboard a Rockot/Breeze-KM launch vehicle from Plesetsk Cosmodrome at 14:21 (UT). ESA had designed GOCE to measure Earth’s gravitational field, so that ESA could use the data to create very high-resolution maps that would provide the baseline for measurements of ocean circulation and sea-level change. The 1,100-kilogram (2,425-pound) spacecraft was 5 meters long (16.4 feet long) by 1 meter wide (3.3 feet wide). GOCE had fixed solar arrays, designed to produce 1.3 kilowatts of power. To enable the craft to acquire the high-resolution measurements, ESA had designed GOCE to travel in a near-polar orbit at an altitude of only 263 kilometers (163.4 miles), rather than at the altitude of 600 to 900 kilometers (372.8 to 559.2 miles) typical for Earth-observation satellites. Mission managers remarked that, to their knowledge, nonmilitary satellites had never before operated in this orbit, an altitude that has significant atmospheric drag effects. To counteract the atmospheric drag, which could slow the spacecraft and potentially cause a premature end to the mission, GOCE had a unique arrowhead-like design that improved its aerodynamics. Additionally, ESA had designed the craft with a xenon-ion propulsion engine that would provide gentle thrust against the effects of the drag.
The Aerospace Industries Association (AIA) published a report titled “The Role of Space in Addressing America’s National Priorities,” which concluded that the United States could “no longer afford to treat its national security, civil, and commercial space capabilities separately.” Therefore, AIA recommended that President Barack H. Obama’s administration “develop a mechanism to look at our space capabilities as a single enterprise consistent with national goals and objectives.” The report suggested that, in developing its space initiatives, the United States confronts many issues that are not so clearly defined as the goals of its space programs— returning to the Moon or sending humans to Mars. Instead, the United States faces a host of complex challenges, such as protecting its satellites from hostile actions; easing export-control laws to facilitate the competitiveness of U.S. companies in the global marketplace for space hardware; and maintaining an experienced space industry workforce. To address these and related issues, the AIA report recommended that the Obama administration establish a national coordinating body to develop and execute a national space strategy and provide the funding necessary to continue critical multiyear space programs.(Aerospace Industries Association, “AIA Report Recommends Space Policies for New Administration,” news release 12 January 2009, http://www.aia-aerospace.org/newsroom/aia_news/aia_report_recommends_space_ policies_for_new_administration/ (accessed 7 February 2011); Andy Pasztor, “U.S. Faces New Space Race,” Wall Street Journal, 13 January 2009.)
NASA’s JPL announced that NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) had reached an agreement concerning priorities for outer-planet missions. NASA and ESA had merged separate concepts to create two missions—the Europa Jupiter System Mission and the Titan Saturn System Mission. NASA and ESA had decided to implement the Europa mission first, since it was the more technically feasible of the two missions. For the Europa mission, NASA and ESA would each provide one of two robotic orbiters. The probes would conduct studies of unprecedented detail of Jupiter and its moons Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. Launching in 2020 on separate vehicles, the probes would reach the Jupiter system in 2026, gathering data for at least three years. NASA’s probe would spend at least a year investigating Europa for signs of life and producing a global map, to prepare for a future mission that would land on Europa. Simultaneously, ESA’s probe would investigate the interior and the surface of Ganymede, to help understand the formation and evolution of the Jovian system. For the Titan Saturn System Mission, NASA would provide an orbiter, and ESA would provide a lander and a research balloon. The Titan mission, which required significant study and technological development to overcome several technical challenges, was not as far along in the planning stage. The agreement to pursue the missions was the culmination of years of debate, involving scientists, space professionals, and space enthusiasts, who had long found icy satellites like Europa intriguing. Scientists believed that satellites of this type—common in the outer solar system—have a potentially habitable environment.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA and ESA Prioritize Outer Planet Missions,” JPL news release 18 February 2009, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=2035 (accessed 7 March 2011); John Johnson Jr., “It’s All Systems Go for Europa,” Los Angeles Times, 19 February 2009.)
