Unnamed USAF satellite launched from Point Arguello, Calif. The announcement said it was powered by an Atlas-Agena B combination and that the satellite was “carrying a number of classified test components.”
West German Post Office indicated that it would construct near Munich a ground station capable of handling up to 600 phone calls simultaneously for operations in late 1963 or early 1964 with Telstar and Relay type satellites.
USAF announced that amateur radio communications satellite, assembled by Project Oscar Association, would be flown piggyback in future Discoverer vehicle.
Navy Transit IV-B and Traac (Transit Research Attitude Control) satellites launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star at Atlantic Missile Range.
In Scout launching of micrometeorite counter satellite (S-55) from Wallops Station, third stage did not ignite, and the vehicle was destroyed.
Industry proposal to FCC for organizing a commercial communications satellite system critically reviewed in hearings of the Monopoly Subcommittee of the Senate Small Business Committee.
Recovery of capsule of Discoverer XXXI was called off as capsule and satellite (launched Sept. 17, 1961) failed to separate and both remained in orbit.
NASA entered letter contract with RCA for four additional Tiros weather satellites to extend the program.
An Atlas intended for 9,000-mile flight into the Indian Ocean plunged into the Atlantic only 200 miles from Cape Canaveral. Mid-March: Up to this time, approximately 78 percent of the wide-angle photographs relayed from Tiros II (weather satellite) were considered usable for current weather analysis.
NASA and United Kingdom agreed to establish joint program to test communications satellites to be launched by NASA in 1962 and 1963 in Projects Relay and Rebound.
NASA announced that the first station in a network of data-gathering stations for use with second-generation satellites had been completed near Fairbanks, Alaska. Site for the second of the $5 million installations, each with a high-gain antenna 85 feet in diameter, was announced to be Rosman, N.C., 40 miles southwest of Asheville.
Orientation of Tiros II made it impossible to obtain Northern Hemisphere pictures and malfunctions made remote picture taking undesirable, so that use of satellite’s cameras was suspended until orbit precession again made Northern Hemisphere pictures possible.
In a letter to the President, 35 Members of Congress urged that a decision on the Nation’s satellite communication system be delayed to determine “whether such a system should be publicly or privately owned and under what circumstances.”
Over 100 foreign weather services were invited jointly by NASA and the U.S. Weather Bureau to participate in the Tiros III experiment for a 9-week period beginning today. The program provides cooperating services with an opportunity to conduct special meteorological observations synchronized with passes of the satellite.
In reviewing NASA’s communications satellite programs, Administrator Webb pointed out that it had been speculated that the satellite system “may have progressed enough by 1964 that we shall be able to watch the Tokyo Olympic Games on television at home.”
At 280th session of disarmament conference at Geneva, Arthur H. Dean presented U.S. proposal that a system of space satellites for patrolling a ban on nuclear testing be fully operational 6 years after ratification of such a ban. Such a space patrol could “open up a new frontier of knowledge for the benefit of mankind.”
Navy Transit III-B with Lofti piggyback satellite placed into orbit by Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle, but satellites did not separate.
NASA and Weather Bureau invited over 100 of the world’s weather services to participate in the Tiros III satellite experiment by conducting special ground-based observations synchronized with passes of the satellite.
France announced plans to launch its first satellite by the end of 1964.
French Foreign Ministry announced that West German Government had agreed in principle to participate in 12-nation program to construct launch satellites.
James E. Webb nominated as Administrator of NASA by President Kennedy. January 30-February 2: Conference of 12 European nations held at Strasbourg to discuss a British and French proposal for a European satellite launcher development program.
Congress appropriated funds to the U.S. Weather Bureau for implementation of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. To phase in as early as technology warrants and to continue expanding the operational capability through the early Nimbus launchings by NASA, the system planned to be fully operational by 1966 as Nimbus system became operational. The system would include data acquisition stations in northern latitudes, communications for transmitting the data, and a National Meteorological Center to receive, process, analyze, and disseminate the derived information over domestic and international weather circuits.
Project Ice Way was established near Thule by the Geophysics Research Directorate of the Cambridge Research Laboratories to test the feasibility of landing heavy aircraft on ice runways. The tests, completed in June 1961, demonstrated the strength and other engineering qualities of the ice runways constructed of natural sea water or reinforced with strands of Fiber-glas. Early January: Because of the danger of a power drain in connection with remote (tape recorder) operation, the wide-angle camera of Tiros II was turned on only for direct readout, while satellite passed over Fort Monmouth and Point Arguello.
Nine-nation Western European Conference in London announced decision to launch a satellite in mid-1965, using a British Blue Streak first stage, a French Veronique second stage, and a West German third stage, from the Woomera range in Australia.
Scientists from the United Kingdom and NASA announced agreement on the scientific instrumentation of a second United Kingdom satellite to be launched by NASA with a Scout vehicle..
White House statement of President Eisenhower issued, stating that “the early establishment of a communication satellite system which can be used on a commercial basis is a national objective.”
NASA ■''selected. RCA to construct the Relay experimental communications satellite to test the feasibility of transoceanic telephone, telegraph, and television communications using an active repeater satellite.
DOD announced that the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) had selected Space Technology Laboratory (STL) to develop satellite system under Project Vela for detection of clandestine nuclear weapons in outer space.
Senate Small Business Committee concluded critical hearings on the FCC’s handling of the communications satellite project.
First launching of three active satellites in one shot, and the first launching of a satellite with nuclear power, when a Thor-Able-Star launched Transit IV-A (equipped with an atomic radioisotope-powered battery of the Snap series), and two accompanying satellites, Injun and Greb III, from Atlantic Missile Range. Transit IV is forerunner of a navigation satellite system, while Injun gathers data on the radiation belts, and Greb III gathers data on X-ray radiation from the Sun.
NASA Argo D-4 launched from Wallops Station carried United States-Canadian topside sounding satellite payload to 560-mile altitude.
NASA awarded contract to General Electric for an investigation of means of storing solar heat energy in satellites.
Midas III (missile defense alarm system) launched into polar orbit from Pacific Missile Range, with record 1,850-mile-high orbit and was heaviest U.S. satellite launched to date. Second-stage Agena B was restarted at apogee of first orbit.
Project West Ford received approval in National Aeronautics and Space Council policy statement released at the National Academy of Sciences by Presidential Scientific Adviser Jerome B. Wiesner. Conceived at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory, project proposed placement of 350-million copper threads (0.7-inch long and 0.001-inch diameter) into a 5-mile wide and 24-mile long belt around the Earth from a satellite, which would serve as reflector antennas for extremely short wave lengths (8,000 megacycles), perhaps expanding usable frequency channels.
Explorer XIII, popularly referred to as the “beer can satellite” because of its micrometeorite counting structure, completed its 15th orbit.
With successful launch of Explorer XII on August 15, NASA Delta launch vehicles had successfully launched five satellites out of six attempts, the only failure being the first attempt. Delta’s high reliability record began with Echo I on August 12, 1960, and includes Tiros II and III, and Explorers X and XII. Built by prime contractor Douglas Aircraft, the NASA Delta launch vehicle consists of a Thor first stage (Rocketdyne MB-3 liquid engine), Aerojet-General second stage (AJ-10-118, an improved Vanguard second stage), and an ABL third stage (X-248 spin-stabilized version of Vanguard third stage).
NASA distributed to the world scientific community, through COSPAR, a detailed description of the next planned Beacon satellite experiment.
NASA announced indefinite suspension of the programing of the wide-angle camera in Tiros II, the experimental weather observation satellite launched on November 23, 1960.
Echo I completed its 3,697th orbit after 9 months. When this first passive communications “balloon satellite” was launched on August 12, 1960, it was not expected to have a long life span.
A.T. & T. stated that it hoped to orbit experimental communications satellite by May 1962, and would share use or ownership of a satellite system with other common carriers.
White House released its reply to letter of August 27 signed by 35 Members of Congress which expressed concern over the private ownership of an operational communications satellite system. The White House memorandum stated that “any decisions as to control should preserve as much flexibility as possible,” and reemphasized the administration policies including “maximum competition” in any system of private ownership.
FCC-NASA memorandum of understanding for delineating and coordinating civil communication space activities signed. It stated that “earliest practicable realization of a commercially operable communication satellite system is a national objective.”
Ranger I test satellite of unmanned lunar spacecraft, launched from Atlantic Missile Range by Atlas D-Agena B into low parking orbit, but did not attain its programed eccentric orbit.
..... Soviet and bloc delegates from Czechoslovakia and Poland, who had previously accepted invitations, did not attend the NASA-Weather Bureau International Meteorological Satellite Workshop held in Washington; telegram from Andre Zolotukhin received by Dr. Reichelderfer stated that “our representatives unable to participate,” but requested “dispatch of relevant papers if possible.”
NASA and France agreed to establish joint program to test communications satellites to be launched by NASA in 1962 and 1963 in Projects Relay and Rebound.
Three-week meeting of the executive council of the U.N. World Meteorological Organization in Geneva concluded, at which 18 national representatives (including A. A. Zolotoukhin of the U.S.S.R.) discussed general basis for international use of weather satellites. Dr. Francis W. Reich elderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, was a U.S. representative. During May: Army Chemical Corps Biological Laboratories completed preliminary tests of microorganisms in a simulated space vacuum at the National Research Corp.
USAF Samos II, a 4,100-pound test satellite containing photographic equipment, placed in orbit by Atlas-Agena A from Point Arguello, Calif.
NASA announced that it had ordered 14 additional Delta launch vehicles (Douglas Thor first stage, Aerojet-General AJ10-U8 second stage, and Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory third stage) for Relay, Syncom, Telstar, and Tiros satellites. Five of the first six of the twelve Deltas successfully launched Echo I, Tiros II and III, and Explorers X and XII.
NASA Tiros III weather satellite successfully launched into near-circular orbit by Thor-Delta from Cape Canaveral.
NASA negotiated $400,000 contract with G. T. Schjeldahl Co. to design, develop, fabricate, and test rigidized inflatable spheres for Project Echo, the passive communications satellite program.
Explorer XI, a gamma-ray satellite, was successfully launched into orbit by NASA Juno II from Cape Canaveral.
NASA announced negotiation of a contract with Hughes Aircraft for construction of three experimental synchronous communications satellites.
Solar flare studied by Explorer XII and Injun I, readings within a few hours indicated energetic protons with velocities of near 10,000 kilometers per second, while 2 days after the solar flare both satellites saw a sudden increase in the intensity of low-energy protons (c. 10 mev) concurrently with a magnetic storm on Earth and bright aurora at low altitude. It was concluded that low-energy protons traveled slowly from the Sun with the magnetic stormcloud.
The United States presented an outline for a program for cooperation and control in outer space to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in New York. This was the first committee meeting held since its membership was expanded from 18 to 24 nations by the General Assembly 2 years ago, the 7 Communist members refusing to attend until today. U.N. Delegate Charles W. Yost urged consideration of the U.S. proposals before the life of this Committee expired at the end of the year. The U.S. proposals were: acknowledge that international law and U.N. Charter extend to outer space; establish central registry for all space launchings and satellites; and share all information from weather satellites.
Navy announced that Injun and Greb satellites placed in orbit with Transit IV-A had not separated and were thus not functioning at full efficiency. During June: National Academy of Sciences established the Geophysics Research Board (GRB) in 1960 in response to a request from the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). By June 1961, it had four active panels to consider specific international programs: World Magnetic Survey (WMS); International Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY); International Exchange of Scientific Data; and Solid Earth Problems.
NASA and United Kingdom’s Space Sciences Committee agreed on experiments to be included in the second United Kingdom satellite (launched by NASA’s Scout), the experiments being galactic noise, atmospheric ozone, and micrometeoroids.
Its instruments recording a magnetic impulse, Explorer X became the first satellite to measure the shock wave generated by a solar flare.
The Ad Hoc Carrier Committee established by the FCC to make an industry proposal on the development and operation of commercial communications satellites recommended a nonprofit corporation be formed, to be owned by companies engaged in international communications, with the U.S. Government having one more representative on the board of directors than any one company. Western Union filed a minority statement proposing a public stock company arrangement to prevent dominance of the corporation by any one company.
Launching of NASA ionosphere beacon satellite (S-45 II) at i Atlantic Missile Range unsuccessful when Juno II power supply failed and prevented ignition of second stage.
Reported in New York Times that U.S. had notified the U.S.S.R. of its willingness to sign an agreement to cooperate in the peaceful exploration and utilization of space. Within the past 3 weeks, U.S. State Department had sent note to Moscow calling for formal signature of a bilateral agreement on joint weather and communications satellites and study of the earth’s magnetic fields.
In Izvestia, Soviet correspondent V. Matveyev said that the background of U.S. satellite telstar showed that progress in the development of productive forces in the U.S. was being usurped by the modern capitalist states in the interests of the monopolies.
dod announced plans to support nasa Syncom communications satellite operations in early 1963. U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency (satcom), Ft. Monmouth, N.J., would send signals to activate and test the first U.S. synchronous-orbit satellite.
fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow invited U.S.S.R. to cooperate in an international television system using high-altitude communications satellites. A high-altitude system would have advantages over low-altitude system such as Telstar, he said in Look magazine, but “we now lack the launching power to make it go.” He proposed that Soviet rockets be used to launch U.S. communications satellites into high-altitude orbits, and added that “this would be a very dramatic area of cooperation for peaceful purposes in space.”
Pilot course in the practical engineering aspects of space satellites began at Texas a&m College under an agreement with nasa.
Successful ground tests of Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) subsystem reported by nasa. To be flight-tested on a Tiros satellite next year, apt would eventually enable weather stations to obtain local cloud-cover pictures directly from orbiting weather satellites, thus making possible a world-wide weather satellite service.
Dr. S. Fred Singer, director of National Weather Satellite Center, said he was recommending an operational Tiros weather satellite system by next June because of Tiros’ “quite astounding” ability. tiros v was first to spot five of the ten major tropical storms around the world in August. He added that scheduled launch of sixth Tiros satellite would not be delayed by the man-made radiation belt.
Senate Foreign Relations Committee returned the communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) to the Senate floor, after defeating amendments sought by opponents of the bill. Senate filibuster against the communications satellite bill was resumed.
Seven newspaper pages were transmitted by facsimile from Westrex Corp. laboratories, New York; to Andover, Maine; to telstar satellite; and back in successful 12-minute communications experiment.
explorer xiv satellite was launched into orbit by Thor-Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral on mission to study natural and man-made radiation in space, nasa spokesmen said satellite appeared to be following the planned orbital path (53,000-mi. apogee, 185-mi. perigee, 31-hr. period), but scientists could not confirm the exact orbital figures for several days (later confirmed as 61,000-mi. apogee, 175-mi. perigee, 36.1-hr. period). The 89-lb. satellite was injected into orbit at nearly 24,000-mph speed by the three-stage Thor-Delta. This was Delta’s 12th straight successful satellite launching.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xi into orbit (572-mi. apogee, 152-mi. perigee, 96.1-min. period); one of series of satellites to study radiation belts, propagation of radio waves in the ionosphere, and the sun.
At nasa press conference, scientists described preliminary scientific results obtained by explorer xii: based on study of 10 per cent of the data, it now appears that instead of the two radiation belts (previously called the inner and outer Van Allen belts) there is one magnetosphere extending roughly from 400 miles above the earth to 30,000 to 40,000 miles out. In this magnetosphere there is only a handful of matter but a very wide range of charged particles trapped by the earth’s magnetic field. Density of electrons is now considered to be 108/cm2/sec as opposed to the 1011 derived from previous satellites. Radiation levels of protons in the lower portion of the magnetosphere were found to be the same as reported by previous satellites, so that the magnetosphere still poses a formidable radiation problem to extended manned flight. At about 10 earth radii the magnetosphere ends abruptly. Above it is an extended area, about 20,000	km. across, of electromagnetic turbulence and featuring very low energy particles on the order of 1 to 20 kilovolts. Beyond this is thought to be true interplanetary space.
relay satellite’s 136-mc beacon was detected by tracking stations at Santiago, Johannesburg, and Woomera, indicating the beacon spontaneously turned itself on.	_
French government announced first satellite, weighing 150 lbs., wollid be launched in March 1965 and would be followed by others three and four times as large.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, at Wilton, Conn., stated that peaceful uses of outer space was still the National goal but that the U.S. would be “ill-advised if we did not hedge our bets.” He said that a satellite interception system would get serious attention if another nation was developing such a capability. “We ought to be ready,” he said in a press conference, “to anticipate the ability of the Soviets at some time to use space offensively.”
Signals from ariel satellite had been received during past week by tracking stations, ariel had stopped transmitting after U.S. high-altitude nuclear test because of radiation damage to the satellite’s solar cells. Although resumed transmission was not continuous, it did demonstrate Ariel’s regained capability to return scientific data from space. Transmission apparently occurred whenever the satellite stayed in sunlight long enough for its damaged solar cells to absorb sufficient solar energy to power its electronic equipment.
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, told Joint Computer Conference in Philadelphia: “. . . It is no exaggeration to say that we could never have succeeded in orbiting and tracking even the simplest satellite without the availability of computers. . . . And it is certainly true that one of the major pacing elements in our rate of progress toward achieving the national goals in space will be the development of progressively more advanced computers and computer techniques to help cope with the even greater tasks ahead. “. . . [Data processing] systems of the future, as we see them, will involve compatible combinations of computer and ancillary devices, some of which will be spaceborne, some stationed on celestial bodies other than the earth, and some of course wlli still be here on earth. “Such computer systems wlli be required to perform navigational and attitude control tasks; edit and store scientific and engineering data; make calculations of a conventional nature; time sequences of operations; feed displays; and trigger alarms. “A task for the future is to extend . . . [the computer’s pre-launch checkout] function to spacecraft for launching from orbit, for landing on celestial bodies, and for take-off from remote planets for return to earth. . . . What we are looking for are systems which are fully automatic and fast. ... “It is apparent that in general a rather complete distribution range of computing burden wlli exist. In some missions, such as close-to-earth satellite, earthbased computing equipment wlli perform most of the processing required. Other missions, such as one bound for Pluto, will require the autonomous activity of a highly redundant, self-adaptive, self-checking computer complex aboard the spacecraft. “A vital need, therefore, is determination of the optimum nature, disposition and use of computing equipment. ... “Eventually ... we may have large numbers of vehicles simultaneously operating in space. ... In such a situation we wlli need sophisticated and very comprehensive Flight Control Centers, with compatible computer systems aboard the spacecraft, to handle information on flight status, command control, navigation, and program sequences. ...”
A cooperative program for testing Relay and Telstar communications satellites by nasa and communications organizations in the U.S., Europe, and South America was announced by nasa. Providing ground stations and conducting the communications experiments would be at&t, it&t, British General Post Office, French National Center for Telecommunications Studies, West German Post Office, Brazilian Department of Posts and Telegraphs, and Telespazio of Italy. The foreign organizations would participate on a voluntary basis with no exchange of funds by the governments, nasa would provide ground stations with orbital data on the satellites.
usaf announced launching of an unidentified satellite using a ThorAgena launch vehicle.
Tiros launch at amr postponed due to technical difficulties. February 7: In a special message to the Congress, President Kennedy proposed the creation of a “Communications Satellite Corporation” to be financed through the sale of stock to communications companies and the general public. This privately-owned corporation wollid have the responsibility to develop, own, and operate communications relay stations in space. The President declared that the creation of a satellite communication system wollid be “a measure of immense long-range importance.”
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa’s Director of Space Sciences, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “Because of this great breadth and scope of space science, and because of the many basic scientific problems that it encompasses, our country must have a sound and vigorous space science program if we intend to maintain our position of leadership in world science . . . “The space science of today is needed to sow the seeds for the harvest of future applications of space knowledge and technology. The weather, communications, and navigation satellites of today grew out of the scientific engineering and research of the past decades. Their perfection, and the development of new applications, will rest upon the space science and engineering of today and the years to come.”
General Dynamics/Astronautics announced results of its molecular erosion-rate tests of low-altitude satellites showed erosion due to molecular bombardment was less than one billionth of an inch per year.
nasa announced that echo i, the 100-ft. balloon-type passive commullications satellite launched on August 12, 1960, had recently become increasingly difficllit for observers to see. The sphere now presented olliy ){to its original size, due either to shrinkage or distortion during its year and a half in orbit.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite with an Atlas-Agena B from Point Arguello, Calif.
Soviet News Agency Tass reported that cosmos i satellite was transmitting a steady stream of technical data.
usn Transit navigational satellite system was described by Capt. Alton B. Moody (usnr) of nasa, at National Electronics Conference in Chicago. The system of four Transit satellites in polar orbits, to be operational by end of 1962, was designed primarily to provide naval craft with constant, accurate navigational fix around the world.
Adlai E. Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N., stated in letter to the Senate that the communications satellite bill “provides the President and the executive branch of this Government with adequate control and influence to ensure that the instrument proposed here can be fitted or adapted to an international system when we learn enough to design one.”
anna ib geodetic satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star vehicle from Cape Canaveral (apogee, 727 mi.; perigee, 670 mi.; inclination, 50° to the equator). Mounted on the 350-lb., 36-in. spherical satellite were four high-intensity lights that would flash on and off; by comparing simultaneous observations of the satellite from various points on earth, scientists could measure earth’s size, shape, and surface features with accuracy never before possible. The light beacons were to be activated by ground command within three days, after orbital data were precisely analysed, anna (Army-Navy-NASA-Air Force) was developed and launched by military services, with Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory as prime contractor; nasa cooperated in tracking and in dissemination of orbital data to the international scientific community for worldwide use of the man-made star for geodetic purposes.
Chairman of fcc, Newton N. Minow, said on “Meet the Press” TV program: “There are some optimists who think we can see the Japanese Olympics in 1964. I would personally think that is stretching it a bit, although the technology certainly will permit us to have a working communications satellite system within three or four years. This is the reason why we are are pushing to have legislation passed—it has passed the House and is now pending in the Senate—to determine national policy as to how the communications system will work. As always in this country technology is ahead of public policy. This time we want to keep our national legislative policy abreast of science.”
Plans for first live transatlantic TV programs in mid-July announced. To be produced by 3 U.S. networks and the 16-nation European Broadcasting Union (ebu), the programs would be transmitted by at&t’s Telstar satellite.
Senators Estes Kefauver and Wayne Morse proposed legislation calling for a government-owned corporation to operate space satellite communications network.
Coordination of international arrangements for exchange and dissemination of weather data, including weather satellite information, was on the agenda of the third session of the U.N.’s Commission for Synoptic Meteorology as it opened a 26-day session in Washington. Technical experts from more than 100 nations had been invited.
Details of Project Anna, flashing-light geodetic satellite, were given to the international Committee on Space Research (cospar) meeting in Washington by Mark M. Macomber of onw. Previously classified, two Anna satellites have been built and when placed into orbit wlli provide means to calibrate three different satellite tracking systems and provide accurate reference points in space (flashing light photographed at precise times against known star background), nasa will now not have to develop a geodetic satellite to provide open scientific information.
Senate Commerce Committee tentatively approved the space communications satellite corporation bill after adopting 32 amendments, one virtually identical to the bill passed by the House on May 3.
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite with AtlasAgena from Point Arguello, Calif.
dod postponed launch of Anna geodetic satellite to Oct. 24, for undisclosed reason.
Washington Evening Star reported that usaf had orbited or attempted to orbit 24 unmanned, unidentified satellites since autumn 1961 when dod adopted its policy of not issuing details of satellite launchings.
U.S.S.R. announced successful launch of cosmos x into earth orbit (apogee, 208 mi.; perigee, 126 mi.; inclination, 65° from the equator; period, 90.2 min.). Tass said the satellite’s many scientific instruments to measure radiation and other spatial conditions were functioning normally.
S-IV stage of Saturn C-l launch vehicle was successfully staticfired for first time in 10-sec. test at Sacramento, Calif., facility of Douglas Aircraft Co. First flight test of the liquid-hydrogen/ liquid-oxygen-powered upper stage would be made in 1963. August 17: U.S. Senate passed Administration communications satellite bill (66 to 11 vote), ending 20-day debate and liberal bloc opposition which had invoked seldom-used anti-filibuster rules. Bill was returned to the House, which had previously passed a slightly different version.
Closed-door sessions of the 13 directors of Communications Satellite Corp. were reported in Drew Pearson’s column, discussions on the revolution in communications made by satellites and the international complications involved.
Scientists again attempted to turn on relay communications equipment, but the satellite’s power level was still too low.
Prof. Vassily V. Parin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reported that fruit flies carried aloft in Soviet spacecraft had shown a “considerable increase in gene mutations,” in a report on space biology to cospar meeting in Washington. Evident to some observers was that the Russians have conducted a wide range of biological experiments in their satellite program.
President Kennedy signed into law the communications satellite bill, which would establish a private corporation in charge of U.S. portion of future global communications satellite network. Satellite corporation board of directors would include six named by communications industry, six elected by public stockholders, and three selected by the President.
relay communications satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle from Cape Canaveral (about 800-mi. perigee; 4,600-mi. apogee; 3 hr., 5 min. period). Built by rca for nasa, relay was designed to be first active repeater satellite linking three continents—North America, South America, and Europe. Efforts to turn on relay’s communications equipment (by nasa test station at Nutley, N.J.) were unsuccessful, the satellite’s onboard battery power being too low to operate the transponders. nasa said telemetry data indicated “abnormal drain upon the power supply” was probable cause of low voltage; relay communications experiments were postponed indefinitely. Objectives of nasa Project Relay were to test intercontinental microwave communications by low-altitude active repeater satellites, measure energy levels of space radiation in its orbital path, and determine extent of radiation damage to solar cells and electronic components.
Prof. Pierre Auger, executive secretary of the Preparatory Committee of the European Space Research Organization (esro) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo), stated that plans called for the expenditure of $100 million a year. Program headquartered in Paris would parallel the work of the U.S.’s nasa, sans man-in-space activity. An important part of its program would be cooperation with other international and national organizations, especially nasa, from which satellites and launchers might be obtained. A new firing range at Kiruna, Sweden, is envisaged for firings in the northern auroral zone.
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, predicted in interview that in 20 years “we’ll be well advanced in the use of nuclear power in space both for propulsion of rockets and for auxiliary power within orbiting satellites. “Around the year 1982 we wlli have already made, or be seriously planning, a manned journey to one of the near planets. And we’ll be using nuclear energy rather routinely in satellites as an auxiliary source of electric power. “For example, by then, we’ll probably be able to have [world] television broadcasts relayed by satellites brought directly into homes, . . . Within 20 years it might be possible to get reception direct from a satellite wherever a television set was located, even in the darkest part of Africa .... “I feel that even such predictions as I have outlined may be too conservative in the sense that there may be spectacular developments that we do not even foresee . . . .”
nasa announced plans to launch two Project Echo ballons during October. To be filled with helium while on the ground near White Sands Missile Range, N.M., one ballon would be Echo I-type measuring 100 ft. m diameter and the other would be Advanced Echo type measuring 135-ft. in diameter. They would reach respective altitudes of approximately 128,000 ft. and 115.000	ft. in short flights over the range. Purpose of launches was to determine skin smoothness for the Advanced Echo balloon satellite, to be orbited in 1963.
Ground signal station at Nutley, N.J., turned on relay satellite’s communications transponders and sent signals to the satellite; telemetry indicated relay received signals, but relay failed to return transmission to Nutley, Andover (Me.), or Pleumeur-Bodou (France) stations. All onboard systems were turned off except command receivers.
House Commerce Committee reported out a commercial communications satellite blli similar to the Senate measure, including a provision “encouraging” communications companies to build and operate their own ground stations.
usaf announced it would build a new phased-array radar system that would have a multiple-track capability and quicker reflexes than present radar for the detection, tracking, identification, and cataloging of satellites. Contractor woud be Bendix Aviation Corp.
oscar ii (Orbital Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio) re-entered earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated, after 295 orbits since launch Juno 1.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos iv, presumably another in the recent series of scientific satellites. Orbital data: apogee, 206 mi.; perigee, 186 mi.; period, 90.6 min.; and inclination, 65°. No other details were announced.
A single communications satellite in stationary equatorial orbit could connect 92 per cent of world’s telephones, Dr. Herbert Trotter, Jr., president of General Telephone & Electronics, Inc., told U.S. Independent Telephone Association in Chicago.
nasa selected Dalmo-Victor Co. and Amelco, Inc., to negotiate for r&d and production services for initial systems of Satan (satellite automatic tracking antenna). New antenna system would orient itself automatically to orbiting spacecraft and would be a major improvement in nasa’s worldwide Minitrack system.
at&t announced that second Telstar communications satellite would be launched next spring, one which would attempt to avoid or overcome radiation damage which shortened the life of telstar i. telstar i transmitted the first live intercontinental television after launch on July 10, but developed malfunctions in power sources on November 29.
sigma 7 (MA-8) launching was relayed to Western Europe via telstar satellite. European TV network Eurovision broadcast the launching sequence to 17 countries. Televised launch was also viewed by millions of Americans.
Day-long procedural quorum calls in the U.S. Senate prompted by filibuster tactics of liberal opponents of the Administration’s communications satellite bill.
Announced that the Nippon Electric Co. of Japan (nec) was constructing several nec-1 active repeater communications satellites to be launched by nasa Scout or Thor-Delta boosters during the Olympic Games in Japan in 1964.
U.S. Weather Bureau announced development of infrared spectrometer, to be flight-tested in new balloons during next six months. The 100-lb. “flying thermometer” was planned for use in Nimbus weather satellites.	_
nasa announced that ariel i, the U.S.-U.K. ionosphere satellite launched on April 26, was functioning well except for one experiment, the solar ultraviolet detector. Telemetry signals were being received by fifteen ground stations around the world, and the tape recorder, which recorded on each orbit, was being commanded successfully about twelve times a day.
Transatlantic telephone conversation via telstar satellite, from at&t President Eugene McNeely to Jacques Marette, French Communications Minister. On next 'orbit, McNeely spoke with Sir Ronald German, director-general of the British Post Office. Technicians had unofficially tallied on transatlantic circuit via telstar the day before, July 12.
Modulation from ariel i satellite appeared on the carrier approximately 10 days out of the 31. Data received indicated the x-ray experiment had failed.
dod announced launch of Anna geodetic satellite would be attempted
European Broadcasting Union in Brussels undertook detailed planning for intercontinental TV experimentation and programing via nasa’s Project Relay and at&t’s Telstar satellites to be launched in late summer of 1962. Construction of stations for participation in the tests were reported underway in England, France, West Germany, and Italy.
Launching of dod geodetic satellite Anna was postponed indefinitely for undisclosed reasons.
Use of missiles and earth-orbiting satellites in forest-fire detection was forecast by R. C. Howard of British Columbia Forest Products, Ltd., speaking in Vancouver to annual convention of Canadian Institute of Forestry. Howard said satellites wollid report fires to computer center which wollid evaluate the fire, permitting foresters to dispatch missile with built-in-fire extinguisher.
Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield, on behalf of himself and Minority Leader Everett M. Dirksen, filed a cloture petition intended to break the Senate filibuster against Administration-backed communications satellite bill.
U.S.S.R. had declined the offer of U.S. networks to use telstar satellite for relaying live telecasts of orbiting Soviet cosmonauts, said Russell Tomabene, Chairman of the U.S. joint network committee coordinating transatlantic telstar programs.
International Telephone & Telegraph Corp. (itat), announced plans for nasa Project Relay satellite communication experiment to link North and South America. To be launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral this year, the satellite would relay 12 telephone calls at once, from itat ground relay station in Nutley, N.J., to portable ground station near Rio de Janeiro. The satellite, built by rca for nasa, would also transmit TV from North America to Europe via ground stations at Andover, Me.; Goon-hilly Downs, England; and Pleumeur-Bodou, France. In another set of experiments, Relay would establish telephone communications between Brazil and England. Relay would radiate microwave signal of 10 watts, compared to telstar’s 2-watt signal.
dod announced International Telephone and Telegraph Corp. (it&t) had leased to usaf two transportable ground communications stations for operational training of communications personnel. The units would be used in new program to provide data on problems of using satellites for communications support.
Roger Seydoux, French ambassador to U.N., announced that France planned to launch its first satellite by 1965, and that France would continue its space activities “at the rhythm required by the present day world.”
nasa reported radiation satellite explorer xv, launched Oct. 27, was spinning at rate of 73 rpm instead of desired 10 rpm because of failure of despin weights to deploy. Preliminary data indicated all experiments were functioning and that all received data were of good quality. Effect of high spin rate on experimental results was under analysis.
Navy, in conjunction with Weather Bureau and Canada, launched a major ice reconnaissance effort in the Gulf of St. Lawrence as part of a project to develop procedures and techniques for interpreting satellite readouts of ice formation. Called Project Tirec, the effort was timed to coincide with the successful launch of tiros iv.
Transatlantic use of telstar communications satellite was discontinued for about seven weeks. During this period, telstar’s orbit brought it too briefly on line of sight with North America and Europe for useful transmission, at&t said the situation would recur every six months. Domestic transmissions would be suspended only from Nov. 26 to Dec. 2, during which time ground equipment would be “tuned up.”
Newsmen in London and New York exchanged news items and conversations in the first two-way transatlantic telephone connection via telstar communications satellite. Reuters transmitted its first news report to the world press via satellite.
Reported from New York that three-day U.S.-British discussions on U.N. problems had devoted considerable time to problems of “the law of outer space.” U.S. representatives indicated that the U.N. resolution of December covering “international cooperation and the peaceful uses of outer space” had extended international law to space. In view of this, the U.N. resolution destroyed any argument that surveillance satellites violate international law, as orbiting satellites are legally no different from operating a destroyer in international waters.
dod announced award of $12.2 million contract to it&t for systems engineering and technical advice in development of communications satellite systems.
ferret super-sensitive robot-inspector satellite developed by Lockheed Aircraft and rca for U.S., reported in orbit by Newsweek. ferret was reported capable of tapping microwave telephone messages and pinpointing missile launching sites by their radio guidance signals. Newsweek said satellite was aimed particularly at Baikonur, major Soviet rocket-testing base.
Reported that the Soviet Union was seeking through diplomatic channels to establish a space satellite tracking station in Australia, offering assurances that the station wollid not be used for military purposes or for the introduction of weapons.
Assistant Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach testified before the Senate Commerce Committee that the compromise communications satellite blli, while generally acceptable to the Administration, wollid place control of the system in the communications industry. “There is real danger,” he said, “that ground stations, if separately owned by the carriers, may because of their high cost represent an obstacle to technical growth so as prematurely to freeze the type of system.” The compromise bill, approved by the Senate Space Committee two weeks ago, provided for a 50-50 split of the stock in the satellite corporation between the communications industry and other companies and investors.
Scientists at Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ. sent operating commands to anna satellite, and three minutes later anna responded by flashing its lights five times to show the message had been received. Satellite’s blinking beacons were designed to aid scientists make precise measurements of the earth and to determine its gravitational field.
Subcommittee of the Senate Antitrust and Monopoly Committee headed by Sen. Estes Kefauver opened hearings on propriety of establishing a privately-owned communications satellite system.
nasa selected Hughes Aircraft Co. for negotiating a $2.5 million, 6-month study contract on advanced Syncom satellite. The contract covered satellite subsystems which would require long leadtime developmental and feasibility work. Second-generation Syncom would be 500-lb., spin-stabilized satellite capable of relaying hundreds of telephone calls or several TV channels. (First-generation Syncom, for which Hughes is prime contractor, is limited to single telephone channel relay.) Syncom project is under technical direction of gsfc.
Bell Telephone Laboratories reported telstar communications satellite’s refusal to respond to transmitter cut-off commands had been followed by the satellite’s turning off its command receiver. Bell scientists expected to correct telstar communications system by remote control.
explorer xiv was relaying “excellent quality preliminary data,” nasa announced. The satellite, launched Oct. 2, was traveling in highly eccentric earth orbit: apogee, 61,000 mi.; perigee, 175 mi.; period, 36.1 hrs. Speed at perigee was 23,700 mph; at apogee, 1,500 mph. nasa said it would be some time before analysis of telemetry data on the radiation belts could be correlated.
British Postmaster General Reginald Bevins told Parliament that Britain wollid spend $1,960,000 in the coming year on development of satellite communications.
Space General Corp. reported development of aspect-insensitive antenna system for satellites and spacecraft. System, which automatically points toward its transmission source on earth, could reduce number of communications satellites in worldwide network “by a factor of four or five,” according to Space General.
Governments of U.S. and Canada jointly announced cooperative venture to build data acquisition station for Nimbus meteorological satellite at Ingomish, Nova Scotia. Successor to Tiros weather satellite program, Nimbus satellites will record meteorological data, including TV pictures, and relay the data back to earth on command; they will travel in near-polar orbit and thus be able to “see” the entire earth every 24 hours. Ingomish station would be staffed mainly with Canadian personnel and would be completed in 1964.
Soviet Union announced launching of cosmos ii satellite (975-mile apogee, 133-mile perigee, 49° inclination, 102.5-minute period). cosmos ii reportedly had the same instrumentation as cosmos i launched on March 16: investigation of radio transmission, radiation belts, magnetic field of the earth, distribution and formation of cloud cover, and to test “elements of space vehicle construction.”
In a recent tightening of dod policy on information about military satellite launchings, officials were reported to have stated that in future even the Discoverer flights would not be so identified. Any information beyond bare announcement of launch of an unidentified satellite would be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Replying to a charge that U K. was playing a declining role in development of satellite communications, Postmaster General Reginald Bevins told Parliament: “I assure you that the British Government is fully alive to the possibilities of satellite communications and when it comes to an operational system, we shall not be left out in the cold.” He predicted a global system of satellite communications within this decade.
Representatives of Australia, Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Britain signed an agreement for the establishment of the European Satellite Launcher Development Organization in London.
Reported that telemetry equipment developed for missiles and earthorbiting satellites was available to automobile engineers to help make cars quieter. To check noise and vibration accurately, car manufacturers could use two-channel electronic telemetry system that picked up sounds made by test cars and transmitted signals to receiver in another vehicle.
Internationa] Edition of New York Times contained articles (about 5,000 words) transmitted from New York to Paris via telstar satellite.
U.S. Weather Bureau announced that the formation of the season’s first hurricane wollid be detected by one or all of its battery of ships, planes, radar, and Tiros weather satellites. Last year tiros iii discovered Hurricane Esther as it was forming in the Atlantic Ocean. Altogether, the Weather Bureau said, tiros iii had seen 5 hurricanes and one tropical storm in the Atlantic, two hurricanes and a tropical storm in the eastern Pacllic, and 9 typhoons in the central and western Pacllic. In preparation for 1962 season, the Weather Bureau arranged to transmit satellite cloud-photographs by photo-facsimile to warnllig centers in San Juan, New Orleans, and Miami, where they wlli be used in forecasting and tracking tropical storms.
First ground-controlled flashes from anna geodetic satellite were delayed because delivery of command equipment to Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory had been delayed.
Bell Telephone Laboratories (btl) announced that Telstar, first privately owned communications satellite, would be launched July 10 from Cape Canaveral, btl built the satellite, purchased the Thor-Delta launch vehicle from nasa, and would reimburse nasa for launching and tracking costs.
nasa announced selection of Westinghouse Electric Coro, as contractor for constructing and testing prototypes and flight models of the S-52 U.S.-U.K. scientific satellite. Second of the three satellites in this program, S-52 was scheduled for launch from Wallops Station, Va., m 1963, would contain 3 major experiments for measurement of galactic radio noise, of vertical distribution of ozone, and of micrometeorite flux.
France carried out six successful missile tests in the Sahara during the previous week. Two of the launchings were of Agate missiles, with which France has planned to develop a missile striking force and eventually to launch a satellite.
The Senate Committee on Commerce concluded its hearings on S. 2814 to establish a commercial communications satellite system.
In testimony before Subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, Dr. Homer E. Newell reviewed history of nasa’s geodetic satellite project, which had been requested in the FY 1960 budget. In mid-1960, dod recommended the geodetic satellite program be classified, which was approved by the Unmanned Space Panel of the nasa/dod aacb in August 1960. Thus was created Project Anna, declassified at the cospar meeting in Washington on April 27, 1962.
Hughes Aircraft Co. reported final assembly of Syncom synchronous communications satellite had been completed. Spacecraft was undergoing final checkout before delivery to nasa at Cape Canaveral, where it wollid be launched early 1963.
Disclosed that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. differed on the total width of microwave bands to be assigned to communications satellites. U.S. proposed two bands with total width of about 3,000 megacycles, but U.S.S.R. favored a much narrower band of frequencies which would include those used by military and would be subject to considerable interference. To date, only informal proposals were made, and the negotiations to work out frequencies for satellite communications were still in the future.
Thirteen incorporators named by President Kennedy to set up communications satellite corporation elected Philip L. Graham as chairman. Graham is president of The Washington Post Co. and board chairman of Newsweek.
U.S.S.R. placed scientific satellite cosmos ix into orbit (apogee, 219 mi.; perigee, 187 mi.; period, 90.9 min.), in series to study ionosphere, radiation belts, and effect of meteorites on spaceships.
House approved Senate version of communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) in vote of 371-10, under suspension of House rules to permit neither further changes nor conference on the measure. The bill, which would establish a corporation responsible for U.S. commercial communications satellites, was sent to the White House.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, told House Military Operations subcommittee that the Midas early warning satellite would “take longer to develop than initially forecast.” He said that usaf and dod had been overly optimistic about the reliability that could be expected from components and about technical features of the system.
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported nasa was considering substituting piggyback satellite for Agena D target in Project Gemini rendezvous maneuvers. Dr. Joseph F. Shea, nasa Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Systems, was quoted as saying nasa could save both time and money by such substitution, usaf plans for Blue Gemini project were not yet firm, pending nasa’s decision, usaf hoped to buy four of nasa’s 12 two-man Gemini capsules for use in its own manned space flight training using Agena D as rendezvous target for two-man Gemini crew, dod had not yet approved any Blue Gemini funds for FY 1964.
J. G. Morse of Martin-Marietta Corp. told Atomic Industrial Forum in Washington that the Government should begin immediately to develop nuclear power systems for communications satellites. Morse suggested that only nuclear power in form of radioactive chemical or isotopic generators could satisfy communications satellite needs—systems in power range of 60 to 300 watts, with operational lifetimes of more than 10 years.
explorer xvi (S-55b) launched into orbit by four-stage Scout vehicle from nasa Wallops Station (initial orbital data: apogee, 733 mi.; perigee, 466 mi.; period, 104 min.; inclination, 52° to the equator), began measuring micrometeoroids in space. Satellite was designed to measure micrometeoroid puncture hazards directly by means of samples of spacecraft structural surfaces, measure particles having different momentums; and compare the performance of protected and unprotected solar cells. Cylindrical satellite was 24-in. in diameter and 76-in. in length; total weight in orbit was 222 lbs., including Scout fourth-stage motor case which was an integral part of the satellite assembly.
Bernard Strassberg was appointed director of the fcc Office of Satellite Communications.
Weather Bureau announced weather data gathered by Tiros satellite was relayed to France via telstar satellite.
Army announced installation of new 102-foot antenna near Fort Dix built in conjunction with dod’s Project Advent, one link in development of a microwave radio-relay system for global communications using active-repeater satellites in a 22,300-mile-high orbit.
dod removed secrecy classification from the satellite Anna, a joint geodetic satellite designed to enable measurement of intercontinental distances and the shape of the earth.
dod announced it had canceled plans for immediate development of detector-interceptor satellite (unofficially called “Project Saint”), and that the project was being “re-oriented towards achieving longer-term” objectives. Official explanation was that Saint had been “bypassed by technological developments.”
Leonard Jaffe, nasa Director of Communications Systems, told House subcommittee of Committee on Science and Astronautics that nasa was “endeavoring to assist in determining as rapidly as possible which of the various system designs . . . should be used in the establishment of operational communications satellite systems.” He described various “orbital configurations proposed for communications satellites” and reviewed passive satellites (Echo) and active-repeater satellites (Telstar, Relay, Syncom). “From these experiments and others which will follow, we will obtain engineering data upon which to base operational system designs. . . . “Satellites of the near future must be designed to exhibit reliability and dependability, unattended in the space environment for many years, if we are to have economically viable communications systems.”
Medium-angle camera on tiros vi meteorological satellite stopped transmitting pictures, during orbit 1,074, but satellite’s wide-angle camera was still sending pictures of “excellent quality.” Through orbit 1,073, the medium-angle, Tegea-lens camera took 12,337 cloud-cover pictures of which 11,131 or 90.2% were usable for weather analysis.
First attempted live radio broadcast between U.S. and Europe via telstar satellite was unsuccessful because of failing radio connections between Boston broadcasting station and Andover, Maine, relay station. Boston station received, but could not understand, Swedish message; Sweden station did not receive message from Boston, telstar performed perfectly, however.
Management of Project Anna geodetic satellite program was transferred from dod to nasa. anna i-b, launched Oct. 31, would remain a responsibility of dod, with nasa scientific direction, but further launchings would be planned and executed by nasa.
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the Department of Defense “strongly supports the objective of establishing a civil communications satellite system as expeditiously as practicable.”
Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee unanimously approved a bill for ownership and operation of the Nation’s commercial communications satellites.
explorer xv energetic particles satellite (S-3b) placed in orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral. Initial orbital data: apogee, 10,960 mi.; perigee, 193.7 mi.; period, 315.3 min.; inclination, 18.02° to the equator; velocity at apogee, 6,015 mph; velocity at perigee, 21,598 mph. Launched to study artificial radiation belt created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July, the 98-lb. satellite was similar to explorer xii and explorer xiv which successfully measured energetic particles of natural radiation belts. Although satellite achieved orbit within predicted estimated range, it was spinning on its axis about 10 times faster than the planned 10-rpm rate. Unnamed spokesman said: “We have a high spin rate. It may well be that we’ll receive acceptable data from the main experiments, with some secondary experiments not able to function. . . . We won’t know for certain until we have made a thorough study of data over a period of days.” explorer xv carried experiments on magnetic field, ion-electron, electron flux, and distribution in pitch angle of electrons; transmitter; optical attitude sensor; and solar cells, including solar-cell damage experiment. Launching marked 13th successful satel-lite-orbitingby NASA-developed Delta vehicle.
Tiros weather satellites have been of major assistance in improving forecasts for airline operations. Mr. Silvio Simplicio, supervis-llig forecaster at New York International Airport, said: “We can do a job nowadays we never thought we could do years ago . . . With the aid of the Tiros satellites we never had it so good, and with the Nimbus meteorological satellite now undergoing tests, we expect even better results.”
Dr.Fred P. Adler, Director of Space Systems Div. of Hughes Aircraft Co., told House subcommittee of Committee on Science and Astronautics that the U.S. should not make a “major investment” in the Telstar communications satellite system until the Syncom system was proven or disproven. Dr. Adler said Hughes’ Syncom could perform better tha at&t’s Telstar and at one third the cost.
President Kennedy nominated 13 men to form satellite communications corporation, under terms of communications satellite law passed in August. The names of the nominees, who would serve only until establishment of corporation’s operating procedures and arrangement for stock sale, were sent to the Senate for confirmation.
Testifying before Senate Foreign Relations Committee on communications satellite bill, Secretary of State Dean Rusk stated: “Most of the discussion of the foreign policy provisions of the bill has centered on whether they delegate to the corporation a part of the President’s authority to engage in international negotiations on behalf of the United States Government. Let me state most emphatically that they do not. . . . “I can assure the committee that we in the State Department are fully aware of the broad range of questions involving foreign policy interests that may arise in connection with this satellite communications system.”
In Paris, delegates from 10 nations—France, Britain, West Germany, Italy, Spam, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria, and Sweden—signed a convention creating the European Space Research Organization (esro). Denmark and Norway nave indicated their intention of joining later. Prof. Pierre V. Auger of France was named Director-General of the new organization. With an eight-year budget of $300 mlliion, esro plans to carry out some 500 space experiments beginning with 10 sounding rockets in 1963, and the first European satellites in 1967. Launching vehicles will be supplied by another organization, the European Council for the Construction of Spatial Vehicles, which was created last March.
usaf announced it had placed in orbit 1.47-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellite (trs), launched piggyback aboard unidentified satellite using Thor-Agena vehicle, trs was orbited to map radiation in space and radio its findings back to earth. nasa communications and telemetry stations were supporting this usaf project.
House of Representatives passed the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 by a vote of 354 to 9, one creating machinery to operate the U.S. portion of a worldwide communications satellite system. Act (H.R. 11040) declared that it is the policy of the U.S. “to establish as soon as practicable a commercial communications satellite system ... in conjunction and cooperation with other countries ... to be responsible to public needs and national objectives, serve the communications needs of the United States and other countries, and contribute to world peace and understanding.” Act created a private corporation, one half of whose stock would be public owned, the remainder by communications companies. Three directors are to be appointed by the President, six elected by public stockholders and six by industry stockholders.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos iii, identified by Tass as another of the scientific satellites in a series to study weather, communications, and radiation. Orbital data: apogee, 448 mi. (720 km.); perigee, 142 (229 km.); period, 93.8; inclination, 48°59'.
Baltimore Sun published photograph of anna satellite taken by U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey tracking team, Spesuti Island (Chesapeake Bay), Md. Triggered by Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab., flashing lights onboard anna were photographed in project to aid geodetic studies; photographs would be made from points around the earth.
Five-day filibuster in Senate against Administration-supported communications satellite bill was shelved under compromise agreement between bill’s supporters and opponents. Bill was referred to Foreign Relations Committee, which was ordered to report it back to the Senate not later than August 10.
Cleveland educators pointed out that the new transatlantic communications prompted by telstar and other satellites would be a tremendous incentive to foreign language study. Supervisor of Foreign Languages Eugene K. Dawson said: “I can think of nothing more exciting for our students than to hear direct broadcasts in the language they are studying.”
tiros ii was turned on late in April from unknown spurious source. An engineering investigation was run in early May before turning it off again. An analysis of the data indicated that at least some usable IR data was obtained. It was interesting to note that the IR electronics and tape recorder are still running after 17 months in orbit. Continued operation of the satellite was not feasible because of power problems.
nasa S-27 Project Officer reported Canadian alouette topside-sounder satellite was performing as expected. Launched Sept. 28, alouette was considered “a very successful experiment since it is producing not only ionospheric data but also information about the earth's magnetic field. . . . Operation of the satellite continues to be normal. . . .”
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences reported out Communications Satellite Bill S. 2814, which was referred to the Senate Commerce Committee.
Testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the Sending communications satellite blli, Washington lawyer oseph L. Rauh, Jr., stated that the blli wollid “give away not only billions of taxpayers' money already spent to develop both space and space communications, but also the vast unknown discoveries of the future.” Another Washington lawyer, Benjamin V. Cohen, testified that the bill was “filled with pitfalls” and advised that its enactment now wollid be “premature.”
United Nations opened a public register on satellites in orbit. At the time of opening, it contained only the U.S. report submitted on March 5, which reported “72 U.S. space vehicles and associated objects in sustained orbit or space transit” as of February 15, 1962.
Beginning of third year of successful weather satellite operation by the U.S. nasa’s tiros i, launched on April 1, 1960, performed beyond all expectations, operated for 78 days, transmitted almost 23,000 cloud photos, of which some 19,000 were useful to meteorologists, tiros ii, launched November 23, 1960, transmitted more than 33,000 photos and one year after launch was still occasionally taking useful photos, tiros iii, launched July 12, 1961, took 24,000 cloud photos and was most spectacular as a “hurricane hunter.” tiros iv, launched February 8, 1962, has averaged 250 operationally-useful photos per day.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos vii into orbit (apogee: 299 miles; perigee: 130 miles; period: 90.1 minutes; inclination: 65° to the equator), announcing that satellite would gather data on the “radiation hazards for long space flights.”
Second birthday of echo passive communication “balloon” satellite. Since launch, the mylar balloon had orbited the earth 9,000	times and traveled 277,257,677.67 miles; it had been used for approximately 150 communication experiments, echo proved that inflatable structures wollid survive for long periods in space, despite sensitivity to aerodynamic drag and solar radiation. Initial orbit was 1,049-mi. apogee and 945-mi. perigee; before first birthday, orbit was 1,350-mi. apogee and 580-mi. perigee; solar pressures caused orbit to become nearly circular again; then, on second birthday, orbit was 1,175-mi. apogee and 704-mi. perigee.
The Science Minister of France, Gaston Palewski, outlined plans for orbiting a satellite at a Cabinet meeting. The date had been set “almost to the hour” for the launching of the first French space satellite, although the actual date was kept secret, according to Information Minister Alain Peyrefitte.
Power supply onboard relay communications satellite remained too low to operate the satellite’s instrumentation properly.
Press conference held at nasa Hq. on the first international satellite, ariel i, with U.K. and U.S. participants. Orbital data was reported: 100.9 min. period; 242.1 st. mi. perigee; 745.4 st. mi. apogee; and 53.87° inclination to the equator. All experiments were reported as functioning. Dr. Robert Seamans, Associate Administrator, outlined nasa's International Program, and pointed to the initiation of the joint U.K.-U.S. S-51 satellite effort in 1959 and the international tracking network (8 non-U.S. stations) participating in the readout of ariel i. Sir Harrie Massey, chairman of the British National Committee on Space Research, pointed out the demands of science and space research for international cooperation.
tiros iv weather satellite was no longer transmitting pictures usable for global weather forecasting, although tiros iv was still taking “direct” pictures on command which were suitable for limited U.S. weather analysis. Infrared instrumentation was still providing information on the earth’s heat balance. Launched on
Advanced Syncom satellite, being developed for nasa by Hughes Aircraft Co., probably wollid carry four radio signal repeaters and could provide up to 300 two-way telephone channels or one TV channel. In 24-hour stationary orbit, one Advanced Syncom wollid be sufficient to link four continents (North America, South America, Europe, and Africa); three such satellites wollid provide worldwide coverage.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy answered a question on the possible U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space because of recent progress in formulating a joint proposal for the use of satellites for weather analysis: “We felt the best place to start was on weather, and any progress we can make on that would be very welcome. I must say that we strongly support any cooperative effort we could make on weather, predictions of storms, and all of the rest, and I hope it wlli lead to other areas of cooperation in space.”
In editorial noting addition to fcc of 19 specialists to plan enforcement of communications satellite bill’s provisions for public interest protection, New York Times said: “the policymaking decisions confronting the fcc will become increasingly complex. How well and how wisely it discharges its duties will be of crucial importance in shaping the future of this mechanism [communications satellite] for bettering life through man’s conquest of space. . . . The march of science is sure to create many more situations in which the partnership of private and public efforts will entail a need for dependable instruments of Government regulation. This makes doubly urgent the successful exercise of the commission’s first test.”
nasa postponed launch of first Canadian satellite, Alouette, at Pt. Arguello.
Navy announced that transit v-a navigation satellite transmitter was now dead, which indicated that its power supply had failed completely, transit v had previously been unable to receive commands from the ground.
Establishment of joint aec-dod-nasa program for development of space nuclear reactor was announced by the three agencies. Col. Elwood M. Douthett (usaf) would head program office, responsible for research, technology, and component development phases of nuclear-electric power unit Snap-50/Spur. A 300-1,000 kw power unit capable of 10,000-hr. unattended operation, Snap-50/Spur would be unification of two existing projects: aec’s Snap (system for nuclear auxiliary power) and usaf’s Spur (space power unit reactor). Unit could be used as power source for “space missions, communications satellites, and other space applications.”
aec displayed its latest radioisotope electrical power generator, Snap-9A, in exhibit at Whittier (Calif.) Civic Center. Designed to produce 20 watts of electrical power for several years, the nuclear generator was scheduled to power radio transmitters in usn Transit satellite to be launched into polar orbit within the next few months.
Nimbus meteorological satellite underwent rigorous test program at GE’s Missile and Space Vehicle Center at Valley Forge, Pa.
European Broadcasting Union ended a 20-nation conference in Seville, Spain, with an announcement that preliminary arrangements had been made for an international television service by use of communications satellites. Three U.S. television networks—cbs, nbc, and abc—would join with usia to operate the system from the U.S., transmitting from Andover, Maine, and the European receiving station would be the British General Post Office Facilities in Cornwall, which would relay the signals to other members of the European Broadcasting Union.
Announced that Anna 1-B geodetic satellite would not be launched until October because recently-created radiation belt might adversely affect Anna’s solar cells. Previously scheduled for August 14 launch, satellite would orbit in 600-mi. circular path where radiation of new belt reached peak intensity. Also reportedly postponed was launching of Canada’s S-27 Alouette satellite, planned for 625-mi. circular polar orbit. Center of peak electron intensity in the new belt had shifted from 16,000 mi. above the earth to 700 mi. Since its creation, the belt had decreased in intensity by about one hall; scientists expected the radiation would soon be dissipated.
International Committee on Space Research (cospar) meeting in Washington received summary reports of accomplishments of 1961 and plans for 1962 by the U.S. and U.S.S.R. A. A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reported that the U.S.S.R. planned to send more men into orbit this year as well as several more unmanned scientific satellites, including one to study “the distribution and production of cloud systems in the atmosphere.” Dr. Richard W. Porter of the U.S. delegation specified that nasa planned to launch 22 instrumented satellites and space probes during the year. During 1961, Porter reported, the U.S. had launched: over 300 high-altitude research balloons; 866 weather rockets; more than 70 larger rockets not meant to carry payloads into orbit; and 31 instrumented satellites and deep-space probes.
dod announced anna geodetic satellite was functioning properly and its orbit was “near perfect.” anna’s flashing light system would be tested Nov. 4 with single series of five flashes triggered by onboard command. Full-scale operation of all systems would begin within a week with anna’s flashing light series triggered by ground command from Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, Md.
U.N. Space Registry revealed the U.S. had reported total of 66 satellite and spacecraft launchings as of Aug. 15, 1962. Of these, 25 were nasa launchings and 41 were U.S. military launchings. U.S. reports to U.N. Space Registry gave same data for nasa and military launchings: name of object; launch date; and satellite’s apogee, perigee, inclination, and period. U.S. reports also identified satellites in one of four categories: development of spaceflight technology; space research and exploration; practical applications of space technology; and non-functional objects.
White House officials announced the secrecy policy on launchings of military satellites was being re-examined.
First transmission of TV pictures in space, made via orbiting echo i. Signals beamed from mit’s Lincoln Laboratory at Camp Parks, Calif., bounced off echo i, and received at Millstone Hill near Westford, Mass. Picture telecast was that of the initials “M.I.T.” and travelled a distance between 3,000 and 4,000	miles, using equipment built for usaf Project Westford experiment. Since test used misshapen echo i, scientists felt that experiment should increase interest in passive satellites for communications once Echo II is orbited.
cosmos iv, Soviet satellite launched on April 26, was successfully landed in a predetermined area, according to Tass announcement. All equipment for research into the upper atmosphere and space worked well during the 1,250,000-mile flight, Tass said.
First east-to-west transatlantic TV transmission, French station at Pleumeur-Bodou reflecting eight-minute telecast off 170-lb. telstar satellite in 15th orbit to at&t facility at Andover, Me. Program featured the French Communications Minister Jacques M. Marette and several entertainers. British Broadcasting Company announced that French transmission violated agreement with Britain and other European Broadcasting Union nations.
nasa and the Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications signed a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperative testing of NASA-launched communications satellites. Japanese Ministry would make available a ground station for communication via artificial satellites; nasa wollid arrange for use of experimental communications satellites locally by Japan as well as jointly by U.S.-Japan.	_
usaf launched two unidentified satellites, one boosted by a fourstage Blue Scout, the other by an Atlas-Agena B, both from pmr. U.N. Public Registry stated Blue Scout did not attain orbit.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy said: “I understand that part of today’s press conference is being relayed by the Telstar communications satellite to viewers across the Atlantic, and this is another indication of the extraordinary world in which we live. This satellite must be high enough to carry messages from both sides of the world, which is of course a very essential requirement for peace, and I think this understanding which will inevitably come from the speedier communications is bound to increase the well-being and security of all people here and those across the ocean. So we’re glad to participate in this operation developed by private industry, launched by Government, in admirable cooperation.”
nasa announced it would launch Canadian spacecraft Alouette (S-27) from Point Arguello, Calif., no earlier than September 26. Named for high-flying songbird of Canada, Alouette was first satellite to be both designed and built by a nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. The launching would mark nasa’s first orbiting attempt from Point Arguello and its first use of a Thor-Agena B launch vehicle.
nasa reported that power output of orbiting satellites ariel i, transit iv-b, and traac dropped after U.S. high-altitude nuclear blast on July 8, the energetic particles created by explosion damaging the satellites’ solar cells and thereby reducing their ability to convert sunlight into electricity. Many satellites, including telstar, showed no signs of damage from radiation. telstar’s solar cells survived because they were specially designed to withstand radiation in the Van Allen belts.
rca reported development of laser that directly converts sunlight into beams of coherent infrared radiation. Such devices would be potentially useful for communications, tracking, and geodetic measurement systems on board future spacecraft and satellites.
cosmos xii satellite placed in orbit by U.S.S.R. Reported orbital data: 270-mi. apogee, 126.6-mi. perigee, 90.45-min. period, 65° inclination to the equator.
General Thomas D. White, former usaf Chief of Staff, wrote in Newsweek article: “There are military requirements in space which this nation can fail to fulfill at its grave peril. ... I wish we would move faster on the satellite inspector and interception. We soon may need to verify what the Soviets have put into space; we may someday want to shoot it down. . . . Another intriguing concept . . . ought to have more steam and money behind it. This is the true ‘space plane.’ ”
Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow testified before Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the Administration-backed communications satellite bill. Urging prompt passage of the bill, Kennedy said it was “one of the most important pieces of legislation offered by this Administration” and that he was “perfectly satisfied it wlli protect the public interest.” This was the eleventh time Minow had testified for the bill, which the House had passed on May 3 and which previously had been approved by two other Senate committees.
dod launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle. (Pres. Reft. on Sface, 1963,1/27/64)
nasa announced stncom n communications satellite, now drifting westward over Atlantic Ocean at 22,800-mi. altitude, would be stopped when it reached desired position at 55° west longitude. At this location stncom n would be lowered into precise synchronous orbit, so that it would appear to trace elongated figure-8 pattern along 55°meridian to points 33° north and south of the equator, period 1,463 min., perigee 22,221 mi., apogee 22,912 mi., drift rate (degrees per day westward) 6.8. (nasa Release 63-168; gsfc Historian)
nasa Acting Director of Office of Applications, Leonard Jaffe, appeared before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, reviewing nasa programs of communications systems, meteorological systems, and future applications satellites. Describing division of responsibility between public interest (nasa) and Communications Satellite Corp., Mr. Jaffe said that “eventually, perhaps” nasa would find way to develop necessary (lower for bouncing radio and TV signals off satellites to “a very arge area of the earth.” Such transmissions would be beyond scope of ComSatCorp. and beyond its charter as common carrier for broadcasters. Yet ComSatCorp. might benefit from NASA-developed technology, particularly in development of tremendous power supplies, under Communications Satellite Act, Mr. Jaffe said, nasa retained responsibility to cooperate with ComSatCorp. and to advise other Federal agencies on the subject, such obligations requiring nasa to maintain independent research capability in communications satellites. (Testimony; Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
U.S.S.R. placed cosmos xv scientific earth satellite in orbit (apogee 317 km.; perigee, 173 km.; period, 89.77 min.; inclination to equator, 65°). Tass said onboard the satellite was “scientific equipment intended for continuing the space research according to the program announced by Tass on 16 March 1962.” Onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 4/23/63, afss-t Trans.)
President Kennedy accepted “with great regret” the resignation of Philip L. Graham as an incorporator of Space Communications Corp., established by legislation to direct U.S. communications satellite activities. Graham had served as chairman of the 13-man board of incorporators. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/63, A9)
First public demonstration of communications exchange via synchronous satellite, when two U.S. wire services and Nigerian newsmen exchanged news stories of about 300 words each via syncom ii communications satellite, hovering 22,823 mi. over Western Africa. Photographs of President Kennedy and Nigerian Governor General Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe also were exchanged. Transmissions were made from nasa station at Lake-hurst, N.J., and usns Kingsport communications ship in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/5/63; nasa Release 63-171)
usaf announced two 1%-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellites (ths) had been ejected into orbit from an unidentified orbiting satellite earlier in 1963. Twin satellites were second and third of series; first trs was launched in 1962. Primary purpose of trs experiments was investigation of radiation damage to spacecraft solar-power systems and evaluating methods of protecting the solar cells from Van Allen belt radiation. Valuable data obtained by the five radiation-damage experiments in each satellite were transmitted back to earth and received by nasa Minitrack telemetry network, cooperating with usaf in the project, (dod Release 1260-63; trs Fact Sheet)
stncom n communications satellite relayed transmission of speech and teletype between Fort Dix, N.J., and moving ship Kingsport about 40 mi. west of Lagos, Nigeria. This was first such transmission via a communications satellite to a moving ship at sea. This was first in series of experiments designed to test shipboard equipment and reception in fringe areas, (nasa Release 63-213)
telstar n was successfully tracked for 18 min. by ground station northeast of Tokyo. Satellite microwave beacon signal was turned on by ground station at Andover, Maine. No communications tests were conducted, but tracking exercises between Tokyo and Andover were to continue through July 20, in preparation for communications experiments to be conducted “during the next period of mutual visibility, beginning in April 1964. (Bell Lab. Release, 7/9/63 in SID, August 1963; Reuters, NTT, 7/8/63,36)
dod launched unidentified satellite from pmr employing Thor-Agena D launch vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
Communications satellites have been used for some time by at&t to transmit a small portion of the overseas telephone calls that normally would have gone by underwater cable. After each call the telephone company would call up the user and ask him about the quality of his call. None of the users were told that they had talked via satellite, since part of the experiment was to test the user’s psychological reactions and these might have been affected by such knowledge. Although the communications satellites are not licensed for commercial use, at&t would pay the U.S. government a fee for the time used for the experiments. Only the medium-altitude Telstar and Relay satellites were used. (Finney, NYT, 11/24/63, 16)
British sources reported U.S. would disclose details of its space launch vehicles to European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) in exchange for cooperative work on joint space projects. (Manchester Guardian, Wash. Post, 1/3/63) January 4; telstar i communications satellite transmitted 10-min. television pictures across the Atlantic, the satellite’s first transatlantic transmission since Nov. 23 when radiation damaged onboard circuits. Eugene S. O’Neill, director of satellite communications for Bell Telephone Laboratories, said btl scientists “tricked telstar’s decoders into receiving commands” by changing the command signals slightly. Remote-control repair was performed after btl constructed laboratory model of telstar i with its faulty circuits and experimented with it to devise corrective signals, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/5/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/5/63, Al, A3)
Bell Telephone Laboratories received patent for improved system of controlling satellite attitude. Invented by C. C. Cutler, system operates by two-way radio which receives signals from satellite for measuring its alignment; ground computer analyzes attitude data and figures any necessary attitude changes, relays them to instruments on satellite which makes corrections in satellite’s position. (Jones, NYT, 5/11/63, 28)
Value of weather Tiros satellites in giving advance warning of tropical storms was underscored by Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D.-Fla.) : “Yesterday’s discovery of Hurricane Flora is a prime example. . . . Through the efforts of the U.S. Weather Bureau, using data supplied bv a weather satellite, warnings were issued a bare 3 hours before the 110-mile-an-hour winds hit the islands [of Trinidad and Tobago]. Because of the 22-mile-an-hour forward speed of the storm, little or no warning would have been possible without the quick work of U.S. weathermen and their new ally, the satellite. While the damage was extensive, untold lives were saved and property damage prevented by the advance warning.” (CR, 10/1/63,17456)
Addressing First World Conference on World Peace Through Law in Athens, nasa Communications Systems Director Leonard Jaffe described role of satellites in communications and said: “. . . Today, approximately 300 telephone channels are available across the North Atlantic. “Notwithstanding these recent and radical improvements in trans-Atlantic telephone service, we can predict the need for still more channels. Every time communication channels have increased, they have been loaded to capacity almost at once—new means for communication have never caused the abandonment of the old ones. During 1960 there were more than three million overseas telephone calls, and reliable estimates indicate a sevenfold increase in overseas calls during the next decade. Such an increase in traffic will overtax the current and planned undersea cables, and high frequency radio facilities. And our current communication facilities have no capability for transmitting television. . . . “Communications satellites should soon be providing a substantial increase in our capabilities for world-wide high quality common carrier communications, at least over those routes where the volume of traffic exceeds present or forecast capabilities, and is also great enough to justify the necessarily large investment in a communications satellite system. Eventually, we hope that communications satellite technology will be improved to the point where service can also be provided to areas not served by other means, either because of their isolation or because the traffic volume does not justify an investment in more conventional communication means. “The objective of the United States in this area was voiced by President Kennedy in a public statement, not too long ago, in which he said: ‘There is no more important field at the present time than communications, and we must grasp the advantages presented to us by the communications satellite to use this medium wisely and effectively to insure greater understanding among the peoples of the world.’ ” (Text)
Letter from David Samoff, rca Board Chairman, to Leo D. Welch, Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman, was disclosed by Drew Pearson in Washington Post. Referring to new technology of transoceanic transistorized cables, Samoff said: “In my view, the transistorized cable does not alter the fundamental premise that early development of an operational communications satellite system is vital to our national prestige and to continued U.S. leadership in both communications and space technology. “Nevertheless, a second premise—that the facilities of a global satellite system will be needed to meet the expected growth of commercial demand for oversea communications services beyond 1965—now needs careful reevaluation in terms of the possible effects upon the [Communications] Satellite Corporation of this latest technological breakthrough. . . . “One transistorized cable, laid across the North Atlantic, could connect areas possessing nearly 90 percent of all the world’s present telephones .... “One new transistorized cable will have a capacity almost double that of all existing transoceanic cables. . . . “We should now consider an amendment to the present law which would enable the satellite corporation to acquire through purchase the international telephone and telegraph facilities and operations, both present and planned, of all American carriers. “Unification of all the Nation’s international communication facilities and operations—satellites, cables, and radios—would in my opinion assure the satellite corporation’s commercial success, best serve our overall national interests, provide the most flexible and economical service to the public, and maintain America’s leadership in world communications . . . .” (Wash. Post, 5/28/63; Letter, 4/2/63, in CR, 5/28/63, 9207-09)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxm into earth orbit (apogee, 381 mi.; perigee, 149 mi.; period, 92.9 min.; inclination to the equator, 49°), the satellite carrying scientific instrumentation for “continuing the study of outer space” in accordance with March 16, 1962, Tass announcement. Tass said onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 12/14/63, 1, atbs-t Trans.)
usaf launched three unidentified satellites and a TetrahedraL Research Satellite (trs) from Pt. Arguello: a single unidentifiea satellite from a Thor-Agena D vehicle and the other two unidentified satellites with the trs from an Atlas-Agena B launch vehicle. The 1.5-lb. trs was to measure solar cell radiation damage. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64; M&R, 7/29/63, 28)
International Telephone and Telegraph Corp. (it&t) announced it had filed application with fcc for authority to purchase stock in newly-formed Communications Satellite Corp. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/15/63, C6)
Reported that State Dept, officials were “dismayed” and surprised Kv ronArfc frnm T ArtHnn Hiqf TT TT Cnvommpnf liorl onTPhrl tn ^	---- ^	^ 'y ~~ —"	~ establish independent space communications system with 12 British companies. U.S. was hoping its Communications Satellite Corp. could become the U.S. participant in a global communications system, a noncompetitive, nonduplieative, and cooperative system. State Dept, cabled London to request clarification as to whether U.K. was actually moving to establish a competitive— and potentially duplicating—space communications system. (Finney, NTT [West. Ed.], 3/13/63)
injttn i satellite, silent since Dec. 25, responded to signals of State Univ. of Iowa scientists, who did not know cause of the cosmic-ray satellite’s transmission interruption. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/30/63)
After 10 months of satisfactory operation in orbit, explorer xiv scientific satellite, with its six experiments to measure energetic particles and magnetic fields in space, was still functioning. During the 10 months, data acquisition stations received 6,003 hrs. of data from explorer xiv, of which more than 4,500 hrs. were digitized and 3,200 hrs. were sent to the six experimenters, (nasa explorer xiv Prog. Rpt. No. 5)
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric said in testimony before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on dod Appropriations: “Our goal is to establish, at an early date, a developmental communications satellite system consisting of a minimum number of simple, reliable satellites together with a minimum number of widely spaced ground stations, which can be tested and evaluated as a ‘package’ within the framework of the established military communications network. This program would demonstrate the technical and operational characteristics of such a system as well as its compatibility with the existing communications complex. The ability to transmit signals between a satellite and two ground stations has already been demonstrated. But the ability of a ‘system,’ comprising a number of satellites and ground stations, to provide a reliable means of military communication has yet to be explored . . . .” (Testimony)
nasa announced syncom n communications satellite achieved perfection of orbit probably unparalleled by any other previous satellite. At more than 22,000-mi. altitude, orbit varies from absolute circle by no more than 4.5 mi. Orbital period—23 hrs., 55 min., 54 sec.—is only 10.09 sec. shorter than mean sidereal day. Virtually stationary over 55th meridian of west longitude, syncom n is drifting eastward so slowly that it would take nearly a month to move a single degree. Drifting will be corrected periodically, and the communications satellite can be expected to remain on station and operating for more than two years. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/5/63)
Dr. Dwain W. Warner, curator of ornithology at Minnesota Museum of Natural History, proposed in Natural History magazine that scientific satellites be used in tracking animal migrations. Dr. Warner proposed animals be tagged with transistor radios and batteries weighing y2 to 2 oz; satellite in 200-mi. polar orbit would pick up signals and transmit them to scientists who could plot animals’ locations and correlate them with other data from satellites. Transistors had been successfully tested with small animals and large birds, but tracking by ground stations was hindered by horizon line; satellite with 24 ground receiving stations could provide constant contact with migratory creatures. (AP, Balt. Sum,, 2/6/63)
relay i satellite transmitted 12-min. Voice of America program as well as AP and upi news dispatches from Nutley, N.J., to Rio de Janeiro and back. Transmissions were reported perfect, even though ordinary high-frequency radio communication with Rio was not possible because of atmosphere conditions. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/17/63; AP, Wash. Post, 1/18/63,4)
nasa announced it had awarded letter contract to rca AstroElectronics Div. for fabrication and test of additional Tiros weather satellites; negotiations of final contract were continuing for total purchase of seven satellites—three r&d type, two operational, and two backup. Before this order, eight Tiros satellites had been funded in r&d phase of the program; six had been placed in orbit since April 1960 and two would be launched in 1963. (nasa Release 63-29)
U.S.-Canada agreement for cooperative testing of communications satellites launched by nasa was announced by nasa and Canada’s Dept, of Transport. Each cooperating national agency would provide a ground station to receive and transmit television and multichannel telephone and telegraphic signals via communications satellites, according to Memorandum of Understanding signed in April and made operative by exchange of notes today. - (nasa Release 63-194)
Unnamed nasa spokesman quoted as saying echo i’s orbit was “holding up fine” and could last another year or more. Although partially crumpled, balloon satellite launched Aug. 12,1960, was still visible to naked eye. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63)
nasa announced that tiros vi weather satellite was no longer sending usable cloud-cover pictures, after 13 months of successful operation ana some o i ,ow pictures. \ naba AW3ie<»oo uu—Z&Z)
Three-minute portion of U.S. color television program received in France via telstar ii communications satellite, nbc transmitted the program, Bell Telephone Hour, from New York to the satellite through Andover, Me., ground station. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/9/63)
U.K. announced it had established a space research station for satellite observation at the Sembawang naval air station in Singapore, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 11/15/65)
syncom n and relay i linked Rio de Janeiro and Lagos, Nigeria, in 20-min. voice conversation, first operation employing both communications satellites in single communications circuit and world’s first three-continent telephone conversation. Signal began from usns Kingsport in Lagos harbor, then to syncom n, which sent it to Lakehurst, N.J., ground station, then by overland wire to Nutley, N.J., ground station, then to relay i overhead which sent it to Rio de Janeiro ground station, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center engineers monitoring the conversation declared quality of transmission to be good, (gsfc Release G-17-63; AP, Wasfu Post, 9/14/63; N.Y. Herald Trb., 9/14/63) *
usaf selected General Electric Co. and Philco Corp. with Space Technology Laboratories (jointly) to compete for development of dod medium-altitude communications satellite. Under two-month contracts, each contractor would propose technical approach, refine cost estimates, and develop internal management structures. Then, should dod decide to proceed with such a comsat system employing 20-30 satellites, one of the contractors would be selected to conduct development phase of usaf portion, (dod xveiease oi-t—<jo)
Dr. Simon Ramo, of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, was quoted as being skeptical of feasibility of using artificial satellites for militarily aggressive purposes, saying: “We often hear the mistaken impression that a bomb dropped from a satellite will fall to earth. Of course, it won’t. It will reach the earth only if it is pushed away from the satellite with the right amount of force and with controlled direction. The whole launching operation (from a satellite) is more difficult that that of launching an icbm from a point on earth. Also, the flight will take very much longer....” (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 4/11/63)
Tiros meteorological satellite discovered Hurricane Flora in the Atlantic off northern coast of South America, (upi, Wash. Post, 10/1/63)
nasa announced award of $97,000 study contract to Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., for preparation of plan to use satellites for collection of weather and oceanographic data from unmanned weather stations, buoys, and balloons. Data collection satellite would interrogate each station, store information on magnetic tape, then transmit it to ground retrieval station upon command, (nasa Release 63-116)
General Electric Co. announced usaf Titan II “carries a re-entry vehicle which would ‘significantly increase’ this country’s ability to penetrate antimissile defenses.” (Witkiin, y7/29/63) July 29: nasa announced syncom u communications satellite was performing “extremely well,” drifting westward at rate of 4.5° per day. Orbital data: 22,800-mi. apogee, 22,110-mi. perigee, 1,454min. period (slightly more than 24 hours), syncom ii was expected to be on station above Brazil in about three weeks. (AP, NYT, 7/30/63)
telstar ii communications satellite placed in elliptical orbit (6,717-mi. apogee, 604-mi. perigee, 225.3-min. period, 42.7° inclination to equator). Thor-Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral boosted the satellite into orbit for its 17th straight success, an unmatched record for U.S. satellite-launching vehicles. telstar ii included design changes aimed at protecting it from radiation damage which affected lifetime of its predecessor, telstar i. With apogee nearly twice that of telstar i, it would provide longer periods of communications between U.S. and Western Europe than did telstar i. Like its predecessor, telstar ii was designed and built by at&t’s Bell Telephone Laboratories at at&t expense, launched by nasa with at&t reimbursing nasa for Delta vehicle, launching, and tracking services. Initial communications test, TV transmission from Andover, Me., to Goon-hilly Downs, England, via the satellite on its fourth orbit, was successful, (nasa Release 63-83; nasa telstar ii Prog. Rpt. No. 2; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/7/63)
Aviation Week reported that usaf and usn were pressing nasa to improve the reliability of the Scout launch vehicle. The Navy was said to have had only 50% success with it in their Transit navigational satellite program, usaf was said to have had a little better performance but only because it had undertaken a complete and expensive checkout of components. Government-furnished equipment was said to be especially unreliable. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63,34)
Weather Bureau stopped its portion of the funding of the Nimbus meteorological satellite because the current Nimbus offers an operational lifetime of no more than one year. Weather Bureau would continue using improved Tiros satellite while cooperating with nasa in development of a follow-on satellite with a lifetime of several years, nasa said it would continue the development of the Nimbus r&d models, (nasa Release 63-220; Commerce Release; Wash. Post, 10/4/63,2)
Soviet press agency Tass announced cosmos xviii satellite had been placed in orbit (apogee, 187 mi.; perigee, 130 mi.; period, 89.44 min.; inclination, 65°01' to the equator). Onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 5/25/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
U.S. Weather Bureau announced it was purchasing 11 ground stations capable of receiving cloud pictures directly from Nimbus meteorological satellites, to be launched by nasa beginning late this year. The stations would receive cloud pictures of their local areas taken by automatic picture transmission (apt) subsystem in the weather satellite, apt device would take and transmit cloud picture automatically every 208 sec., each photograph showing area of about l,000-mi.-by-l,000-mi. Meteorologists expected to make immediate use of Nimbus cloud pictures. (Dept, of Commerce Release WB 63-3)
At Fourth Congress of the World Meteorological Organization, being held in Geneva, U.S. delegation circulated paper describing plans to orbit a Nimbus weather satellite in 1963, the satellite to provide daily photographic observations of the globe. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 4/8/63)
U.S. television audiences witnessed first public appearance of Pope Paul VI via relax communications satellite, (cbs TV)
gsfc awarded contract to Yale Univ. to design and develop a worldwide radio monitoring network for study of planet Jupiter. Four stations would comprise the global network, located at approximately every 90° longitude around the earth— one at gsfc in Greenbelt, Md., and the other three at U.S. satellite tracking stations in Hartesbeesthoek, South Africa; Carnarvon, Australia; and South Point, Hawaii. Primary duty of the stations would be to maintain a 24-hr. radio monitor of the mysterious low-frequency radio noises sporadically emitted from the planet. The data should provide information on Jupiter’s magnetosphere, the interplanetary medium, and the earth’s ionosphere. (gsfc Release G-25-6'3)
Bv its 1,842nd orbit, relay i communications satellite had been used in 930 wideband experiments; 409 narrowband experiments; 95 demonstrations (TV and narrowband). Transponder had been operated for 190 hrs. over period of 454 operations. (gsfc Historian, Memo, 8/14/63)
dod launched two unidentified satellites and Tetrahedral Research Satellite (trs n) using Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. 3-lb. trs n was to measure charged particle intensity in Van Allen belts. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
explorer xviii (Imp) satellite completed second of its long elliptical orbits (apogee, 122,800 mi.; perigee, 119 mi.), and all systems appeared to be functioning as planned. Lifetime of imp-a, launched Nov. 26 from Cape Canaveral, revised by nasa from estimated 12 months to hundreds of years. (nasa Release 63-265; Ad-A, February 1964, 11)
Television photographs of Lt. Col. Valery F. Bykovsky (U.S.S.R.) in orbiting spacecraft were viewed by U.S. television audience. Soviet-bloc TV system Intervision’s broadcast of photographs from space was received in Helsinki, where telecast was put onto Western Europe TV system Eurovision. Telecast was taped and edited in London, then sent to Goonhilly Downs for transmission via telstar n communications satellite to receiving station in Andover, Me.; there it was sent to New York, where all three U.S. networks picked it up. {NYT, 6/15/63, 35)
tiros vii meteorological satellite discovered Hurricane Debra, fourth hurricane of season, headed north in Atlantic southeast of Bermuda. (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/23/63)
U.K. and France were calling conference of European Postal and Telecommunications Administrations to discuss possibility of European communications satellite system, U.K. Foreign Office spokesman said. U.K. had abandoned any plan to develop its own system. Conference participants would be Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom, and West Germany. {NYT, 5/16/63, 19)
At Delta Day ceremony, Cape Canaveral, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced nasa had ordered 14 more Delta space vehicles from prime contractor Douglas Aircraft Co., most of which were expected to be used in launching additional nasa communications satellites and meteorological satellites as well as new scientific satellites, (nasa Release 63-39)
WICUOU	AJ\J ) nasa announced it would negotiate contract with Fairchild Stratos Corp. for two meteoroid detection satellites to be launched by Saturn I vehicles. Once in orbit, the two-ton satellite would extend its two “wings” totaling 96-ft. length and providing area of more than 2,000 sq. ft. exposure to possible meteoroid hits. Aluminum skin of wings would be electrically charged; penetration of skin by meteoroid would trigger an electrical pulse which would be recorded and radioed back to earth. First of the satellites was scheduled for launch in late 1965. (nasa Release 63-24)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition, described the four areas of nasa’s applications program— communications systems, meteorological systems, future applications satellites, and industrial applications: “The space research and development effort is so broad that there will be ideas and innovations in almost every field. Products, based upon space development and produced using techniques and materials created for space use, may become increasingly evident with time in the everyday life of the nation. “The applications program ranges over a very broad spectrum of scientific and industrial activity. We are concerned with investigations from purely scientific interest in atmospheric physics to problems associated with commercial communications satellites. It is a very challenging area of work and it is most satisfying to our people to find that great benefits are accruing to the nation from meteorological and communications satellite developments, and now from industrial applications as well.” (Testimony)
Both U.S. communications satellites, telstar i and relay i, came to life, telstar i, silent since Nov. 23, responded to signals sent by Bell Telephone Laboratories; later in the day, relay i, silent since first being orbited Dec. 13, responded twice to television test patterns sent from New Jersey and Maine. (Wash. Post, 1/4/63, Al)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from pmr using Thor-Agena D launch vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64) August 26: Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) submitted to the House the conference report and statement on bill (H.R. 7500) to authorize FY 1964 appropriations to nasa. As reported, bill would authorize total appropriations of $5,350,820,400. Report was submitted to Senate August 28. (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. II/ 133)	...	.	.
Radar contact with copper dipoles launched in usaf Project West Ford confirmed they were successfully ejected into orbit from unidentified usaf satellite, mit Lincoln Laboratoiy announced. Fibers were still in compact cloud circling earth every 166 min. in near-polar orbit, some 2,000 mi. high and at approximately 87° to equator; on May 13 dipoles had begun to spread in elongated cloud. Fibers were expected to spread along circular orbital path, some 40,000 mi. in circumference, to form ring around earth. Orbital ring would be used in bouncing radio signals back to earth over long distances, (dod Release 666-63; NYT, 5/13/63, 1; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/13/63, A3; Sullivan, NYT, 5/14/63,18)
Third anniversary of orbiting of tiros i, first U.S. meteorological satellite, which provided during its 78-day lifetime more than 19,000 usable cloud-cover photographs, tiros i was followed by five additional successful Tiros satellites, the last two of which—tiros v and vi—were still in operation after more than nine and six months respectively. To date, tiros v had transmitted more than 44,000 useful cloud-system photographs and tiros vi, more than 39,000. tiros v and vi photographed hurricanes and typhoons in July, August, and September 1962; in August alone, they discovered two Atlantic hurricanes and four Pacific typhoons. Since April 1, 1962, there were only seven days when a Tiros satellite was not in operation. Information gathered by satellites was being used in daily operations of Weather Bureau’s National Meteorological Center in weather analyses and forecasts for entire U.S. (nasa Release 63-65; Commerce Dept. Release WB 63-4)
cosmos xxiv earth satellite orbited by U.S.S.R. (apogee, 254 mi.; perigee, 131 mi.; period, 90.5 min.; inclination to the equator, 65°). Tass said the satellite carried scientific instrumentation for “continuing the study of outer space” in accordance with program announced March 16,1962, and the onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/20/68, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Televised White House ceremony, with President Kennedy signing bill making Sir Winston Churchill an honorary citizen of the U.S.j was transmitted to England and Europe via relay i communications satellite. Broadcast was viewed by millions of Britons and Sir Winston himself, and both audio and visual reception were considered perfect, (nasa Release 63-69; Wash. Post, 4/10/63)
January 15: telstar communications satellite relayed pictures of opening of East German Communist party congress to television viewers in U.S. (Chicago Trib., 1/16/63)
U.S.S.R. unannounced launching (1963 1-A, 1-C), with fragments re-entering from Jan. 5 through Jan. 11. Launch reported by gsfc in Satellite Situation Report, June 15, 1963. (gsfc Sat. Sit. Rpt., June 15,1963)
French Scientific Research Minister Gaston Palewski told French National Assembly a satellite launching site would be established in Eastern Pyrenees Department near the Spanish border. France's first satellite was scheduled for launching in 1965; other European satellites may also be launched from the site. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 1/12/63)
After prolonged debate, Senate confirmed nominations of the 14 incorporators of Communications Satellite Corp. (CR, 4/24/63, 6606f; CR, 4/25/63, 6698-99)
Frederick R. Kappel, Chairman of the Board of at&t, was presented Silver Quill Award of National Business Publications at 12th annual State-of-the-Nation dinner, Washington. In accepting the award, Mr. Kappel said that at&t’s telstar communications satellite had “provided basic assurance that satellite communications are indeed feasible and practical, and that design and construction of commercial satellites, and ground stations to work with them, can now be approached pretty much as a straight engineering project. There is no scientific obstacle to designing a commercial system immediately, and bringing it into being as soon as the satellites could be manufactured and put into orbit, say in 2 or 3 years . . . .” {CR, 2/11/63, A656)
dod plans to orbit its first two experimental satellites for detecting nuclear tests in outer space reported by New York Times. The Project Vela satellites, under jurisdiction of dod’s Advanced Research Projects Agency, were expected to be capable of detecting unshielded nuclear tests as small as 10 kllotons and as far away as 180,000,000 mi. from earth. To be launched this fall, satellites would orbit earth at 50,000-60,000 mi. (NYT, 8/7/63, 12)
Enea Bossi, international aviation pioneer, died in Dayton, Ohio. Native of Milan, Bossi built and flew his own airplane in 1908; he designed first Italian seaplane. After coming to U.S. in 1919, Bossi designed first U.S. stainless steel plane, most successful manpowered aircraft, and an early helicopter. He also invented vacuum fuel-intake system used in U.S. automobiles during 1920’s. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/12/63)	...	. ,January 10: explorer xiv energetic particles satellite developed radio transmission difficulty, not repairable by remote control. Exact cause of difficulty, apparently in one of the binary counters of satellite’s encoder system, was not determined, (nasa explorer xrv Program. Rpt. No. 4; nasa Release 63-6)
nasa and French National Center for Space Studies (cnes) jointly announced signing of Memorandum of Understanding for a cooperative U.S.-France program to investigate propagation of vlf electromagnetic waves. First phase of the program would consist of two electromagnetic-field experiments with French-instrumented payloads to be launched from nasa Wallops Station. Second phase, to be implemented upon mutual consent that Phase I had proved the experiments to be scientifically and technically feasible, would consist of orbiting of scientific satellite, designed and built by France, with a Scout vehicle. (Memo of Understanding; nasa Release 63-49) 741-623 0—64--7
By this date, 53 communications companies had filed with Federal Communications Commission for authorization to purchase common carrier stock in Communications Satellite Corp. (Av. Wk., 4/1/63, 30)
nasa scheduled the first Synoom communications satellite to be launched into orbit in which the satellite would truly remain stationary with respect to the earth in orbit—synchronous, equatorial, and circular—in the second quarter of 1964. Thrust-Augmented Delta (tad) launch vehicle would boost the spacecraft into 22,300-mi. eccentric orbit from Cape Kennedy, and at apogee Syn-oom’s onboard kick motor would place the satellite in circular orbit. Equatorial position would be achieved by change of orbital plane—once as third stage fires and again as kick motor fires at equatorial injection point. The spacecraft would then move to on-station position at 180° longitude over the Pacific Ocean, where it would be stopped by onboard gas jets. The satellite will provide the first continuous communications link between Asia and North America, (nasa Release 63-263)
On his 66th birthday, Pope Paul VT recognized 175th anniversary of Georgetown Univ. by a special address broadcast to U.S. via teistar n communications satellite. (NYT, 9/27/63, 9; nbc-TV, 9/26/63)
tiros v meteorological satellite, launched June 19, 1962, entered its eleventh month of operation, surpassing previous longevity production record of tiros n. Since launch, tiros v had collected and transmitted more than 53,000 cloud-cover photographs of which more than 42,000 were meteorologically usable, (nasa Release 63-77)
United Arab Republic announced it planned to orbit a weather satellite this year. (Wash. Daily News, 4/23/63)
nasa announced publication of “Handbook on Space Radiation Effects to Solar Cell Power Systems,” prepared for nasa by Exotech, Inc., of Alexandria, Va. The handbook and the recently published transcript of Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, held m Wash. ington earlier this year, were expected to help industry produce more durable, radiation-resistant solar-cell systems for satellites. (nasa Release 63-187)
Special camera for optical tracking of satellites at Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern, England, described in London Times. Camera weighed 8y2 tons, had focal length of 24 in. with aperture of f/1. According to Ministry of Aviation, the instrument had been working since last November and had photographed Discoverer and Anna satellites in orbit. A second identical camera would be operating at Malvern in several weeks. (London Times, 2/20/63,15, and 2/22/63,22)
cosmos xvi launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit of 401-km. apogee, 207-km. perigee, 90.4-min. period, and 65°01' inclination to equator. Tass said the satellite contained “scientific equipment intended to continue the space research in accordance with the program announced . . . March 16, 1962.” (Tass, Pravda, 4/29/63, 3; afss-t Trans.)
telstar ii communications satellite resumed operating for first time since July 16. Satellite received and transmitted sound and television picture test sent by Bell Telephone Laboratories on telstar ii’s 622nd orbit. Cause of the satellite’s restoration, like its silence, was not known. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/13/63; NYT. 8/13/63,12)
stncom ii communications satellite relayed its first live telephone conversations, a transmission between President Kennedy and Nigerian Prime Minister Sir Abubaker Tafawa Balewa and other messages between U.S., Nigerian, and U.N. officials. Arranged by usia, the demonstration program originated from the White House and Voice of America studios in Washington and from ground station aboard usns Kingsport in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. (Goddard News, 8/26/63, 3; Av. Week, 9/2/63, 24)
nasa awarded four-month study contracts for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite to Radio Corp. of America and Hughes Aircraft. rca would study camera resolution requirements in synchronous-orbit weather satellite and ways to modify Tiros satellite launched into highly eccentric orbit (about 22,000 mi. apogee and 200-300-mi. perigee). Hughes would study way in which a Syncom communications satellite could be modified for installation of weather satellite cameras. (M&R, 4/22/63, 10)
Chief of nasa Future Applications Satellites Capt. Alton B. Moody (usnr), addressing graduating class of U.S. Naval Academy, described nonmilitary navigation satellite system being studied by nasa. One such system could provide position determination, air traffic control, ship surveillance, search and rescue, fleet monitoring, and weather routing services. (Text)
European interest in a cooperative communications satellite effort was continuing. The U.K. and 12 other European countries met on the subject in Paris in May 1963 and in London in July. Various committees were formed to study the technical, economic, and political problems involved and these committees were to report to a meeting to be held in Rome on Nov. 27. The general direction of the discussions has been toward some sort of partnership between the European countries and the U.S. ComSatCorp. (Farnsworth, NYT, 11/3/63,12F)
nasa Director of Communications Systems, Leonard Jaffee, announced nasa would attempt to launch Syncom communications satellite into synchronous orbit with Delta vehicle no earlier than Feb. 13. Previously announced for no earlier than Feb. 6, Syncom launch was postponed “to insure that the [command and control] equipment is completely checked out” aboard usns Kingsport, stationed in Lagos Harbor, and on the launch vehicle at Cape Canaveral. (Teen. Background Briefing, 1/29/63)
Hughes Aircraft Co., prime contractor for syncom n communica Ar»o onfnllif a nnnAiinrtAil fli.. nono outuxuiA/^ ciimvuiiv^u liiv cTTnoliT»AT>Aiio	finnr c*ofol 11fa Vvo/1 oj xivm viivuo 'vi	ouxviiito nwu accumulated more message time than all other communications satellites combined, stncom n was launched July 26, maneuvered into 24-hr. station Aug. 15. {Space Bus. Daily, 8/28/63, 306)
telstar ii communications satellite went dead during its 450th orbit, and subsequent efforts to reactivate the satellite by radio signal were not successful. Cause of telstar ii’s failure was not known, but at&t said that telemetry data had given “no indication that radiation damage has caused the satellite to fail.” Efforts to turn on the satellite’s communications equipment were continuing. (Osmundsen, NTT, 7/18/63; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/18/63)	_	_
Voice and teletype messages exchanged via syncom ii communications satellite between ground station at Paso Robles, Calif., and communications ship Kingsport in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. The test spanned 7,700 mi., greatest surface distance ever spanned between two points on earth via a communications satellite, (nasa “syncom ii Fact Sheet”; N.Y. Herald Tnb., 8/10/63)
U.K. Office of the Minister for Science announced contract had been awarded to British Aircraft Corp., Ltd., for development and construction of UK-3 (S-53) satellite, nasa would launch the experimental satellite into orbit in about four years. (AP, Wash. Post, 6/7/63)
cosmos xx was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. A scientific satellite for “continuing the study of space,” cosmos xx was stated to have an apogee of 311 km. (193 mi.) ; perigee of 206 km. (128 mi.); period, 89.55 min.; and inclination, 65°. (Komsomolskaya Pravda, Oct. 19,1963, 1, afss-t Trans.)
John H. Rubel, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told House Committee on Science aqd Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition that dod planned to initiate a communications satellite program definition study in May or June, the program based on goal of putting 24-30 operational satellites into orbit by end of 1965. “Approximately six satellites will be launched per booster, using the . . . Atlas-Agena D. The six satellites will be ejected at slightly different velocities into an approximately 6,000-mi.-altitude circular polar orbit, where they will gradually spread out. The successive clusters will be injected into orbital planes spaced 45 deg. apart.” System would be developed jointly by usaf and Army, usaf being responsible for space-related activities and Army for ground stations. (Av. Wk., 4/15/63,27)
The Rosman, N.C., tracking and data acquisition facility was dedicated by nasa. A key station in nasa’s Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), the 85-ft.-diameter parabolic antenna at Rosman would be used to track and receive the large flow of telemetered data from the large orbiting observatories and would relay the data by telephone and radio to gsfc for processing and analysis, (nasa Release 63-240)
Mstislav Keldysh, President of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, reported on Soviet progress in science at annual meeting of the Academy: “New successes have been achieved by our scientists in the field of space radio communications. New data have been obtained as the result of the radar observation of Mercury carried out for the first time and the repeated radar observation of Venus. Communications were made possible by reflecting telegraphy signals from the planet Venus . . . “Research by satellites and rockets . . . [is] opening new possibilities for understanding the powerful effect of cosmic factors on electromagnetic and hydrodynamic phenomena in the atmosphere which, in turn, decisively influence life on earth. I think that very important discoveries will be made in the near future in the field of physics of the atmosphere . . . .”	(Pravda, 2/5/63, afss-t Trans.)
President John F. Kennedy addressed the centennial meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington: “. . . it took the First World War to bring science into central contact with government policy, and it took the Second World War to make scientific counsel an indispensable function of government .... “Every time you scientists make a major invention, we politicians have to invent a new institution to cope with it—and almost invariably, these days, it must be an international institution. I am not just thinking of the fact that when you people figure out how to build a global satellite communication system, we have to figure out a global organization to manage it. I am thinking, as well, that scientific advance provided the rationale for the World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization—that splitting the atom leads not only to a nuclear arms race but to the establishment of the International Atomic Energy Agency—that the need for scientific exploration of Antarctica leads to an international treaty providing free access to the area without regard to territorial claims—that the scientific possibility of a World Weather Watch requires the attention of the World Meteorological Organization—that the exploration of international oceans leads to the establishment of an Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission .... The ocean, the atmosphere and outer space belong not to one nation or to one ideology but to all mankind. “. . . ours is a century of scientific conquest and scientific triumph. If scientific discovery has not been an unalloyed blessing, if it has conferred on mankind the power not only to create but also to annihilate, it has at the same time provided humanity with a supreme challenge and a supreme testing. If the challenge and the testing are too much for humanity, then we are all doomed. But my own faith is plain and clear. I believe that the power of science and the responsibility of science have offered mankind a new opportunity not only for intellectual growth but for moral discipline—not only for the acquisition of knowledge but for the strengthening of nerve and will.” (CR, 10/28/63, 19279-80)
Bochum Institute for Satellite and Space Research, Germany, announced reception of 15-min. radio transmission on frequencies normally used by Soviet spacecraft. Commercial radio station in Paris broadcast that U.S.S.R. had placed a man into space but did not elaborate. Soviet news agency Tass made no mention of space launching, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/4/63)
cosmos xvn launched into orbit by U.S.S.R. (apogee, 488 mi.; perigee, 161 mi.; period, 94.82 min.; inclination, 49°02' to equator). As with previous Cosmos satellites, Tass said scientific equipment “intended for continuing the study of interplanetary space . . . was mounted on board. (Tass, Izvestia, 5/23/63, 1, afss-t Trans.)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D from Pt. Arguello with unidentified satellite. (M&R, 9/16/63, 11-12)
rca announced relay i communications satellite had operated succesfully for 203 days, setting record for performance and durability by a communications satellite, rca, which built satellite for nasa, said relay i had traveled estimated 156 million mi. and carried out more than 1,350 communications experiments and demonstrations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/29/63)
First international art program via communications satellite was presented over nbc-tv. Entitled “Museums Without Walls,” the half-hour program interchanged views of paintings from the Louvre in Paris and the National Gallery in Washington via Relay communications satellite. The program went off without any significant technical difficulties and reception was excellent. (Gould, NYT, 11/18/63,59)
nasa announced award of four-month study contract to bca Astro-Electronics Div. for engineering evaluation of whether Tiros meteorological satellite could be modified to increase its cloud-cover photography capability, bca would evaluate Tiros “wheel configuration,” calling for two TV cameras mounted in satellite to point in opposite directions; satellite would be launched into polar orbit spinning on its side, pointed towards earth at all times. Such satellite could provide complete earth coverage every three days. ( nasa Release 63-115)
On a date not released, dod launched a pickaback satellite attached to a principal satellite payload boosted by Thor-Agena D. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
U.S. Navy announced it had successfully permanently stabilized an orbiting satellite through use of 100-ft. boom. Difference in gravitational forces acting on satellite and on end of the boom aligned satellite so that its face will be permanently pointed toward earth. As satellite was tumbling through space with its face toward earth, boom was released from canister, causing entire assembly to rock through 40° arc. Weight attached to boom by 40-ft. spring bobbed yo-yo fashion, slowing oscillation of boom and satellite until nearly all sway was removed. Satellite would remain stabilized indefinitely. Navy announcement said this was first successful stabilization of satellite without fueled mechanical controls, (dod Release 103436)	_
relay i communications satellite was used to transmit electroencephalograms (“brain waves”) from Bristol, England, to Minneapolis, Minn., in demonstration experiment conducted in connection with meeting of National Academy of Neurology in Minneapolis, (nasa Release 63-85)
cosmos xiv scientific satellite launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit (apogee, 318 mi.; perigee, 165 mi.; period, 92.1 min.; inclination, 48° 57' to the equator). Tass said satellite was carrying equipment “designed to continue the study of outer space,” and that the satellite was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/14/63, 1, afss-t Trans.; NYT, 4/15/63, 25; upi. Wash. Post, 4/14/63)
relay i communications satellite was turned off because of severe drain on the onboard power supply, a difficulty similar to that encountered during first week after launch. Power drain was encountered March 9 after relay i’s orbit had been in earth’s shadow for five weeks and spacecraft temperatures were low. When satellite was exposed again to constant sunlight, a voltage regulator switch became too hot to operate properly and power drain occurred, nasa and rca engineers were hopeful that onboard batteries could be recharged by power from solar cells during period of rest. Between January 3 and March 9, relay i had operated successfully in about 500 communications experiments, including first voice, facsimile, and teletype links via satellite between U.S. and South America, (nasa Release, 63-54)
usaf launched unidentified satellite using Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle from Pt. Arguello, Calif. This was the 100th launch of an Agena space vehicle, the first having been launched on February 28, 1959. (upi, Wash. Post, 7/13/63; M&R, 7/22/63, 11; A-N-AF Journal and Register, January 1964; CR, 2/18/64, 2909)
dod announced solar radiation i satellite, orbited June 22,1960, with transit n-A, was turned on again on Feb. 25, after 22 months of silence, (dod Release 321-63)
Five New Jersey newspapermen held first press conference through space, using relay i communications satellite in 25-min. broadcast to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Photo of newsmen sent via relay i during conference was of good quality, Rio officials said. (AP, Santa Monica Evening Outlook, 4/17/63)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev formally welcomed Cosmonauts Valery F. Bykovsky and Valentina V. Tereshkova in ceremony before crowds in Moscow’s Red Square. Later, in Kremlin reception, the cosmonauts were awarded Hero of the Soviet Union and Pilot-Astronaut citations as well as Order of Lenin and Gold Star medals. (Topping, NYT, 6/23/63,1,8) Jv/ne 33: explorer xiv was eclipsed by the moon—a possible first in satellite history. Satellite was some 70,000 km. from the earth with apogee portion in the sun’s direction when a 19-min. shadow occurred between approximately 0151 and 0210 UT. (gsfc Historian)
Informants said in Cairo that Egyptian scientists were interested in obtaining a satellite tracking station from U.S. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/20/63)
Reported in Aviation World (Flugwelt) that West Germany has a $25 million-budget to develop a series of 5 satellites to be built under nasa’s established quality control standards. The satellite would consist of three parts: the satellite capsule with a recovery unit, the sun mirror, the energy converter. The first satellite recovery capsule would descend with the aid of a parachute; later models would include a winged glider version. Telemetric transmissions and subsequent evaluation would commence as soon as the satellite enters an Earth orbit. The second satellite and the remainder of the series would be equipped with engines that will permit changes in the orbital parameters. On the second satellite small solid fuel rockets would be used, but the following models could be equipped with ion engines. The satellite’s mission would include research in the guidance and direction stabilization systems during the launching investigation of the orbital rendezvous problems, as well as a study of the radiation belts. In the case of the fifth satellite, the ion engines could be replaced with nuclear-powered engines to permit continuous orbital changes and accelerate to an escape velocity. (Flugwelt {Aviation World), Nov., 1963; sin, Jan., 1964)
Tremendous atmospheric explosion in Kimberley Mountains of Western Australia was reported by observers, who saw trail of smoke and ball of orange flame and heard the explosion. Australian Weather Office spokesman said cause was unknown but suggested possibility of artificial satellite’s exploding during atmospheric re-entry. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 8/21/63)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from pmr using Thor-Agena vehicle, (upi, Chic. Tnb., 4/27/63)
relay i communications satellite, its power supply voltage and temperature returned to normal, responded to command signals turning on its telemetry transmitter and encoder, nasa planned to resume normal experimental operations with the satellite March 14. relay i had been turned off because of severe power drain encountered March 9. (nasa Release 63-56)
Launch of nasa atmospheric structure satellite (S-6) from amr was postponed because of difficulties in payload checkout. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/29/63, 1)
Japanese newspaper Yomiuri reported Japanese Space Development Council was preparing to build navigational satellite for launching by U.S. within five years. Plan was to be submitted to Prime Minister Hayato Ikeda for approval. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 6/4/63)
Official opening of 1963 hurricane season, tiros vi meteorological satellite, launched September 18, 1962, was still operational and U.S. Weather Bureau said additional meteorological satellites may be orbited by nasa before end of season, Nov. 15. (Commerce Dept. Release WB 637)
usaf announced it would attempt second Project West Ford orbiting belt of 400 million copper filaments “in the near future.” First such attempt, Oct. 21, 1961, was unsuccessful because container failed to eject the needles, mit Lincoln Laboratory, conducting experiment for usaf, said in fact sheet that “no other communication method suggested to date, by satellite or otherwise, offers comparable reliability, in terms of global coverage with virtually complete invulnerability to destruction or jamming . . . .” (dod Release 637-63; Finney, NYT, 5/7/63, 29; Laurence, NYT, 5/12/63, E9)
dod launched two unidentified satellites on one Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
Communications Satellite Corp. issued its first request for contract proposals—proposals for study of multiple access system for communications satellites. (ComSatCorp Release)
S. Fred Singer, Director of National "Weather Satellite Center, told Metropolitan Board of Trade, Washington, that weather satellites would probably make possible prediction of weather trends by as much as a year. By photographing cloud formations and measuring moisture content of atmosphere, satellites should enable meteorologists to discover conditions causing weather trends. {Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A4)
nasa Director of International Programs Arnold Frutkin discussed U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative meteorological satellite program in Aviation Week and Space Technology interview. Beginning late next year, nasa would launch Nimbus meteorological satellites into polar orbit and U.S.S.R. would launch polar orbiting satellites. Paths of two satellites would be phased so that they are 90° apart, so that one satellite of each pair will cross each spot on globe every six hours. (Av. Wk., 8/12/63)
rcc released letter to Communications Satellite Corp., indicating ComSatCorp. directors should make definite plans for stock issue. Pointing out that ComSat Act of 1962 required ComSat Corp.’s directors be divided among stock-owning public, communications companies, and presidential nominees, fcc said that “undue delay in tne establishment of the corporation may force the present [appointed] Board of Directors to engage in activities and to make decisions which should be left to the representatives of the owners of the corporation.” ComSatCorp. Chairman Leo D. Welch told press that there was “no basis for the concern expressed by the Commission,” and ComSatCorp. would issue stock “at as early a date as the directors determine to be compatible with the public interest and the carrying out of the purpose and objectives of the Act.” (Clayton, Wash. Post, 7/26/63; Toth. NYT, 7/27/63)
U.S.S.R. has not yet named delegates for working groups to work out details implementing U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreements reached this year by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Academician A. A. Blagonravov, Howard Simons reported in Washington Post. U.S. and U.S.S.R. had agreed on coordinated communications satellite exiiiiij'iictiC mapping cooperation. JJCl UllVUlD^ also pointed out Soviet lack of definite response to proposal for negotiations leading to U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in lunar exploration, presented by President Kennedy Sept. 20 and reiterated this month by President Johnson. ^Simons, Wash. Post, 12/26/63)
V. Arsentyev of State Astronomical Institute, Moscow, was quoted as saying Soviet Cosmos satellites were planned to map the atmospheric layer between 124 mi. and 995 mi., as well as to provide specific data for space flights and spacecraft design. Cosmos satellites supplied current space weather data before and during flight of vostok hi and iv and were used to study ipicrometeoroid impact on spacecraft. {Av. Wk., 4/1/63)
explorer xvi meteoroid detector satellite recorded 16 punctures by meteoroids dur®% its first 29 days in orbit, nasa reported. Charles T. D’Aiutolo, manager of meteoroid research programs in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said that with explorer xvi “we have established conclusively that there are micrometeoroids out there which can penetrate thin surfaces.” Other spacecraft had reported hits by cosmic debris, but this was first time actual punctures were recorded. If explorer xvi continued as expected to report meteoroid data for a full year, it should enable scientists to determine whether meteoroids are hazardous to spacecraft—both manned and unmanned. D’Aiutolo said the satellite, which exposed 25 sq. ft. of surface to meteoroid impacts, was not large enough to provide good statistical data on larger and rarer particles in space. (Earlier this month, nasa announced plans to orbit two meteoroid-detector satellites, each with exposure surface of more than 2,000 sq. ft. See Feb. 5.) (Langley Release, 2/19/63; upi, Wash. Post, 2/14/63, Al)
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya ZvezJa (Red Star) quoted Edward Teller (U.S. nuclear physicist), Gen. L. Lemnitzer (usa), and other Americans regarding U.S. plans to “militarize the moon, including the delivery of an ‘absolute’ weapon there for the conduct of interplanetary nuclear war.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 1/4/63,3) Januai'y 5: relay i communications satellite made two successful intercontinental television test transmissions between Andover, Me., and Goonhilly, England, one for 23 min. and the other for an hour; teletype tests were also successfully made from Nutley, N.J., to Fucino, Italy, nasa said relay i’s power difficulty had apparently corrected itself, but “project officials have experienced difficulties with relay responding properly to commands. Tests during the past three days were possible by employing special operational procedures and altering command sequences to the satellite. Experiments will continue to evaluate the satellite’s communications and command systems.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/6/63, A8)	_
Reported that a U.S. military satellite, launched by Agena, had established a record 46 days of operation under continued attitude stabilization. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/14/63)
Photograph was sent from New York to London, Paris, and Rome via relay i communications satellite, and back to New York via transatlantic cable—in total of 11 minutes. This was first demonstration in which the three European capitals simultaneously received a picture and the first in which relay i sent a picture to Italy. Experiment was made by Associated Press in cooperation with nasa and the it&t Federal Laboratories, Nutley, N.J. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63)
usaf Space Systems Div. requested proposals from 34 firms for development of medium-altitude communications satellite system. (M&R, 2/4/63,11)
ComSatCorp was planning its initial offering of stock in the spring of 1964, probably on the order of $200 million. Half of this stock would by law have to be made available to the general public at no more than $100 per share, the remaining half being taken by the communications industry. Wall Street predicted that the stock would meet with unprecedented enthusiasm for a large issue by a new and speculative corporation. Meanwhile the ComSatCorp technical staff was still studying the technical and economic factors involved in establishing a global communications net “at the earliest practicable date” that Congress directed. Die goal was for an operating satellite system by 1966-67, employing either medium-altitude or synchronous-orbit satellites. (NYT, 11/3/63, IF)
Fifth anniversary of orbiting of vanguard i, still orbiting the earth and still transmitting data. The satellite had made more than 19,700 orbits and had slowed about *4 sec. from original 134 min., 27 sec. period. Present apogee: 2,447 mi.; perigee: 403 mi. Scientists estimated vanguard i might have a lifetime of 2,000 years, (dod Release 365-63)
usaf awarded contract to Goodyear Aerospace to study and develop a post-Echo passive communications satellite. Ten ft. in diameter, the satellites would be a wire grid covered with a plastic film. Once inflation in orbit had occurred, the plastic film would dissipate under ultraviolet radiation from the sun, and the circular wire grid would be left. It was thought that greater reflectivity could be achieved with the wire grid than with solid-skin spheres such as Echo and that they would have a more stable orbit since they would not be as subject to the solar wind. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/30/63, 172)	_
Unnamed usaf spokesman disclosed usaf had orbited “thermonuclear converter” aboard one of its unidentified satellites launched from pmr. Device was designed to convert sunlight into electricity with efficiency of solar cells but with more resistance to space radiation, usaf received signals from the converter for four days, according to spokesman, and “test was considered a major step in proving this concept.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 2/16/63)
rand Corp. report on communications satellites estimated that worldwide revenues from international communications would reach $210 million by 1965, $350 million by 1970, and $620 million by 1975. Large part of these revenues would come from undersea cables. (NYT, 4/24/63)
At Goddard Scientific Satellite Symposium, results from ariel i scientific satellite were presented. Data from ariel confirmed ionospheric temperature relationship with latitude as detected by alouette i. Solar x-ray detectors found solar flares are made up of two phases—(1) heating of sun’s corona above sunspot, increasing x-ray flux by factor of 10; and (2) quiet period marked by flux leveling off at accelerated level, followed by streams of electrons pushed into chromosphere, causing x-ray emissions at 500 times greater than normal. (Av. Wk., 3/25/63, 26)
On a date not released, dod launched a pickaback satellite attached to a principal satellite payload boosted by an Atlas-Agena B. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Communications Satellite Corp. set 1966 as target date to start commercial operation of global satellite communications network. {A&AE, Nov. 1963, 11)
Bell Telephone Laboratories announced telstar i communications satellite disconnected its storage batteries and stopped communicating, apparently after misinterpreting a ground command. As in previous communications blackout in November, shutoff occurred as telstar’s changing orbit brought it into strong sections of radiation belt. This pattern led Bell engineers to “suspect that the continued inhibiting effects of radiation on transistors” is to blame, according to Bell spokesman Bruce Stasser. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/21/63, AS)
Incorporation articles for Communications Satellite Corp. were filed by board of incorporators and approved by President Kennedy. Articles of incorporation provided two series of common stock: Series I, to be issued to the public, to aerospace industries, and to noncommunications companies; Series II, to be issued to communications common carriers with permission from fcc. Shares of stock were not expected to be issued for at least six months. Incorporators were serving as company directors until first annual meeting of stockholders—expected about six months after public offering of stock—when stockholders would elect 12 directors and President Kennedy would appoint three more. (Wall Street Journal, 2/4/63; AP, Newport News Daily Press, 2/2/63)
In International Geophysics Bulletin, nasa proposed contributions to iqsy (1964-65) were outlined. Prominently among them: sounding rockets; ionosphere explorers and monitors; atmospheric structure satellite; Oso, Ego, Pogo satellites; Imp, Pioneer, Mariner, and Surveyor probes. (IG Bulletin, 1/63, 12-19) During January: Engineers Joint Council issued report. The Nation’s Engineering Research Needs, 1965-85, which concluded: (1) present system of allocating resources to U.S. r&d is producing imbalance in technical effort; (2) non-defense agencies of Government do not have adequate research programs relating to problems in public sector of the economy; (3) r&d by private industry is influenced heavily by Government r&d allocations; and (4) r&d efforts applied to creating new materials and products have been highly successful, but have not been matched by development of systems to utilize these products and materials efficiently. ejc recommended: (1) periodic review of U.S. r&d allocations and “their compatibility with national goals”; (2) council and professional societies make periodic studies of technical and social problems to which engineering profession should make significant contributions, but “for which engineering programs and institutions appear to be inadequate”; (3) educational institutions and professional societies expand their programs of systems engineering “aimed at optimizing the technical engineering and social systems within which improved materials and devices perform their designed functions.” (Industrial Research, 1/63, 5)
U.S. is recovering more than three of every four satellites launched in its orbit-recovery program, according to Maj. Gen. Benjamin I. Funk, afssd Commander, writing in Bell Aerosystems Co. magazine: “In the recovery of satellites from orbit, we achieved a 75 per cent success record last year, and this rate has since improved even more.” (Troan, Wash. Daily News, 12/5/63)
nasa announced relay i communciations satellite had achieved all of its experiments and missions. Performance of relay i, launched by nasa December 13, “has been uniformly excellent” throughout about 500 communications tests and demonstrations in 660 orbits December 13-March 11. Although all planned demonstrations were completed, they would be continued while the satellite remained in operation, (nasa Release (>3-57)
New evidence verifying existence of long-lived solar plasma streams in interplanetary space was published in article by four gsfc scientists in Physical Review Letters. Evidence was based on data gathered by explorer xn energetic particles satellite : On two occasions the satellite observed solar events producing solar plasma streams. Indication that they were long-lived was revealed when the plasma streams caused geophysical disturbances more than 20 days after the streams were created. (gsfc Release G-14-63)
Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, in address at Queens College, Charlotte, N.C., said photographs made by U.S. military satellites were providing excellent studies of Soviet military installations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/5/63)
West Germany joined the list of nations participating in satellite communications with the opening of its narrowband station at Raisting. A wideband station to permit television transmission was under construction. Raisting became the seventh station in the satellite communications network. Other narrowband stations were at Nutley, N.J.; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Fucino, Italy. Wideband stations were at Andover, Me.; Goonhilly Downs, U.K.; and Pleumeur-Bodou, France, (nasa Release 63-250)
Hitchhiker radiation monitor satellite on dod unidentified satellite launched June 27, 1963, with Thor-Agena vehicle, was ejected and fired ki,ck motor to attain higher apogee. Satellite measuring magnetically trapped electrons and protons of all significant energy levels showed relation between solar flares and low-energy particles in solar plasma. No distinct division between inner and outer Van Allen belts was found, but instead a gradual transition. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
General B. A, Sohriever (afsc), addressing Armed Forces Dinner in Louisville, Ky., said: “I am convinced that we must.. . investigate the military potential of space systems. We simply cannot afford to leave the space frontier unguarded. Satellite systems promise to strengthen our present defenses in a number Of ways. For example, they show definite potential for improved warning, communications, and navigation systems. “We may also need to develop the ability to defend ourselves against space-borne weapons. The Soviets have threatened many times to use their space technology for military purposes. Until we know for sure that they will not carry out these threats, it is logical to pursue the development of ways to identify, inspect and rendezvous with a non-cooperative object in space . . . .” (Text, afsc Release 35-R-41)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced award of contract to Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. for computer services to facilitate ComSatCorp’s comparative global satellite communications system studies. (ComSatCorp Release)
Because of weather conditions at Cape Canaveral, launching of Syncom communications satellite was postponed from Feb. 13 to Feb. 14. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A6)
Secretaiy of Commerce Luther H. Hodges released letter of commendation to Francis W. Reichelderfer, retiring as Chief of Weather Bureau, which said: “. . . When you took your post 25 years ago, the Bureau established its first network of radio-sonde upper air observations. On your departure you are leaving a legacy of the world’s largest and most sophisticated weather system, one that is already effectively using such modem tools as satellites and computers. “During your tour of duty, your leadership and inspiration guided meteorologists throughout the world to work toward the common goal of a truly global weather system. Your plans to expand your international activities will, I am sure, contribute much to world cooperation and advancement in atmospheric sciences . . . .” (Commerce Dept. Release G-63-142)
Third command and data acquisition station in Tiros meteorological satellite cda system became operational, the Fairbanks, Alaska, station joining those at Wallops Island, Va., and Pt. Mugu, Calif. cda stations receive cloud-cover photographs and other data from orbiting Tiros satellites, relay them to Weather Bureau’s National Weather Satellite Center, Suitland, Md., for analysis, (nasa Release 63-206)
nasa syncom ii communications satellite launched into orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle from amr, entering elliptical orbit (140-mi. perigee, 22,548-mi. apogee). Five hrs. 33 min. after launching, apogee-kick motor onboard fired for 21 sec., placing syncom ii in orbital path ranging from 22,300-mi. to 22,548-mi. altitude and adjusting its speed to near-synchronous 6,800 mph. Traveling in slightly lower than synchronous orbit and at less than synchronous speed, satellite began drifting eastward at rate of 7.5° per day. Ground signals would attempt to reverse drifting so that satellite would attain synchronous position over Brazil. Communications tests during syncom ii’s ascent into orbit were successful, including reception and transmission of “The Star Spangled Banner,” a voice message, and a teletype transmission. Once in synchronous position, syncom ii would provide telephone, teletype, and photo facsimile communications between Lakehurst, N.J., and Lagos Harbor, Nigeria, (nasa Release 63-152; NYT, 7/27/63; N.Y. Herald Trib.^ 7/27/63)
relay i communications satellite transmitted its first transatlantic television programs, sending British and French viewers clear pictures of ceremonial unveiling of Mona Lisa in Washington and 10 min. of network program “Today.” (upi, Wash. Post, 1/10/63^.3)
A solar array characteristics test was run on the orbiting syncom: n synchronous-orbit communciations satellite. The test (on Nov. 22) found a power loss of 20% from the effects of solar radiation on the solar cells during four months in orbit. The text confirmed the desirability of changing the next Syncom satellite—Syncom -c__„ /„________ii„ “liUlll ^Jj 11 ACIIO .1 .000*111. tjuai V£j OOVCl oliuco tu u/ p CCllO with ,012-in. quartz cover slides. The newer n/p cells had shown in ground evaluation to last up to 20 times longer than conventional p/n cells, (gsfc Historian; Goddard News, 12/2/63, 2) Reported in Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering that a “hitchhiker” satellite called Satar (Satellite-Aerospace Research) would be built and tested by General Dynamics. A bullet-shaped spacecraft 12 ft. long and 30 in. in diameter, Satar would be incorporated in Atlas missiles used for training missions. It would consist of a payload section capable of accommodating “several hundred pounds of experiments” and a propulsion section including a solid-propellant motor, guidance, attitude control, and related equipment. Satar would be released after Atlas burnout and coast about 15 min. before its own engine ignited to send it into orbit. First flight was scheduled for next spring. {A&AE, Nov. 1963,158)
George J. Feldman, a director and incorporator of Communications Satellite Corp., said in address before Federal Bar Association in Washington: “The execution of this national program [developing a commercial comsat system] and the task faced by the corporation is difficult, complex, and truly formidable and should be viewed by the objective witb understanding. This is the uncharted region of technology, international relationship and agreements, and national support .... “Up to this point the United States has been the innovator and leader in this field, with great benefit to our national prestige, and international standing and with the satisfaction of pioneering a part of the future. Having taken this pioneering step, we have now assumed our share of responsibility and the latter is the operative word . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/20/63, A3948-49)
Portions of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, telecast by nationwide networks within U.S., were transmitted via telstar n communications satellite to Europe. (cbs-TV, 8/28/63; Wash. Post. 8/30/63,5)	_
usn Transit navigational satellite program was classified, with no further information to be released until fully operational system is placed in orbit, Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported. {A&AE, 5/63,141)
nasa and dod announced signing of agreement establishing areas of responsibility in nonmilitary applications of Navy’s Transit navigational satellite system. Under agreement, nasa would determine suitability of Transit equipment for nonmilitary use and necessity for additional equipment. Navy would continue to be responsible for technical direction of Transit system and for r&d in support of military applications of the system, but would also provide nasa with necessary information, specifications, and equipment for meeting nonmilitary requirements, nasa and Navy would coordinate r&d “for mutual benefit and to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort.” (dod Release 315-63)
Video tape of President Kennedy’s address before World Food Congress in Washington was transmitted to European television viewers via relay i communications satellite, (nasa Release 63-121)
Final approval for contracting the military Medium Altitude Communications Satellite (macs) was being delayed by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara pending a reply from ComSatCorp as to whether a civilian comsat could handle military traffic under wartime conditions, according to Aviation. Week. It was anticipated that the answer would be that several of the military requirements—jam-resistant channels, protection against attack, transportable receiving stations—would not be met by the civilian system. (Av. Wk., 10/28/63, 25)
usaf satellite (1962 Beta Kappa-1), launched Oct. 26, 1962, to study artificial radiation, had discovered evidence that radiation from U.S. Starfish high-altitude nuclear test would last up to 10 years, Project Director Dr. Ludwig Katz of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories disclosed. The previously unidentified satellite, called “starad,” was built at dod request when it became apparent artificial radiation might be damaging orbiting satellites, carried nine different instruments for measuring the artificial radiation, usaf spokesmen said, in their opinion, data from this satellite were influential in Dr. James A. Van Allen’s reversal of his previous position that the radiation would last only a year (see March 15). Dr. Katz said the satellite found there had been little decrease in artifical radiation’s intensity since the satellite was launched. “The decay of the belt is so small that a lifetime of five to ten years would not surprise me.” starad also detected increased radiation from Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions of Oct. 28 and Nov. 1. It transmitted until Jan. 18 when its batteries deteriorated. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63; Wash. Post, 4/7/63; Av. Wk., 4/15/63,26)
Hughes Aircraft Co., nasa contractor for Syncom communications satellite, outlined design features of military synchronous communication satellite for usaf Space Systems Div. and Aerospace Corp. {Av. Wk., 9/9/63, 23)
George J. Feldman, Communications Satellite Corp., incorporator nominee, said in address on international arrangements for satellite communications: “Last July 10, when Telstar went into orbit; communications via satellite literally entered the homes of millions of men. and women. This historic event symbolized technical developments which open up unparalleled opportunities and will, in time, significantly affect the daily lives of people in many parts of the world. A new dimension has been added to communications by telephone, telegraph, radio and television. . . . “Cooperation on the international level, bilaterally and multilaterally, is a keystone of a successful communications satellite system and it is self-evident that the wider the range of the system, the more extensive will be the need for wider participation and agreement. . . . “The development of the communications satellite system is underway. It will involve intricate negotiation and arrangements, and there are many problems to be tackled. But technology has thrust greatness upon us and, as in some other manifestations of this technological revolution, we are summoned to the challenge. . . .” (Text, CR, 4/24/63, A2426)
Effective this date, the International Code would designate all orbiting artificial satellites and space probes with Arabic numerals (1963-1, 1963-2, etc.) rather than Greek letters (1963 Alpha, 1963 Beta, etc.), National Academy of Sciences announced. New system had been agreed upon by all national members of cospar in May 1962. ( nas Release)
nasa announced explorer xvi meteoroid-detection satellite, launched Dec. 16, 1962, had ceased transmitting usable experimental data on July 25, 1963. Throughout its 7i/> months of transmitting useful data, explorer xvi fulfilled all its primary objectives. The satellite reported these results (one mil equals 1,000th of an inch): 44 penetrations of one-mil beryllium-copper; 11 penetrations of two-mil beryllium copper; 6 penetrations of one-mil stainless steel; one penetration of two-mil copper; and one* penetration of three-mil copper. There were no penetrations of five-mil beryllium-copper or six-mil stainless steel. One cadmium-sulfide cell was penetrated in such a way that sunlight Qnfnrnf at? if on J rsndorsd it mopfiRibls, AJorg than 15,000 niftte-oroid hits were recorded by microphone impact sensors which covered about one-tenth of total exposed experiment surface. These sensors did not measure penetration, (nasa Release 63203; Lane Release)
In the Washington Post, Howard Simons reviewed reconnaissance satellites, referring to previously released information and statements regarding a so-called “Samos” project, and inferring that “Samos” satellites were now onerational. (Wash. Post. 12/8/63, Ei-5)	"	'	'
Project Mercury flight MA-9 postponed at T-13 in launch countdown because of technical failure in computer converter at Bermuda tracking station. Earlier, at T-60, countdown was halted for 129 min. to repair faulty fuel pump in gantry’s diesel engine, which had failed to start. Eight-min. recapitulation of prelaunch activities for Project Mercury flight MA-9, Cape Canaveral, was telecast to European viewers via relay i communications satellite shortly after flight was postponed, (nasa Release 63-104; NYT, 5/15/63)
Dr. Eberhard Wahl, afsc scientist, announced development of Phototype Optical Surveillance System—electro-optical telescope capable of tracking spacecraft more than 3,000 mi. away. Telescope’s three main components: ‘27-in. optic for gathering light, electrooptical device for measuring light, and computer-command system for controlling tracking of satellites. (AP, NTT, 5/4/63, 26) _
General Telephone and Electronics Corp. filed application with fcc for authority to purchase stock in Communications Satellite Corp. (AP? NYT, 4/23/63)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
nasa explorer xiv satellite progress report indicated no usable scientific data had been obtained from the scientific satellite since mid-August. In its ten months of operation since launch into highly elliptical orbit Oct. 2j 1962, explorer xiv sent back more than 6,500 hours of data from the six onboard scientific experiments to chart boundaries of earth’s magnetosphere, measure particle population and energies of electrons and protons, and determine how magnetic fields influence these particles. 3,700 hours of data had been processed through computers and scientific analysis was continuing, (nasa Explorer XIV Prog. Rpt. No. 6)
Researchers at Technology Audit Corp. continued, under nasa contract extension, to study possible use of a satellite as a navigation aid for advanced aircraft such as the supersonic transport. (M&R, 12/9/63,9)
S. Fred Singer, Director of National Weather Satellite Center of U.S. Weather Bureau, was awarded first Astronautics Space Research Medal of British Interplanetary Society. {A&AE, 8/63,119)
Communications Satellite Corp. issued to industry a Request for Proposals for Engineering Design of a Commercial Communications Satellite, to include satellite design for either a medium-altitude system or a synchronous-orbit system. The RfP’s were directed to development of ComSatCorp’s basic comsat system, with initial global coverage to be achieved not later than 1967 for medium-altitude system or 1968 for synchronous-orbit system. Design proposals, due Feb. 10, would be evaluated and ComSatCorp would select one or more for six-month design contracts. (ComSatCorp Release)
Navy Bureau of Weapons’ astronautics group approved a study by the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and recommended that the Thor-Able-Star be substituted for the Scout as the launch vehicle for the Navy Transit navigational satellites. Navy had been dissatisfied with the reliability record of the nasa Scout boosters in the Transit program. {Av. Wk., 11/25/63, 23)
U.K. sent television signals across the Atlantic for first time via relay i communications satellite. Signals sent from Goonhilly Downs to Nutley, N.J., were described as “very good” and “ex' ’	1	” ‘hey were also clearly received at ground Fucino. v	, igo Trtb., 1/8/63)
usaf announced plans to test fuel cell in space by sending new type of electrical power system into orbit in a satellite within next few months. Working model of the fuel cell, developed by Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co., was displayed at afa convention in Washington. (Finney, NTT, 9/12/63,14)
A U.N. space subcommittee addressed a resolution to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space emphasizing the “urgency and importance of the problem of preventing potentially harmful interference with peaceful uses of outer space.” The warning was contained in a diluted version of a resolution in which the Soviet Union had hoped to see a direct criticism of the recent United States launching of millions of small copper wires in a communications experiment. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, the Soviet delegate, had denounced the experiment as a danger to other space studies, including flights by manned satellites. This was denied by Dr. Homer E. Newell, the U.S. representative. In the resolution adopted at the close of a two-week session, the 28-nation subcommittee said that “certain experiments conducted in space may affect present or future scientific activities.” There was no reference to the U.S. “needles” or to any other experiment. (NYT, Western Edition, 5/31/63)
At two meetings of European Conference on Satellite Communications in Geneva, representatives proposed plans for regional comsat network independent of the U.S., while not ruling out participation with U.S. in global network. {M&R, 11/9/64,12-13)
Communications Satellite Corp. requested bids from 15 companies for research data and consultant services for defining design and performance requirements of ground terminals for global comsat system. (ComSat-Coxp Release)
usn announced a solar-powered, 120-lb. satellite was launched pickaback last Sept. 28 along with a previously announced nuclear-powered satellite. On board the solar-powered satellite were six transistors and several radiation detectors, testing means of protecting the transistors from radiation damage. (AP, NYT, 1/10/64, 86)
AEC spokesman said about 2.2 lbs. of plutonium 238 had been lost over the west coast of Africa last month after usn satellite carrying it had failed to orbit (see May 11). Onboard as fuel for Snap—9A generator, the plutonium apparently vaporized on re-entry into earth’s atmosphere and now was dispersed in very fine particles at the edge of space, where it would gradually lose its radioactivity. It posed “no health hazard to the world’s population,” aec spokesman said, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/24/ 64)
Rear Adm. Francis D. Boyle, Deputy Director of Defense Communications Agency’s Communications Satellite Project Office, told National Space Club in Washington of dod plans for a military comsat system. He said Titan III—C launch vehicles would orbit up to 24 comsats during the first six months of 1966, placing six to eight satellites in orbit each launch. Orbiting at more than 22,000 mi., the satellites would be “approximately synchronous.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64)
General order from afsc established Eastern and Western Test Ranges of the National Range Division, wtr would assume range support for icbm and satellite programs on a phased basis, gaining full responsibility some time between Mar. 1 and Jun. 30,1965. Until then, overall responsibilities for these functions continued with PMR; after that time, pmr would continue to operate as a national sea test range under the Navy, ft would comprise facilities in Pt. Mugu-San Nicholas Island area and certain downrange stations in the area of Hawaii, and would be responsible for Pacific Ocean-based launches. (afsc Release 45-R-61; NASA Announcement 61-161)
First TV transmission from Japan to the U.S. was made, nsing NASA’s relay II communications satellite. Quality of the live pictures as well as the sound was excellent. In the telecast Prime Minister Hayato Ikeda offered his country’s apologies directly to the U.S. for the “unfortunate coincidence” of the stabbing of U.S. Ambassador Edwin Reischauer by a deranged Japanese youth the previous day. The eight-minute telecast was seen simultaneously on the three national networks. (nasa Release 64-63; upi, NYT, 3/26/64,3 ; AP, Wash. Post, 3/26/64)
At his news conference, President Johnson stated, in reply to a question about reconnaissance of Cuba by means of planes and satellites: “I will say this: that we, at the time of the Cuba missile crisis, attempted to work out an agreement for inspection and that was refused. This nation, in order to protect its people, must have a knowledge of what is taking place and we propose to keep informed. As to what offers the best method, we will have to determine that.” (NYT, 6/3/64, 25)
Danish Government announced it would join international telecommunication system based on global communications satellites. (AP, NYT, 2/6/64,6)
Aviation Week stated that a technological war plan task force under the cognizance of afsc had been established at Space Systems Div., to investigate a variety of subject areas as a continuation of the usaf’s Project Forecast. Participants were expected to include key personnel from industry and NASA as well as afsc. Areas to be studied included boron fiber technology for application to structural materials, operational requirements of biological satellites, manned hypersonic vehicles to investigate thermodynamic and aerodynamic regions, and laser applications and requirements. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 23)
Sonny Liston-Cassius Clay heavyweight title match was first championship fight to be telecast via communications satellite; video tape of the .match was transmitted to 11 European countries shortly after 1:00 a.m. est via NASA’s relay II communications satellite, (nasa Release 64-44)
Unspecified “informed sources” in Paris said that the first foreign base on U.S. territory—a satellite tracking station in Alaska—was to be established by the European Space Research Organization. It was reported that the establishment of die station had been agreed to in principle by the U.S. State Department, and that a formal agreement was expected to be signed in the near future. ESRO had plans for launching about 400 sounding rockets, 6 small satellites, 8 medium satellites, 7 space probes, and an orbiting astronomical observatory during the following 8 years and would use the station to help track, control, and communicate with these spacecraft, esro planned a network of similar stations extending from Alaska across North Pole to the Shetland Islands, Belgium, and Italy. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/29/64)
Japan’s first television transmission to Europe by communications satellite was received in Pleumeur-Bodou, France, and fed into France’s television network for European viewing. Reception was excellent. The relay was made by telstar d communications satellite. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/17/64)
fcc approved application of ComSatCorp to build communications satellite for its planned experimental-operational synchronous-orbit network. The authorization was for construction only; further authorization would be required for placing the satellite in orbit and using it in experimental or operational service. (AP, NYT, 4/16/64)
Parade magazine’s Intelligence Report said the U.S. had 50 Samos surveillance satellites in orbit photographing Soviet military installations. Photographs were reported to be parachuted to earth between Calif, and Hawaii. Russians were said to have similar satellites spying on U.S. (Parade, Wash. Post, 6/7/64)
Future Delta launch vehicles with larger propellant tanks, the Thrust-Augmented Delta (tad) , would be used to launch payloads in the Biosatellite, Pioneer, and meteorological satellite families, GSFC reported. (Goddard News, 6/29/64,1)
France planned to launch a series of constant-level balloon weather stations in the southern hemisphere and a satellite to “interrogate” them on their findings. Named Project Eole, it was scheduled for 1967. Up to 256 balloons were to be sent aloft, each carrying four pounds of weather and communications equipment, to remain at fixed altitudes between 16,500 and 33,000 ft. for at least ten days. The French satellite would interrogate each balloon twice during a single pass overhead. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/21/64)
A joint British-American group of communications engineers was preparing recommendations for a communications base in the Seychelles Islands, northeast of Madagascar. Station would fill a wide gap between Atlantic and Pacific stations in the present worldwide chain of receiving-transmitting stations for satellites. Existing network, set up by the U.S. Navy, had to rely on shipboard stations for Indian Ocean coverage. British responsibility would be limited to the real estate involved while the U.S. would build and equip the station and furnish most of the operating personnel. (Watson, Balt. Sun, 12/31/64)
General Accounting Office made public report to Congress charging NASA’s “unrealistic delivery dates” for first two Oso satellites had cost an unnecessary $526,000. GAO was critical of NASA for ordering backup Oso eight weeks before scheduled launching of the first satellite, thus spending $273,000 that was not needed. The GAO report also said NASA had unnecessarily limited competition for Oso construction. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/64,2; Finney, NYT, 2/7/64,10)
NASA announced Hughes Aircraft Co. had been awarded contract to develop and build five Advanced Technological Satellites (ATS) based on Advanced Syncom design study. The 650-lb. satellites would be used to test several spacecraft techniques, particularly spacecraft stabilization and orientation in higher altitudes, (nasa Release 64-50; Goddard News, 3/9/64, 8)
Sixth anniversary of vanguard i satellite, launched into orbit Mar. 17, 1958. The satellite’s stability of orbit had provided geodetic observations, including the determination that the earth is slightly pearshaped. vanguard I was the only satellite orbited before 1959 that was still transmitting. (A&A/1915-60)
NASA and Australian Ministry of Supply announced installation to command flight of Syncom C synchronous-orbit communications satellite would be installed at Salisbury, Australia. Installation would have two functions: monitor the Syncom’s attitude and command its apogee-motor firing, and command the satellite’s control system to make any necessary adj ustments to maintain synchronous position. (NASA Release 64^47)
Arthur Kantrowitz delivered 1964 von Karman Lecture at AIAA annual During June: Analysis of infrared radiation measurements of TIROS n meteorological satellite was detailed 'by R. S. Hawkins of afcrl. Hawkins suggested that when discrepancies 'between data from satellite and from other sources are understood and accounted for, infrared data from meteorological satellites could provide an invaluable tool for plotting and predicting course of cold fronts as well as for obtaining information on structure of frontal zones and regions of convective activity, (oar Research Review, 6/64, 3)
British Postmaster General Reginald Bevins said in House of Commons that, under the right conditions, “the United Kingdom will be willing to provide up to £15 million of the capital cost of a world system” for satellite communications. He said U.K. would share in design of comsat system, share in its ownership, and play full part in providing satellite launch vehicles and other equipment. He reported that in recent meeting of representatives of European, U.S., and Canadian governments on problems of establishing a global comsat system, “good progress” was made. (upi, NYT, 4/16/64, 9)
NASA’s explorer xx topside-ionosphere sounder satellite was providing new information on “the arrangement of ionospheric irregularities” and “the structure of plasma resonances,” according to Central Radio Propagation of National Bureau of Standards. (M&R, 10/26/64,23)
U.S. Samos (Satellite and Missile Observation Systems) satellites, undiscussed by dod since secrecy policy was adopted in late 1961, had been orbited “periodically” ever since then, Albert Ravenholt said in New Orleans Times-Picayune article. Even though Samos was de-7B6-5D8 0—65-----18 veloped as successor to U-2 high-altitude photographic airplane, Raven-holt said, U.S.S.R. had “made no threatening noises about Samos,” probably because some Russian Cosmos satellites are equipped with cameras; U.S.S.R. has no missile capable of shooting down a Samos; and, if it could down one, the action would open whole new vista of legal problems about control of outer space. (Ravenholt, N.O. Times-Picayune, 8/10/64)
Institute for Satellite and Space Research scientists in Bochum, W.	Germany, reported monitors had picked up both radio signals and voice broadcasts on the same frequency used by the Soviet Union for manned spacecraft. No manned space launch had been announced by U.S.S.R. (Sci. Ser., Wash. Daily News, 11/13/64)
Plans for first operational weather satellite system, to be called Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, were announced, nasa had selected RCa’s Astro Electronics Div. for negotiations leading to manufacture of five Tiros operational weather satellites, at cost expected to exceed $9 million. Dept: of Commerce/Weather Bureau would finance tos system, provide overall management, and be responsible for its operation. NASA was responsible for spacecraft procurement, launch, and initial checkout after satellite is in orbit. After system begins in late 1965, two meteorological satellites would be in orbit at all times, photographing cloud-cover of the entire earth every day. (nasa Release 64-125; Commerce Dept. Release WB 64-9)
120 delegates from 17 European nations met with U.S. and Canadian delegations in Rome for exploratory talks on European participation in an international communications satellite system proposed by the U.S. (NYT, 2/11/64)	_
Spokesman for European conference on satellite communications, meeting in Rome with U.S. and Canadian delegations, said conference had reached agreement on principal points of the U.S. proposed to establish an international comsat system. “They are now discussing the details, upon which the accord isn’t so extensive.” (NYT, 2/12/64,
syncom in was in near equatorial orbit over the Indian Ocean, with mean altitude of 22,395 mi. and 1/4° inclination to the equator, while drifting westward at the rate of about 3° per day. On ground command, the satellite ejected two bursts of steam, correcting its position to 21,890 mi. mean altitude (22,540-mi. apogee and 21,240-mi perigee) and inclination of less than 1° to the equator. It then began drifting eastward; the drift would be halted by onboard control jets, fired by ground command, once syncom ill reached the International Date Line. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/23/64; NASA Release 64-193 & Press Conf. Transcript)
NASA announced syncom hi synchronous-orbit communications satellite was now in such a precise orbit that its rotational speed was only five seconds slower than that of the earth. Positioned over the equator at 22,300-mi. altitude, syncom m drifted less than l/100th of a degree per day. Orbital parameters: 22,311-mi. apogee, 22,164-mi. perigee, 1,436.158-min. period, and .095° to the equator. Same day, spokesman for Communications Satellite Corp, announced syncom ill was successfully relaying test pictures across the Pacific and their quality was “much better than expected.” The experimental transmissions between Kashima, Japan, and Pt. Mugu, Calif., had begun Sept. 21. (NASA Release 64-241; Finney, NYT, 9/24/64, 13)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xlvii artificial earth satellite “for the further investigation of cosmic space.” Orbital data: apogee, 413 km. (256 mi.); perigee, 177 km. (110 mi); period, 90 min.; and inclination to the equator, 64.77°. cosmos xlvii de-orbited Oct. 7. (Tass, Pravda, 10/7/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; GSFC SSR, 10/15/64)
U.S.S.R. announced launching cosmos XLIX artificial earth satellite into orbit: apogee, 490 km. (304 mi.); perigee, 260 km. (162 mi.); period, 91.83 min.; and inclination, 49° to the equatorial plane. Onboard equipment was said to be operating normally and ground tracking station was processing incoming data. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/25/64,1, ATSS—T Trans.)
It was announced that the British government was spending $2.8 million to enlarge its space communications facilities at Goonhilly Downs. Future communications satellites would require more powerful receivers because of higher orbits. (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/4/64)
usn disclosed it was developing seagoing tracking system for its ships and submarines to “avoid those areas of the oceans covered at intervals by spy satellites. Submarines would stay submerged, surfacing only when the sky above is clear.” (Wash. Post, 2/28/64)
New gravity gradient stabilization system utilizing earth’s gravitational field to orient the satellite and earth’s magnetic field to assist in damping was developed by General Electric and recently tested onboard a USN satellite, orbited Jan. 11. Within three days the system stabilized the satellite to accuracy of ±5 degrees. (M&R, 2/17/64, 10; Av. Wk., 2/24/64,57)	_
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara issued statement amplifying the President’s Sept. 17 announcement of U.S. systems for intercepting and destroying armed satellites. Secretary McNamara said one of the systems was operated by the Army and used Nike-Zeus missile; other system was operated by usaf and used Thor missile. In tests both systems had “intercepted satellites in space, their missiles passing so close as to be within the destruction radius of the warheads.” Army system became operational Aug. 1, 1963, and usaf system May 29, 1964. (dod Release 673-64)
ComSatCorp petitioned fcc for rule to give it exclusive eligibility for ownership and operation of the initial ground stations for the global commercial comsat network. Under Communications Satellite Act of 1962, fcc must decide whether ComSatCorp or other commercial communications carrier, or both, shall build and operate the ground stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
Information conditioning unit that converts data for computer use much more rapidly than any before had been tested on usn satellite, according to Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., inventor of the system. System was said to reduce to hours the weeks or months pre-1766-598 0—65----5 viously required for conversion of satellite data into usable scientific information. After recent launch of usn satellite with the unit onboard, scientists obtained more than 50 types of information—analyzed, checked, and printed—from the satellite within 12 hours, (upi, NYT, 2/9/64,91)
NASA announced it had requested proposals from scientists for experiments on Advanced Technological Satellites to be launched from Cape Kennedy in 1966-68. Primary mission of ATS would be to evaluate advanced communication techniques, meteorological components, and gravity gradient stabilization systems, but additional space for scientific experiments was available. (NASA Release 64-153)
nimbus i experimental weather satellite ceased operating, after producing more than 27,000 remarkably sharp weather photographs. As result of several days’ buildup of friction in motor that turned satellite’s solar paddles, the solar paddles locked, preventing them from rotating toward sun. Lacking adequate solar power to recharge batteries, the satellite control system, three camera systems, and associated electronic equipment could no longer function, nimbus i surpassed all expectations both as a research spacecraft and as a storm-spotter. During its 380-orbit lifetime it provided the first satellite pictures of nighttime cloud-cover and photographed Hurricanes Dora, Ethel, and Florence, Typhoons Ruby and Sally, (nasa Release 64-243)
By this date U.S. still did not know whether U.S.S.R. would participate in tracking Echo II balloon satellite, scheduled for launching Jan. 23. Earlier this month NASA sent cable to Soviet Academy of Sciences outlining launch schedule and inquiring about Soviet tracking plans, agreed on in principle last summer. NASA received cable in reply, acknowledging receipt of U.S. message but providing no details of Soviet plans. NASA planned to launch the satellite as scheduled, hoped to hear further word from U.S.S.R. (Finney, NYT, 1/19/64)
Dr. Eugene Fubini, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Deputy Director, ddr&e ), told Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee that dod was “very close to an agreement” with the Communications Satellite Corp. on working out a system for military satellite communications. Although decision had not been reached as to whether DOD would develop its own comsat system or lease channels from ComSatCorp satellites, Fubini said leasing channels “has proved to be more feasible than our fondest hopes.” He emphasized that there would be “no compromise on security” if the commercial system were chosen. (Finney, NYT, 3/18/64, 15; Av. Wk., 3/23/64,19)
aec scientists were reported to be planning even more sophisticated nuclear radiation detection satellites to follow the two identified by press sources as having been maneuvered into patrol positions during the preceding weekend. The advanced Sentries were reported to carry optical devices to monitor not only space nuclear blasts but also those in the earth’s atmosphere. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/64)
U.S.-Japan telecommunications cable broke at the peak of traffic from the Olympic Games in Tokyo, including sound track for films telecast from Tokyo and sent via syncom in communications satellite. Japanese officials estimated earliest repair date as Oct. 23. (NYT, 10/17/64,13)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced six companies had responded to its request for proposals for designing international commercial communications satellite, at&t and RCA submitted a joint proposal; Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc., submitted proposal with ITT as principal subcontractor; Hughes Aircraft Co. and Philco Corp. submitted individual proposals. ComSatCorp was evaluating the proposals. (WSJ, 2/12/64)
Opening ceremonies of the Olympic Games in Tokyo were telecast live in U.S. via ComSatCorp’s communications link using NASA’s syncom hi satellite. Telecast was delayed on West Coast and taped for later showing by nbc, which said it was avoiding interference with commercial programing. Japan was reported to have expressed disappointment to U.S. State Dept., and State Dept, in turn was said to be “deeply concerned” over the procedure. NBC confirmed that future coverage of Olympic Games would be taped or filmed. (ComSatCorp Release; Gould, NYT, 10/11/64,1,25)
Firing of hydrogen peroxide gas jets aboard SYNCOM in communications satellite changed its drift rate from 7° east per day to 3.3° per day. (nasa Release 64-217)
NASA’s syncom III synchronous-orbit communications satellite was launched into preliminary orbit high above the earth by a tad (Thrust-Augmented Delta) launch vehicle, its premiere satellite launching. Preliminary orbit: 23,675-mi. apogee, 695-mi. perigee, 11 hrs. 35 min. period, and 16° inclination to the equator. Four hours after launch from Cape Kennedy, the satellite received and sent back a test recording of music of “The Star Spangled Banner” as well as test voice and teletype message. Further maneuvers during the next 10 days would move syncom III into a synchronous position over the Pacific, where it would be able to communicate with surface stations at Clark afb in the Philippines, at Guam, and at Camp Roberts, Calif. Work was underway to make it possible to transmit the 1964 Olympic Games from Tokyo via syncom m in October, (nasa Release 64-193; nasa Transcript of Press Conference; AP, NYT, 8/20/64, 51)
usaf launched unidentified satellite payload aboard a Scout vehicle from Pt. Arguelfo, Calif. Purpose of the shot was not announced. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced it had filed application with fcc for authority to modify at&t ground station at Andover, Me., so it could be used with ComSatCorp synchronous satellite scheduled for launch in March 1965. The application requested fcc approval of technical characteristics of the modified station. ComSatCorp also filed proposed agreement with at&t for modification and operation of the station. (ComSatCorp Release)
relay ii active communications satellite launched into orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle from AMR (4,606-mi. apogee; 1,298-mi. perigee; 195-min. period; 46.3° inclination to the equator). The 184-lb. satellite would continue communications tests of relay i, still orbiting the earth, and provide evaluation of improvements in the new comsat. relay II completed its first communications test during its first orbit, receiving radio signals and TV test pattern from Mojave, Calif., ground station and beaming them back to earth, relay n was initially in excellent mutual visibility position between North America and Europe for TV transmission between the two hemispheres. Mutual visibility with Japan, about 40 min. at maximum, would decrease gradually to nothing by mid-July and continue with no mutual visibility again until mid-November, relay n was equipped for transmitting one-way wideband communications (one-way TV, 300 one-way voice channels or high-speed data) or two-way narrow-band communications (12 two-way telephone conversations or teletype, photo-facsimile and data). Unlike its predecesor, relay ii had ho automatic cutoff device; it had negative-on-positive (n-on-p) solar cells for greater resistance to radiation than relay i’s p-on-n solar cells, relay n was 22nd straight launch success of Thor-Delta launch vehicle, (gsfc Historian: Goddard News, 1/27/64,1;AP,AHT, 1/22/64,17)	_
Communications Satellite Corp. held its first stockholders’ meeting and elected its first Board of Directors—six representing public shareholders and six, communications carriers. (Finney, NYT, 9/18/64, 45)
Unnamed “high State Department official” told New York Herald Tribune that talks between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. regarding Soviet cooperation in worldwide comsat network had been scheduled for June in Geneva. The official said the talks came in response to Soviet government’s recent expression of interest in such negotiations to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. Other sources indicated Soviet representatives had visited Communications Satellite Corp. in Washington and fcc inquiring ajsout procedural arrangements. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 4/1/64; Av. Wk., 4/6/64,15)
Morris Forgash, president of United States Freight Co., gave his predictions of transportation in the year 2000, in address at National Defense Transportation Association conference in Frankfurt, Germany. Among his predictions: “By the year 2000 the hydrofoils will be the buslines of the oceans”; “people and things will be transported between all the more distant points on earth by rocket-powered craft.” He concluded: “Before you mark off anything that I have predicted for the next three and a half decades look back on the startling developments of the recent past. The breaking of the sound barrier. Space travel. Substitution of a cushion of air for the ageless wheel. The broadcasting of a message of good will to the world by a President of the United States not by cable, phone, or radio, but from a satellite circling around the globe in outer space—then the erasure of the message and substitution of another while die satellite was in orbit. The Olympic games in Tokyo brought into the homes of people on the far side of the earth through the medium of a relay station in space. Multiply these miracles of science by the rate of change which is being constantly compounded and see if my predictions do not come out on the modest side even to the point of reticence. “I believe the most important fact for us to understand is that transportation, though it opens new worlds and changes old concepts of time and distance, will not shape the world of 2000 A.D. Transportation is the servant of the people—the genie which makes their dreams come true—the magic carpet of their future—the mobility of their desires, their aspirations, and their resources. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/7/65, A70-74)
Communications Satellite Corp. re-emphasized to Fee its need to own and operate initial satellite terminal stations in U.S. ComSatCorp was replying to statements filed with fcc by communications common-carriers which requested fcc to deny ComSatCorp’s request, originally filed Aug. 14. (ComSatCorp Release)
U.S.S.R. announced successful orbiting of two satellites, electron in and ELECTRON XV, with a single launch vehicle. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellites were studying the earth’s magnetic field and radiation belts, radiation arriving from deep space, and the physical conditions in the upper atmospheric layers, electron iii was orbiting at 7,040-km. (4,375-mi.) apogee, 405-km. (252-mi.) perigee, 2-hr., 48 min. period, and 60.86° inclination to the equator, electron xv was orbiting at 66,235-km. (41,158-mi.) apogee, 459-km. (285-mi.) perigee, 21-hr., 54-min. period, and 60.86° inclination to the equator. (Tass, Izvestia, 7/12/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/11/ 64)
General Dynamics/Astronautics received $6 million contract from usaf for additional standardized Atlas space launch vehicles. Atlases produced under this contract were said to be for sending lunar-orbiting probes on photographic missions. (San Diego Union, 9/8/64) Congress opened with statement by President Edmond A. Brun (France) that deliberations “should undoubtedly contribute towards increasing international cooperation in the field of astronautics.” First report to the entire Congres was on the lunar mission of RANGER vn by JPL Director William Pickering and Harris Schurmeier. ranger vn movie was shown five times during the week to packed audiences. Informative U.S. papers on progress on comsats, weather satellites (including NIMBUS I photographs), manned lunar landing program, and bioastronautics, as well as Consideration of the idea of a Lunar International Laboratory, appeared highlights of the 15th IAF Congress. (NASA Hist.)
Communications Satellite Corp. submitted its annual report to the President and the Congress on its activities February 1—December 31, 1963. ComSatCorp reported it had made plans for development and establishment of commercial communications satellite system with global capability, calling for launching of one or more synchronous-orbit satellites over the Atlantic Ocean in 1965 on an experimental-operational basis and initial launching of satellite for the comsat system in 1966. (ComSatCorp Rpt., 1/31/64)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xxx satellite. Initial orbital data, according to Tass: 383.1-km. apogee (238 mi.), 206.6-km. perigee (128 mi.), 90.24-min. period, and 64.94° inclination to the equator. (Pravda, 5/19/64, atss-t Trans.)
dod announced it was abandoning plans to join with ComSatCorp in a space communications system meeting both military and commercial needs. Despite the economies of participation, the factor of international participation in the satellite system and the control foreign nations would have over a communications network that dod wanted for emergency command control over its forces finally tipped the balance against dod cooperation. (Finney, NYT, 7/14/64,15)
Rep. E. Ross Adair (R.-Ind.) said on House floor that a fifth transatlantic communications cable (TAT) would be unnecessary: “It is expected that within the next 6 weeks the . . . [ComSatCorp] will announce its plans for financing a communications satellite system and will tell Congress and potential investors when it expects to have a system in operation. I understand that CSC expects to design its first satellites to handle traffic between the United States and Europe. “. . . based on information filed with the fcc by the International Carriers having an interest in these matters ... I am convinced that there is no need for tat 5. If permission is granted to lay tat 5 it would add at least 128 channels of capacity . . and this would mean that there would be no economic justification for orbiting a satellite system in the immediate future . . .” He recommended adopting Mackay Radio’s proposal to change the route planned for TAT 4: “. . . this route would not only make it possible to establish intermediate relay and terminal facilities in the Azores, but also to provide for extension to Spain and Portugal and even down to the Canary Islands. “The U.S. military might well prefer cable links to the Azores and this route could also serve the interests of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, both in Spain and the Canary Islands, where NASA tracking stations are either in being or being constructed. . . .” (CR, 2/6/64, 2220)
U.S.S.R. announced orbiting of two satellites, electron i and electron II, with a single launch vehicle. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellites were studying “the internal and external radiation belts of the earth and physical phenomena connected with them.” electron I was orbiting at 7,100-km. (4,412-mi.) apogee; 406-km. (252mi.) perigee; 2-hr., 49-min. period; and 61° inclination; electron ii was orbiting at 68,200-km. (42,379-mi.) apogee; 460-km. (286-mi.) perigee; 22-hr., 40-min. period; and 61° inclination. (Tass; Wash. Post, 1/31/64, A14)	_	_
First meeting of Joint Navigation Satellite Committee, composed of representatives from NASA, FAA, and Departments of Commerce, Defense, Interior, and Treasury. Committee would evaluate requirements for improved navigation, traffic control, and search-rescue services, then determine whether navsat system could meet these requirements and at what costs, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 64-253)
Appointment of David S. Johnson as Director of National Weather Satellite Center, effective April 1, was announced by Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau Dr. Robert M. White. Mr. Johnson succeeded Dr. S. Fred Singer, resigning to become Dean of new School of Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Univ. of Miami. Deputy Director of the Center since its formation in 1962, Mr. Johnson had been engaged in research, development, and technical management of meteorological satellites and sounding rockets since 1958. (Commerce Release WB 64-6)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xxvm. Initial orbital data: apogee, 395 km. (245 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (130 mi.); period, 90.38 min.; and inclination, 65° to the equator. Scientific equipment onboard the satellite was “intended for the further exploration of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass March 16, 1962.” In addition, the satellite contained radio transmitter and telemetering system. All instrumentation was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/5/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
British Labor party leader Harold Wilson said Soviet voskhod i spacecraft was forerunner of missile-launching satellites that would make Polaris missile obsolete. Such space-based weapons, he said, “would mean that the all-American deterrent on which Sir Alec Douglas-Home bases his defense argument will soon be made obsolete by space missile development.” British election was three days away. (Cul'hane, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64)
Eight Tiros meteorological satellites had taken more than 350,000 photographs from altitudes above 400 mi. The spectacularly successful weather-forecasting satellites did not live up to the one-time charge of “spying,” for of all the pictures, only two showed any indication of existence of intelligent life on earth—and both of these pictures required corroborative knowledge to identify them, (upi, Phil. Sun. Bull., 5/17/64)
NASA announced that further analysis of results of the first experiments to use the laser beam for satellite tracking indicated that scientists had accomplished precision tracking of a satellite with a laser device. Tests were conducted on 10 passes of the explorer xxii satellite since the first success on Oct. 11. (NASA Release 64-285)
usia communications exhibition to be shown in U.S.S.R. this summer was previewed by Government, industry, and press representatives in New York. Exhibition covered U.S. communications in space satellites, TV and radio, telephone, and business and industry. The space portion featured models of nine satellites and live TV images of visitors bounced off working model of Telstar satellite. (Shanley, NYT, 4/19/64, 47)
cosmos xxvi scientific earth satellite was launched into orbit. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellite’s initial orbital parameters were: apogee, 403 km. (250 mi.); perigee, 271 km. (168 mi.); period, 91 min.; angle of inclination to the equatorial plane, 49°. Onboard scientific equipment, radio system, and instrumentation were said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/19/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
Party of scientists led by Nikolai Yerpylev, scientific secretary of Soviet Academy of Sciences, left Moscow for Cuba to “start the preliminary stage of the work” to establish Soviet satellite observation station on the island. Tass said equipment for the station already had been sent to Cuba, (upi, NYT, 2/27/64,12)
Tass reported Soviet Union had launched COSMOS XXXII, latest satellite in series of launches initiated in March 1962. Initial orbit: 333-km. apogee (206.9 mi.), 209-km. perigee (130.5 mi.), 89.78-min. period, and 51.28° inclination to the equator, cosmos XXXII re-entered earth’s atmosphere June 18.	(Pravda, 6/11/64, in msfc SIN, 7/64; GSFC SSR, 6/30/64)
dod issued rebuttal to report issued the day before by Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee criticizing dod plans for a military communications satellite system. dod said: “The Defense Department is being operated to provide the highest degree of combat readiness at the lowest possible cost. This policy is being followed in the development of communications satellites. As a result, the defense establishment will have a better satellite communications capability than originally foreseen at anticipated savings of $75-100 millions.” (Finney, NYT, 10/10/64,1,14)
U.S.S.R. orbited cosmos xxv scientific earth satellite from unidentified site in Soviet Union. Initial orbital data, according to Tass: 526-km. (320.6-mi.) apogee, 272-km. (169-mi.) perigee, 92.27-min. period, and 49° angle of inclination to equator. Scientific equipment and communication systems onboard the satellite were said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/28/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Wolfgang Cartellieri, West Germany Research Ministry state secretary, announced that preparations had begun for a space satellite program involving small research and telecommunications satellites, (upi, NYT, 11/15/64,56)
SAN MARCO i (SM-1) was orbited from NASA Wallops Station. The NASA-trained Italian crew launched the 254-lb. Italian-designed satellite on a four-stage solid-propellant Scout to an orbit with an apogee of 490.04 mi., a perigee of 124.62 mi., an orbital period of 94.7 min., and an inclination of 37.77°. It was the first time a foreign country had designed, built, and launched a satellite in orbit in the course of nasa’s international program. The satellite would measure air density and ionospheric characteristics related to long-range radio transmissions and would qualify satellite and train crew for subsequent launches from sea platform in Indian Ocean. (Wallops Release 64-91)
Beginning of cable circuit connecting New York and Offenbach, West Germany, announced by Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau, for exchange of meteorological information between North America and Europe. Inauguration of cable circuit, expected to yield improved reception of weather data because of freedom from radio propagation occurring on radioteletypewriter circuit, represented major achievement in global exchange of weather information. International meteorological community now was planning for future exchanges using highspeed computers and communications satellites. (Commerce Dept. Release WB 64-1)
Soviet news agency Tass said electron i and electron ii scientific satellites continued to function successfully. By 6:00 p.m. Moscow time Feb. 11, electron I had completed 104 orbits and electron ii more than 13 orbits. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/12/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
syncom ill might be in position to relay television pictures from Japan as soon as the first week in September, NASA said. The satellite was drifting eastward on the equator at rate of about 483 miles per day. (AP, Balt Sun, 8/25/64)
Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted to recommend Senate ratification of radio communications treaty, drawn up at 70-nation conference in Geneva last fall. Considered a step toward establishment of global communications satellite network, treaty revised radio regulations, provided for international allocation of radio frequencies for communications, navigational, and meteorological satellites. (AP, NYT, 2/19/64 ,15)
Communications Satellite Corp., authorized two years ago by law as a private corporation to establish a global commercial comsat system, was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Incorporated Feb. 1,1963, ComSatCorp had offered 10 million shares at $20 each, five million to communications common carriers and five million to the general public. (ComSatCorp Release)
Capt Robert E. Jasperson (usn, Ret.) recently received patent for invention of “satellite alert,” a hand-held computer for informing ships’ officers when to expect radio reports from navigation satellites and meteorologists when to expect readings from weather satellites. (Jones, NYT, 5/23/64)
Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications conducted its first TV test with syncom ni communications satellite from ground station at Kashima, receiving return picture with satisfactory resolution. Purpose of test was to investigate parameters of the Station. Transmission tests to Pt. Mugu, Calif., via the comsat were planned for early October. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64,30)
Third international working conference on satellite communications ended in London after three days of consultation between delegates of U.S., U.K., Canada, Australia, Japan, and European nations. Next conference would be held in Washington in July. (NYT, 6/22/64, 45)
France and Spain signed an agreement to set up a joint satellite tracking station in the jSpanish-owned Canary Islands, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/5/64)
At Cape Kennedy press conference following Saturn I SA—5 launch, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans stated, “There is little question that it took us ahead of the Russians in our capability.” He noted that payload equivalent of SA-5’s orbiting body was between 19,000	and 20,000 lbs., far exceeding the 14,292 lbs. reported for heaviest Soviet satellites.. {M&R, 2/3/64,18)
The U.S.S.R. launched another earth satellite, cosmos xxxvi. The initial orbital parameters were as follows: period, 91.9 min.; apogee, 503 km. (300 mi.); perigee, 259 km. (155 mi.); inclination, 49°. {Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/31/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.) 768-598 O—65---18
U.S. and Japanese meteorologists ended week-long conference in Miami where they formulated informal recommendations for increased international cooperation in problems of hurricanes and typhoons. Satellites and rockets were expected to play key role in the program, administered by Japanese Research Council and the National Science Foundation. (M&R, 3/23/64, 8)
Fee ruled AT&T must confine its use of channels in undersea cables to voice and related service, and leave the services of non-voice and combined voice/non-voice to smaller message companies. Although the decision applied to undersea cables, there was speculation that it could affect future commercial communications satellites. As one Fee aide said, “The rationale of the decision would seem to extend to any type of facility.” (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/20/64)
Soviet Academy of Sciences announced Soviet ground stations were tracking echo ii passive communications satellite, in first joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. space experiment. Academician A. A. Blagonravov said Soviet ground stations observed the 135-ft. balloon as it inflated in space and three observatories succeeded in photographing the satellite. Observation stations reported the satellite appeared very bright, varying from magnitude-1 to zero. “Observers in Arkhangelsk report that two additional objects are moving in front of and slightly faster than the satellite proper, and a third object is moving behind it. The results of the first observations are being forwarded to the U.S. The optical stations will continue tracking the echo n. The radio communications experiment is slated to begin somewhat later.” (NYT, 1/27/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/27/64; Izvestia, 1/28/64,6, atss-tTrans.)
The U.S. Weather Bureau reported that a hurricane having winds of 75 mph had been located by tiros VII satellite 1,000 mi. southwest of San Diego. (San Diego Union, 7/18/64; U.S. Weather Bureau)
relay i communications satellite continued operating normally and the one-year onboard timer had not cut off as of this date. ( gsfc Historian)
U.S.S.R. launched earth satellite cosmos xxxi. The orbit had the following initial parameters: period of rotation, 91.6 min.; apogee, 508 km. (309 mi.); perigee, 228 km. (141.67 mi.); inclination to equator, 49°. (Izvestia, 6/7/64:, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Delegates from U.S., Canada, Australia, and Japan met with the European Conference on Satellite Communications—a body representing 15 European nations—to further negotiate formation of a world-wide communications satellite system. Francis Trew, secretary of the European Conference, said at the London meeting he was hopeful an agreement “would be ready for ratification in the ‘near future.’ ” (Farnsworth, NYT, 5/26/64,11)
In an Astronautics and Aeronautics editorial, Burton I. Edelson, Chairman of the aiaa Communications Committee, said: “In applying earth satellites to practical tasks, we have long passed the stage of demonstration. Now as we approach the stage of extensive operations, we face another major challenge in what industry terms a ‘market survey.’ We must be alert to the possibility of entirely new markets which evolve once an initial experiment demonstrates capability. The professional community can and should make major contributions to the prompt exploitation of its brain-childs.” (A&A, 12/64, 13)
Communications Satellite Corp. stock reached $48, highest price since it went public June 2 at $20. (Hammer, NYT, 8/20/64, 37)
Communications Satellite Corp. said dod’s last-minute demands on ComSatCorp to change the terms of the international comsat agreement were the reason why DOD-ComSatCorp negotiations fell through. ComSatCorp President Joseph Charyk said DOD had insisted on changes which would have barred foreign members from any voice in letting contracts to build the military portion of the network, dod’s demands were presented in July, shortly before the conference that created the new consortium and after all technical details of the proposed military-commercial sharing plan had been agreed upon in June. (Toth, Wash. Post, 8/12/64)
SYNCOM in was positioned into near-perfect stationary orbit over the Pacific Ocean. Final corrective maneuvers were completed, and the communications satellite appeared to hang motionless in space above the equator and International Date Line, where it could transmit radio and television signals between Japan and California. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/13/64)	_
Speaking at Georgetown Univ.’s 175th anniversary convocation, President Johnson said: “For almost the first time the interdependence of nations is not a remote goal or a ringing slogan. It is a fact which we neglect at our peril. “Communications satellites, atomic rockets and jet transports have made distant capitals into close neighbors. Our challenge is to transform this reality into an instrument for the freedom of man. “Today the cost of failure to communicate is not silence or serenity but destruction and dissolution.” (Text, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/64)
Managing underwriters of ComSatCorp’s 10-million-share public offering at $20 a share announced the offering was oversubscribed and the books closed. Thus ComSatCorp had enough money to launch the fleet of satellites that was expected to be handling global communications by 1967. (WSJ, 6/9/64; NYT, 6/12/64,47)
NASA announced agreement had been reached by Malagasy Republic and U.S. on the relocation and expansion of NASA tracking station on Madagascar. Previously located at Majunga, the station was being relocated near Tananarive and expanded to include instrumentation for Project Gemini monitoring and communicating and for scientific satellite tracking and recording data. (NASA Release 64-222)
National Weather Satellite Center was seeking sources for services and material for advanced development models of water-borne automatic unmanned weather stations by January 14,1965. Companies with mooring and static meteorology sensor technology and design capabilities were being sought. (M&R, 12/21/64,8)
usaf Electronic Systems Division announced award of $1,350,000 fixedprice contract to Space-General Corp. for design, fabrication, and testing of satellite payloads, (dod Release 849-64)
Addressing National Space Club in Washington, arpa Director Dr. R. L. Sproull said the nuclear detection satellites orbited last month were operating “without a hitch.” He described the satellites as “experimental”, said they were being used “to determine the most appropriate sensors and the most attractive modes of processing information from them.” He said the success of first launch (October 1963) enabled arpa to revise the program with fewer launches. The satellites were still operating “excellently” and providing information on radiation. (SBD, 8/19/64, 246; NSC Release).
Joint Navigation Satellite Committee (jnsc) established by agreement between Depts. of Treasury, Defense, Interior, Commerce; faa; and NASA, jnsc would evaluate requirements for a nonmilitary satellite system for air-sea navigation, traffic control, emergency and rescue operations, and related functions. If jnsc found navsat system to be the most advantageous means of providing these services, it would recommend appropriate program to develop the satellite system. (Agreement; nmi 2-3-39)
Communications Satellite Corp. stock had more than doubled in price since heing issued to the public in June and was continuing to rise. Michael Getler, in analysis of the situation, attributed rapid price rise to “basically an amazing scarcity of shares for daily grading—in combination with some rather short-sighted short-selling of the issue based in large measure on early, perhaps overly pessimistic, views of its likely performance. . . .” He quoted security consultant George P. Edgar: “ "The instinct of the public, in this case, has operated better than that of Wall Street. For the most part, professionals have missed ComSat and the public took the ball and ran.’ . . .” (Getler, M&R, 9/14/64, 18)
tiros vii completed one year in orbit with all components working as well as the day it was launched. During the past year, the satellite transmitted about 70,000 pictures to earth, 90 per cent of them usable, and spotted 16 hurricanes and typhoons, (nasa Release 64-144)
Attempt to orbit NASA Explorer Beacon satellite (S-66) failed when third stage of Delta launch vehicle burned for only 22 sec. instead of normal 40. This was only the second Delta failure and followed 22 consecutive successes. The 120-lb. satellite was designed to transmit data on the ionosphere directly to worldwide network of ground stations. In addition to making major ionosphere studies, the satellite was to have served as test bed for two geodesic experiments—reflection of a laser beam directed from Wallops Island, Va., and transmission on two frequencies permitting ground stations to study Doppler method of satellite tracking and influence of ionosphere on Doppler tracking. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/20/64; Av. Wk., 2/23/64,25; nasa Release 64-60)
Leo D. Welch, Chairman of the Communications Satellite Corp., reported that Soviet officials had refused to answer a question as to whether they were developing their own system of communications by satellite. Welch said that the Soviets would say only that they were conducting experiments in the space technology. The questions were asked when the Soviets attended a meeting in Geneva in June at which they received a briefing on the formation of the 18-nation communications satellite network. (Wash. Post, 7/20/64)
It was reported dod may coordinate a geodetic survey program combining Secor satellite, a planned Transit satellite, echo ii, and a planned Anna satellite. A ground station would correlate the flashing light of Anna, the optical system of Secor, and the doppler radar system of the Transit, using echo ii as a reference point. (SBD, 6/24/64)
usaf announced Atlas-Agena D launch from Pt. Arguello, Calif., with undisclosed satellite payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/12/64)
usaf advanced development program to investigate laser’s intelligencegathering capabilities in space was reported. Called “Lariat” (Laser Radar Intelligence Acquisition Technology), program was outgrowth of three-year effort by afsc Aeronautical Systems Div. to develop satellite surveillance system at Cloudcroft, N. Mex. ( Av. Wk., 5/18/64,104)
Cape Kennedy, prepared for the onslaught of Hurricane Dora by advance warnings including photographs by nimbus i satellite, escaped the second hurricane in a month with virtually no damage. (AP, 9/9/64)
Soviet satellites electron in and electron iv were successfully conducting scientific investigation of upper atmosphere and outer space, according to Soviet newspaper source. Since their orbiting last July 11,50 communication sessions had been held with electron III and 19 with electron rv, and valuable scientific and engineering data had been obtained. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/2/64, ATSS—T Trans.)
At White House news conference, President Johnson announced his three appointees to the board of Communications Satellite Corp. “I have appointed Mr. Frederick Donner, who is chairman of the board of General Motors, and has been since 1958. . . . “I have Mr. George Meany, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. I will have Mr. Clark Kerr, president of the University of California. Those are the three Presidential appointees. “This has required a good deal of study and discussion, and I feel very pleased that these men have indicated their willingness to make a sacrifice to lend their peculiar and unusual talents to the direction of this great adventure between government and free enterprise. “Needless to say, all of them have a good many duties at the present time, but because I pointed out the need for their experience and their broad knowledge, they accepted membership.” (Transcript, NYT, 9/22/64)
Delegates from 10 nations and the Vatican formally signed in Washington an agreement for a global communications satellite system. Previously initialed by the negotiators, the agreement designated Communications Satellite Corp. of the U.S. as the partnership’s “manager in the design, development, construction, establishment, operation of the space segment.” (Ward, Balt. Sun, 8/20/64)
U.S. Army’s use of orbiting satellite to pinpoint exact locations of land bodies separated by large expanses of ocean was described by DOD. Using secor (Sequential Collation of Range) system with the satellite and overseas ground stations, Army Corps of Engineers’ Army Map Service was for the first time obtaining distance measurements of up to a thousand miles to an accuracy within 30 meters. Nine unknown points were expected to be located in the Pacific during the first year of operations, (dod Release 776-64)
European Space Research Organization (esro) announced in Paris its plans for satellite development program. First two esro satellites would be launched into orbit from the U.S. with Scout boosters; launch vehicles for later satellites would be supplied by member nations. ESRO set budget of $300 million for eight years. (NYT, 3/25/64, 31; A&A, 5/64,9)
Information about the Van Allen radiation belts, obtained from usaf satellite about a year ago, was reported by Dr. Ludwig Katz, of usaf’s Space Physics Laboratory: “These low energy particles are not a serious hazard to men in space. Over a period of time, however, they could affect the performance of electronic equipment carried aboard a satellite. “The instruments carried aboard the satellite were of six types: a proton detector, plasma probe, electron detector, electrostatic analyzer, geiger counter and magnetometer. The data were gathered from more than 100 orbits.” (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/64)
explorer ix re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated after more than three years in space. The lightweight, 12-ft.-diameter balloon was NASA’s most effective satellite for measuring atmospheric density and temperature. Placed in orbit Feb. 16, 1961, explorer lx traveled more than 340 million mi. during its 14,000 orbits of the earth. It provided a better understanding of upper atmosphere characteristics, determining more precisely the relationships between air density and solar radiations. Measurements of the satellite’s atmospheric drag effects were correlated with those of a similar inflated sphere, explorer XIX, orbited Dec. 19,1963. explorer ix was the first satellite orbited by a solid-fuel launch vehicle (Scout) and the first satellite launched at Wallops, (nasa Release 64-81; Wallops Release 64-35)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxxvii into earth orbit: 300-km. (186.42-mi.) apogee, 205-km. (127.39-mi.) perigee, 89.45-min. period, and 65° angle of inclination to the equator. Tass said the satellite contained scientific equipment intended for carrying on space research according to program announced March 16, 1962. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/15/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
The “complete success” of Project Vela high-altitude nuclear-detection satellites led DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) to expand and revise the project. Future launchings had been rescheduled farther apart so that subsequent satellites could incorporate any major improvements between launchings, according to arpa Director Dr. R. L. Sproull. (M&R, 4/27/64,11)	_
First anniversary of telstaR ii communications satellite. AT&T reported its second communications satellite was “functioning normally in every respect” and had completed 2,340 orbits of the earth. Nearly 60 public demonstrations, most of them overseas TV transmissions, were conducted with telstar ii. Radiation data collected by telstar n enabled scientists to determine that the very high intensity of electrons in inner region of the Van Allen belt had decayed slowly during the past year. Built with stronger shielding against radiation than its predecessor and equipped with specially, developed transistors to better withstand the space environment, telstar ii was orbiting in higher apogee than telstar i, making possible communications experiments of greater length, (at&t Release)	.
ComSatCorp asked 16 companies to propose studies on how to judge the merits of launch vehicles which could be used to put medium-altitude communications satellites into orbit around the earth. ComSatCorp told fcc it planned to launch its first satellite, the Early Bird, in March as a communication link between Europe and North America. The Early Bird would be able to transmit two-way telephone conversations, television computer data, and other types of communications as an experiment in synchronous satellites, placed above the equator at an altitude of 22,300 miles. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 12/9/64>)
New and more detailed information about Van Allen belts gleaned by hitchhiker I satellite was reported to cospar by Ludwig Katz, afcrl project scientist, hitchhiker satellite was launched pickaback on usaf satellite and separated last July 1. In the afcrl measurements the count rate for protons between one and five million electron volts (mev) indicated that for this energy region there were two distinct Van Allen belts. The count was significantly lower in the middle region between two belts. A second feature, found in measurements between 15 and 100 kev, was that more electrons were found in energy region of the radiation belt, although there was decrease in total flux of electrons from the inner to the outer areas of earth’s magnetic lines of force. (usaf oar Release 5-64-2)
NASA announced two industry teams had presented to NASA and other agencies their feasibility studies for nonmilitary navigation satellite system. General Electric Co. and Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. made one study under $156,000 NASA contract, while Westinghouse Electric Corp. studied another approach under $225,000 contract. The proposed satellite network would provide worldwide, all-weather coverage for ships and aircraft. (NASA Release 64-37)
Fee announced Communications Satellite Corp. planned negotiation of $8 million contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for development, fabrication, assembly, test, maintenance, and service for “Early Bird” communications satellite—the proposed experimental-operational comsat system. The proposed contract would be subject to Fee approval, (upi, Houston Chron., 3/17/64; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/64; M&R, 3/23/64,8)
NASA’s nimbus i meteorological satellite was launched into polar orbit from Western Test Range with Thor-Agena B launch vehicle, and on its sixth orbit began transmitting weather photographs which were called “the best pictures ever” from space. Orbit of the 830-lb. satellite had been planned as circular 575-mi. altitude orbit; Agena B engines burned for only .84 sec. instead of the 3.8 sec. expected for injection bum, so the satellite was orbiting with 578-mi. apogee, 252-mi. perigee, 98-min. period, and 81° inclination to the equator, nimbus I, unlike the Tiros meteorological satellites, was earth-oriented and stabilized in all three axes. It contained Advanced Vidicon Camera System and Automatic Picture Transmission System, both of which operate during daylight portion of each orbit; High Resolution Infrared Radiometer, first to be flown on NASA meteorological satellite, provided first high resolution night-time cloud-cover pictures and cloud-top temperatures taken from a satellite. About 62 apt stations, including those in 12 foreign countries and 4 owned privately, participated in nimbus i picture reception. The apt system was designed for Nimbus and was first tested—successfully—on tiros viii launched last December. Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said at nimbus i news conference: “. . . This much is certain: We are way ahead of the rest of the world. I am certain that if nothing came out of the space effort but the communications satellite, the weather satellite, and the navigational satellites, which will soon be flying, in a limited number of years, it would more than pay back all of the investment that has been made in space.” (NASA Release 64-195; GSFC Press Briefing Transcript; Wash. Eve. Star, 8/29/64; nasa r&sc Div.)
Fourth birthday of echo I passive communications satellite, still orbiting the earth in its visible path. G. T. Schjeldahl Co., builders of the 100-ft. sphere for NASA, said echo i’s supply of gas had long ago leaked out through holes made by micrometeoroids, but even so, echo i had “demonstrated the practicability of employing large inflatable and erectable reflectors to rebound intelligent signals beamed at it.” (Schjeldahl Release; Wash. Post, 8/11/64)
In Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet Academician A. A. Blagonravov was interviewed by Tass correspondent regarding the launching of echo ii :	. . in time, international space cooperation will acquire decisive significance. Each country will contribute its best efforts to the peaceful conquest of space. The knowledge obtained will accrue to the benefit of all mankind. Certain long-range communication problems will be clarified by the joint investigations of the U.S. and U.S.S.R. scientists. There are other equally fruitful points of contact. The coordination of the program of space experiments envisages the use of satellites for weather service on a world-wide scale. Also the combined use of sputniks for compiling charts of the Earth’s magnetic field will be a significant contribution to world science. These projects are part of the Soviet-American collaboration in the interests of mankind.” (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/28/64, 4, ATSS-T Trans.)
relay i and relay II communications satellites were used to broadcast election week previews and results to Europe. Total broadcast time amounted to slightly less than two hours, syncom II synchronous communications satellite, stationed in the Pacific, relayed nearly eight hours of U.S. Presidential election returns to the Far East. Voice of America transmitted the radio signals. (Goddard News, 11/ 16/64,3; nasa Release 64-279)
Second anniversary of orbiting of anna Ib first satellite designed for use in measuring size and shape of the earth. Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, builder of the satellite, said anna ib was still flashing its beacon and relaying radio signals to earth upon command. (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
U.S.S.R.’s Ivan Cheprov, speaking at symposium on international space law held in Warsaw in conjunction with IAF congress, criticized the planned global communications satellite network being organized by Communications Satellite Corp. He said it appeared “that the very use of new communications channels by other nations would depend on the whims of Comsat. . . . The right to participate in the management of the space communications system is denied those who are not willing to subsidize and to perpetuate a monopoly in the sphere of producing communications satellites and running space communications business. . . . The other participants merely form a chorus for approving any decisions dictated by Comsat.” He said the U.N. and the International Telecommunication Union could organize an international communications system “on the basis of equality.” (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/11/64)
At conclusion of Rome meeting of European Conference on Satellite Communications with representatives from U.S. and Canada, head of U.S. delegation Abram Chayes said “the most significant result of the conference is that a number of European countries as well as Canada have now expressed serious interest in joining as copartners” in the international comsat system. Discussions would continue, and another meeting was scheduled for mid-March in Washington. (Woll-emborg, Wash. Post, 2/14/64)
Ernest W. Brackett, NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator (Procurement Policy), addressed National Association of Professional Contract Administrators in Orlando, Fla. Discussing some NASA contract matters of current interest, he outlined ways in which NASA worked similarly to and differently than dod contract administration, then said: “Perhaps the outstanding difference between NASA and dod in the field? of- contract administration is in the area of quality control and inspection. NASA’s contracts are almost wholly for research and the development of satellites, space vehicles, engines, etc., the like of which have never been made before. There are no production type contracts and these probably will be very few. The system of inspection and quality control as envisaged by NASA is quite different from the sampling type of inspection used on a production line. “We buy only a few of each item and a failure may mean the compromise of a program. Also, development items are very expensive and the loss of a shot may mean the loss of millions of dollars. There have been failures where the cause has been traced to the failure of a small component costing a hundred dollars or so which might have been caught with proper inspection. The Saturn is an example of a project where very high degrees of quality control have been applied and very detailed inspection has taken place. The six Saturn shots have all been successful and it is difficult to criticize success. “nasa has had over 100 space shots. There have been successes and failures. In 1960 only 47% of the shots were successful,t but in 1963 successes had risen to 85%. You can expect continued emphasis on quality control from NASA. Someone described that degree of reliability that nasa is looking for as being the equivalent of 1,000 TV sets made to run continuously for a year without a single one failing. . . .” (Text)
ComSatCorp said it would award three additional study contracts for design of communications satellites systems. AT&T and RCA would design a system of 18 satellites to be placed in random orbits. TRW Space Technology Laboratories would engineer a system of 12 satellites in controlled orbits. Hughes Aircraft would plan an improved synchronous-orbit communications satellite. Based on these preliminary studies, a choice was to be made for use in the initial comsat system to begin operation in 1966-67. (ComSatCorp Release; Wash. Post, 6/9/64; Balt. Sun, 6/9/64; NYT, 6/9/64,25)
NASA and ComSatCorp jointly announced the signing of an agreement covering the launching by NASA of “Early Bird”—the first communications satellite intended for commercial use. The agreement provided that NASA would launch Early Bird from Cape Kennedy, Fla., into synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude above the Atlantic as soon after Mar. 1 as NASA found feasible. ComSatCorp would pay NASA approximately $3.5 million for the initial launch, whether or not the Thrust Augmented Delta launch vehicle was successful in orbiting the satellite, and for each subsequent launch under the contract. The $3.5 million would reimburse NASA for the cost of the Delta vehicle, other launch services, propellants, guidance and tracking services, and data processing. Should the first launch be unsuccessful, nasa would try again on a second satellite. The contract gave ComSatCorp the option of calling for additional launches, after July 1, of synchronous satellites of the same type. (ComSatCorp Release, 12/23/64)
The White House and Communications Satellite Corp. announced television coverage of the Olympic Games from Tokyo to the U.S. and Canada would be attempted via communications satellite. Project would be earned out with cooperation of NASA and dod and with Government of Japan and Japan Broadcasting Corp. NASA’s Syncom 3 experimental communications satellite, planned for launch into synchronous orbit during August, would be made available for transmission of TV coverage of the Games, which would take place Oct. 10-24. (ComSatCorp Release; Finney, NYT, 7/23/64,42)
NASA and NBC conducted one-hour test of the syncom II communication satellite hovering in synchronous orbit near the West Coast, testing the satellite’s capability to relay video coverage from Tokyo’s Olympic Games next fall. In the test, signals were transmitted from an antenna at Fort Dix, N.J.; signals returned from the satellite were received at Andover, Me., and relayed to nbc studios by land lines. Quality of the pictures was considered below standard commercial quality but adequate for brief broadcasts of select events. NBC, which had purchased exclusive rights to TV coverage of the 1964 Summer Olympics in the U.S. and Central and South America, would now decide whether to attempt live coverage with satellites or to rely on tapes. (Witkin, NYT, 4/24/64, 55)	_
Senate confirmed President Johnson’s nominations to Board of Directors of the Communications Satellite Corp.: Frederic G. Donner, George Meany, and Clark Kerr, (nasa lar III/187-88)
USAF’s start (Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-entry Test) program was discussed by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal of the Armed Forces, start, according to Haggerty, “appears to be more than . . . an expansion of the ASSET program. . . . START involves a dozen or more areas of investigation in the general field of re-entry. It could lead to development of a manned re-entry vehicle for use with the Manned Orbital Laboratory, one which could make a maneuvering re-entry to a landing field, as opposed to the ballistic flight path of the Gemini spacecraft which will be the original MOL re-entry vehicle. Looking farther down the road, start technology could provide the basis for eventual development of a large ferry vehicle for shuttling men and supplies to and from an orbiting space station. . . .” First contract for this new type of spacecraft was awarded recently to Martin Marietta Corp. for ablative-type re-entry body, designated SV-5, capable of maneuvering during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere at hypersonic-transonic speeds. SV-5 was said to be only one portion of broad start program, which would investigate a .number of other reentry body shapes, possibly even lifting body types such as M-2 and HL-10 being investigated by NASA. (J/Armed Forces, 9/5/64, 5) September 5: More emigrating scientists and engineers settle in the U.S. than in any other country, according to Dr. Charles V. Kidd, Associate Director for International Activities of National Institutes of Health, writing in UNESCO publication. From 1949 through 1961, 43,000 scientists and engineers (average of 3,350 per year) immigrated to U.S., reaching peak of 5,800 per year in 1957. (O’Kane, NYT, 9/6/64, 20) September 6: NASA announced echo I balloon satellite had been used this summer by French National Geographic Institute to accurately locate satellite tracking stations being built for France and esro across Europe and Africa. According to reports, French National Geographic Institute photographed echo i simultaneously from precisely located cameras in France and Algeria, in order to join the triangulation systems of France and Algeria. Its aluminum-coated mylar skin wrinkled and misshapen, echo i was no longer useful in radio-reflecting communications, but it was still clearly visible in the nighttime sky after more than four years of orbiting the earth. (NASA Release 64-226)
The U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxxv into orbit. The satellite’s initial orbital parameters were: period, 89.2 min.; apogee, 268 km. (161 mi.); perigee, 217 km. (130 mi.); inclination, 51.3°- The satellite, carrying scientific equipment for space studies, was reported to be functioning normally. (Tass, Izvestia, 7/17/64,1, atss-t Trans.; AP, NYT, 7/16/64)
Scientific results from the explorer xvm satellite—-Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP)—was topic of discussion at GSFC symposium. The NASA satellite was orbited in November 1963, with onboard instrumentation including two magnetometers, three plasma probes, and five sets of low and medium energy particle detectors, imp data revealed a shock wave existed 53,600 mi. above earth’s sunlit surface, formed by interaction of interplanetary magnetic field and high-speed constant wind of particles from the sun. Between shock wave and upper edge of Van Allen belts, a region ranging in depth from 12,000 to 20,000 mi., there is great turbulence; moderately energetic particles constantly flow into the region and drain away. (Simons, Wash. Post, 3/13/64; NYT, 3/13/64; Goddard News, 3/23/64, 1-2)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xlviii satellite into orbit, with the following parameters: 295-km. apogee (183-mi.), 203-km. perigee (126-mi.), 89.4-min. period, and 65.07°-inclination to the equator. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/15/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Impact of global communications satellite systems was predicted by Arthur C. Clarke in Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine. During the coming decade, comsat systems would bring about “orbital post office,” “orbital newspapers,” and “orbital telephony.” And eventually global comsat system would underscore requirement for universal language, which Clarke predicted would be met with English; would educate millions with TV visual aids; and would end barriers to free flow of information (such as censorship and jamming). “The inexorable force of astronomical facts will destroy the political fantasies which so long fragmented our planet. For when all major artistic productions, entertainments, political and news events (not to mention disasters) can be observed and experienced simultaneously by the whole world, the parochialism and xenophobia of the past will not be able to survive. “. . . another [influence], perhaps even more fundamental, may be reversal of an historic trend which has proceeded with scarcely a break for 5000 years. The traditional role of the city as a meeting-place is coming to an end; Megapolis may soon go the way of the dinosaurs it now resembles in so many respects. This century may see the beginnings of a slow but irresistible dispersion and decentralization of mankind—a physical dispersion which will take place, paradoxically enough, at the same time as cultural unification.” (Clarke, A/A, 2/64, 45—48)
U.S.S.R launched cosmos xxix into orbit from unspecified site. Soviet press agency Tass said the satellite was in the following initial orbit: 309-km. apogee (192mi.) ; 204-km. perigee (127 mi.); 89.52 min. period; and 65°4' angle of inclination to the equator. Tass said scientific equipment, radio systems, and onboard instrumentation were functioning normally, and ground station was processing incoming information. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 4/26/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
NASA anounced closing the command and control station for Relay communications satellites at Nutley, N J., and moving the operation to the Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (Stadan) at Blossom Point, Md. The move was made to consolidate personnel and equipment and save operation costs, (nasa Release 64-77)
Reported that NASA was considering University Explorer program, under which universities would design and build their own scientific satellites with NASA funding. The satellites would be launched from Wallops Island with Scout boosters. (Av. Wk., 10/19/64, 35)
Among 49 new projects voted by U.N. Special Fund was $582,000 grant to help India establish a satellite tracking station and perform research in space communications. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 6/22/64)
Unnamed DOD officials said they were certain that U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos satellites were being used for reconnaissance over U.S. (Hoffman, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/19/64)
usaf launched Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from WTR with unidentified satellite payload. It was later revealed that two satellites were placed in orbit (hhn-48)
U.S.S.R. announced launching of cosmos xliv earth satellite into the following orbit: 860-km. (534-mi.) apogee, 618-km. (384-mi.) perigee, 99.5-min. period, and 65° inclination to the equator. The satellite was said to be carrying on the Cosmos program announced March 16, 1962. (Tass, Pravda, 8/29/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
NASA announced that Europeans in nine countries would be able to watch the Republican National Convention via NASA’s relay ii communications satellite. Television networks in England, France, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, and Italy were to use relay ii five times during the four-day convention, July 20-23. Similar coverage would be provided during the Democratic National Convention, beginning August 24. (NASA Release 64-170) *	NASA announced that four flight tests of liquid-hydrogen stages in Centaur and Saturn rockets had established liquid hydrogen as a new high-energy fuel for space vehicles. Liquid hydrogen, when mixed with liquid oxygen, produced about 35 per cent more thrust than the kerosene-type fuels normally used, (nasa Release 64-164) *	It was probable that the Soviet space probe zond i, was nearing Venus and would try to send back the first close-up television pictures of that planet, reported Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Radio Experimental Station, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/13/64) *	Aec disclosed decision to discontinue Project Pluto, attempt to build lowflying, atomic-powered missile, despite ten years of effort and $200 million investment. Livermore Radiation Laboratory, initiator and developer of project, had been notified of decision about ten day & earlier. Cause of discontinuation was reportedly combination of indecision, indifference, and lack of support by dod. (Finney, NYT, 7/13/64, 11) July 12: Abraham Hyatt, formerly NASA. Director of Plans and Program Evaluation, was appointed Jerome Clarke Hunsaker Professor of Aeronautical Engineering at MIT. (Boston Sun. Globe, 7/12/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center issued request for proposals for study of deep space laser acquisition and tracking techniques in manned space missions. Specifications called for high priority development of laser tracking techniques between earth and a manned deep space vehicle or between a satellite and two manned deep space vehicles. System must be capable of handling two-way telemetry and voice communications, as well as spacecraft-to-ground TV. 22 companies were invited to bid on the six- to nine-month study, (msc Release 64-3)
Tass announced electron i and electron II scientific satellites were continuing their elliptical orbits of the earth. By 6:00 p.m. Moscow time Feb. 1, electron i had passed repeatedly through the inner radation belt in its 19 orbits and electron ii had moved four times through the outer radiation belt in its two orbits. Tass said the following studies were being made with aid of onboard equipment: outer and inner radiation belts; charged particles having low energy; concentrations of electrons and positive ions; magnetic fields and radiation belts of the earth; nuclear component of cosmic radiation; shortwave solar radiation; propagation of radio waves; radio-radiation of galaxies; and densities of meteoritic material. Tass said the studies, being accomplished under a unified program in various areas of outer space, were being conducted for the first time. These studies were important for conducting the program of the IQSY and for permitting collection of data to assure radiation safety of manned space flights. Tass said all onboard equipment was functioning normally and ground stations were receiving scientific data from the satellites. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/2/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
U.S.S.R. announced orbiting of cosmos l satellite into the following orbit: apogee, 150 mi.; perigee, 122 mi.; period, 88.7 min.; inclination to the equator, 51.3°. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/30/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
NASA Hq. received telegrams from Soviet Academy of Sciences containing first data from Soviet optical observations of echo ii passive communications satellite. The data were obtained Jan. 25 from Soviet optical observation stations at Tashkent, Ashklabad, Erevan, Vologda, Archangel, Dushanbe, and Vorkuta, were being analyzed along with observations made at NASA stations around the world. Soviet Academy also indicated photographs of echo ii were obtained at five stations. (nasa Release 64-21)
NASA’s explorer xvni (imp-i) satellite, silent since last June because of low power levels, resumed data transmission; it had reached a more favorable sun angle and was able to operate on power directly from its four solar panels. Data received from the satellite, based on preliminary analysis, were described as “good.” (NASA Release 64-242 Addendum)
Public sale of stock in Communications Satellite Corp. would be offered in April, New York sources revealed, (nytns, Denver Post, 2/21/64)
COSMOS xxvil satellite was launched into orbit by U.S.S.R. Announced orbital data were: 237-km. (147-mi.) apogee; 192-km. (119-mi.) perigee; 88.7-min. period; and 64.8° inclination to the equator. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellite carried scientific instrumentation intended for the “further study of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass” March 16, 1962, as well as radio transmitter and telemetering systems. All onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 3/28/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Radio command signal to syncom II communications satellite pulsed onboard gas jets to increase the satellite’s 6,800-mph speed. The satellite began drifting westward at rate of about 1.3 degree per day, was expected to reach vicinity of the International Date Line in mid-May. There syncom ii would serve as backup for a third Syncom, scheduled for synchronous orbit over the Pacific in May and transpacific communications experiments during the summer. (Finney, NYT, 3/19/64, 14) 706-598 0—65---8
dod announced Army Corps of Engineers’ secor (Sequential Collation of Range) geodetic satellite was performing “exceptionally well,” confirming Dr. Albert Hall’s disclosure of Feb. 18. The 40-lb. satellite was orbiting at about 600-mi. altitude in periods of about 100 min. secor system tests were being conducted by Army’s Geodesy, Intelligence and Mapping Research and Development Agency (gimrada) , which had contracted for the satellite from itt Federal Laboratories. gimrada ground stations were measuring distances by sending and receiving signals through satellite’s onboard transponder, then acquiring ranging data for use in automatic data reduction process by Army Map Service to determine station positions, afsc/ssd had lofted the satellite into orbit for gimrada; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was providing orbital data and telemetry support, (dod Release 156-64)
NASA announced the details of U.S. geodetic satellite program, designed to provide more precise mapping of the earth’s surface and its gravitational field. Program was based on recommendation of NASA-DOD-Dept. of Commerce Geodetic Satellite Policy Board and involved three types of satellites: Beacon Explorer, equipped with reflectors to reflect laser beams from earth and with Doppler transmitter to measure effect of irregularities in earth’s gravitational field; Geodetic Explorer (instrumented to conduct more experiments than the Beacon Explorer), containing flashing lights, variety of electronic beacons, optical reflectors, and when possible radar reflectors; and passive geodetic staellite, sunlight-reflecting lOO-ft.-diameter Echo-type sphere, (nasa Release 64-236)
U.S. Army presented two pioneer communications satellites, Score and Courier, to Smithsonian Institution during opening of Museum of History and Technology’s Hall of Electricity. Both satellites were developed at present Army Electronics Command, Ft. Monmouth, N.J. (Balt. Sun, 7/8/64)
The “strange object” that fell from sky near remote Venezuelan village was identified by two U.S. Army officers as a U.S. satellite, according to U.S. Embassy spokesman in Caracas. The 175-lb. satellite had been charred by re-entry heat, damaged by impact, and partly dismantled by local residents, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/7/64)
Soviets launched cosmos xxxiv artificial earth satellite equipped for scientific study of outer space. It was part of program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962. Period was 90 min., apogee was 360 km. (223 mi.), perigee was 205 km. (127 mi.), and equatorial inclination was 64.96°. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 7/2/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Plans for military communications satellite system were described in Aviation Week & Space Technology, which reported that latest dod plan for interim military comsat network called for two or three Titan III—C boosters to place 16-24 satellites into near-equatorial orbit. First launch was scheduled for February 1966. (Av. Wk., 8/17/64, 19)
NASA announced it would negotiate contract with General Electric Co.’s Valley Forge Space Technology Center to design and build gravity-gradient stabilization system for Advanced Technological Satellite. Contract was expected to exceed $5 million. The GE devices would be flown on three satellites; in addition, GE would supply two prototype and two engineering gravity-gradient system models plus ground operations and data analysis. (NASA Release 64-115)
According to press reports, the twin satellites launched July 17 by USAF continued to send back clear signals from space. Press sources had indicated the satellites were Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites, said one satellite was in almost perfectly circular orbit ranging from 63,314 mi. to 64,915 mi. altitude, while the other was in slightly higher orbit ranging from 58,686 mi. to 69,387 mi. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/26/64; Wash. Sun. Star, 7/26/64)
Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell discussed objectives, progress, and future plans of NASA’s programs in the area of space science (space environment, sun-earth relationships, geodesy, investigation of moon and planets, investigation into nature of the universe, exobiology) and applications (meteorological satellites, communications program, and advanced technological satellites). Some of the space environment results obtained during the past year: “1. The existence of an appreciable number of protons in the outer Van Allen Belts was established. “2. The lifetime in the belt of artificially injected electrons was determined. . . . “3. Trapping lifetimes and rates of enhancement of electrons of varying energies in the outer radiation zone have been correlated with magnetic storms. “4. Large low energy electron fluxes have been found on lines of magnetic force which appear to trail off to immense distances out into deep space. “5. Contours of constant counting rate near the magnetic equator were found to draw closer to the Earth on the night side of the Earth than on the day side. “6. Repeated observations were made of simultaneous vlf electromagnetic emission, auroral optical emission, and particle precipitation into the atmosphere. “7. It was discovered that the Earth’s magnetic tail in the antisolar direction extends at least half way to the Moon’s orbit. “8. Direct observations were made of the way in which solar plasma on the sunward side of the Earth piles up outside the boundary of the Earth’s magnetic field, and in so doing appreciably compresses the geomagnetic field. “9. Direct extended observations were made of the particle density and velocity of solar interplanetary plasma. These densities and velocities were found to have direct correlations with magnetic activity on the Earth and calcium plage activity regions on the Sun. “10. Extended measurements were made of the interplanetary magnetic field and solar and galactic cosmic ray intensities. “11. The true energy spectrum possessed by solar cosmic rays at their source on the Sun was deduced from the observational data. . . . “12. First simultaneous measurements were made of electron temperature, positive ion density, and neutral atmospheric constituents in the Earth’s high atmosphere. “13. A new theory was developed to account for the types of ions found in the ionosphere, specifically the ratio of helium to hydrogen. “14. Sounding rockets furnished important information on the ionospheric D region from 35 miles to 55 miles and the origin of the sporadic effects in the E region of the ionosphere at about 75 miles. “15. Diurnal and seasonal variations in the ionosphere were established. “16. Sounding rockets launched simultaneously with an overhead pass of the satellite Alouette reached within a few miles of the satellite, thereby connecting up ionospheric measurements in the lower atmosphere with those being made by the satellite.” (Testimony)
A $ 100-million issue of Communications Satellite Corp. stock was put on the market and almost immediately sold out. Five million shares were involved in the stock issue. The maximum allotment was 50 shares per customer from each security house, but the average was only about 15 shares because of the great public demand. The par value of the stock was $20 per share, and it closed at around $23 after having reached a high of $27 in the first few minutes of trading. (NYT, 6/3/64, 59)
Spatial orientation and stabilization of Early Bird, ComSatCorp’s first experimental satellite, was to be achieved using a hydrogen-peroxide reaction jet control system. Developed by Walter Kidde and Co., and originally intended for SYNCOM II, newer version would be capable of at least a 10-yr. lifetime. {M&R, 7/13/64, 27)
tiros vm meteorological satellite, launched December 21, 1963, was performing highly successfully in automatic transmission of cloud pictures to ground stations around the world, NASA announced. “Reports from 47 ground stations around the world, including five foreign stations, show that with one exception results have been satisfactory. TV signal strength has been good, tracking of the spacecraft based on data furnished daily by NASA has been easy for the ground stations, and picture contrast of the cloud cover photos generally has been excellent.” (NASA Release 64-53)
It was announced that President Johnson had designated December 1964 as United States International Aviation Month to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the International Civil Aviation Organization (icao), a division of the United Nations. The icao was responsible for making the international rules and setting international standards for all civil aviation activity, including the field of general avaiation. (naa Release) December 4: usaf launched Aflas-Agena D from wtr with unidentified satellite payload, (hhn—48)
Common stock of Communications Satellite Corp. had risen as high as $35 since it was put on sale to the public at $20 last June 2, surprising many Wall Street experts. (Vartan, NYT, 8/7/64,33)
cosmos XXxiii launched into orbit with the following initial parameters: apogee, 293 km. (182.06 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (129.87 mi.); period, 89.38 min.; and inclination to the equator, 65°. Tass said the satellite carried scientific apparatus designed for investigation of space in accordance with program announced March 16, 1962, and onboard instrumentation was operating normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 6/24/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
NASA Goddard Space Fight Center announced plans for negotiation with the General Dynamics-Electronics Co. for purchase of approximately $1.25 million worth of unique ground tracking equipment to be used in the Applications Technology Satellite project. ATS Range and Range Rate electronic systems would be installed in three ground stations to provide ground trackers with extremely accurate satellite position, velocity, and range. The systems would also drive displays and digital data consoles. The contractor would design, manufacture, and test the systems under a cost reimbursable contract with incentive provisions. ATS satellites, designed to advance technology in communications, meteorology, and other applications, would require unique ground systems ready for the first launch in 1966. (gsfc Release G—36-64) 76ft-598 O—65- —28
At international conference in Washington, two interrelated agreements for establishment of global commercial communications satellite system were initialed by the negotiators from 13 participating countries. Five other nations planned to join the agreement on or before Aug. 19, date of formal enactment. Under these agreements, ownership in the $200 million enterprise would be shared among 18 nations and Vatican City, with the United States’ Communications Satellite Corp., owning 61% of the shares and serving as manager of the system on behalf of all participants. Agreement would be open for six months beginning Aug. 19 to any nation belonging to International Telecommunications Union. (ComSatCorp Releases;’ Finney, NYT, 7/25/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/25/64; WSJ, 7/27/64)
Reorientation maneuver was made with syncom ill communications satellite, high above the Pacific Ocean, to align the communications antenna atop the spacecraft for optimum coverage of the earth. This positioned the antenna along a north-south axis perpendicular to the orbital plane. Side effect of this maneuver, plus an orbital adjustment made Aug. 31, was to reduce the eastward drift rate from 3.6° per day to less than 3° per day. (nasa Release 64-230)
relay I communications satellite continued transmitting despite an onboard timer set to turn it off after one year. Electrolytic solution was supposed to have eaten through main power lead to switch off transmission power. NASA and rca experts speculated erosion was slowed because environmental temperatures were cooler than anticipated. Launched into orbit Dec. 13,1962, relay i has been used for 2,000 communications experiments with more than 290 hours of transmission time, most of which was wideband transmission or TV. (nasa Release 64-1)
By midnight deadline, 197 communications carriers had filed applications with fcc to invest in Communications Satellite Corp. (AP, NYT, 3/25/64,53)
NASA’s SYNCOM iii synchonous-orbit communications satellite was 178.12° east longitude and 0.03° north latitude at noon, and was traveling along the equator drifting eastward at the rate of 2.8° per day. It was expected to reach the International Date Line (180°) tomorrow, syncom in was inclined 0.081° to the equator, and its orbit ranged in altitude from 21,690-mi. perigee to 22,509-mi. apogee. Control maneuvers would be signaled tomorrow to decrease the satellite’s apogee and increase the perigee, thus giving it a more nearly circular orbit, (nasa Release 64-230)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. began exchanging weather data over special teletype, Weather Bureau spokesman said, although some operating details had not yet been worked out. Spokesman said U.S. was not yet sending to U.S.S.R. any data gathered from meteorological satellites. (AP, NYT, 10/29/64,58)
Dr. V. A. Bailey, prof, emeritus of physics at Univ. of Sydney, Australia, stated in the British journal Nature his theory that the sun has a large negative electric charge. He proposed that two satellites be launched around the sun, one clockwise and the other counterclockwise, to learn whether or not the sun had electrical charge and whether such a charge was negative or positive. Most physicists believed sun had no electrical charge. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 3/31/64, 21)
Tass announced electron i and electron ii scientific satellites were continuing to send back “valuable scientific information.” electron i had made 53 orbits of the earth and electron ii, 6 orbits. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/64,6)
President Johnson submitted to the Congress his 1963 report on the activities and accomplishments of the U.S. program to establish and operate a commercial communications satellite system. In his transmittal message, the President said: “The year 1963 has been a period of major accomplishment toward the objectives established by the Congress in the Communications Satellite Act. The Communications Satellite Corporation has been organized, established, has employed a competent staff, and is implementing plans for a commercial communications satellite system. All agencies of Government concerned have contributed wholeheartedly to the furtherance of the objectives of the act. . . (CR, 2/10/64, 2714)
UNESCO decided to convene an international meeting of scientists in Paris late next year to study the use of space satellites in mass communications media. No exact date was set for the meeting. (NYT, 11/14/64, 29)
Sixth birthday of explorer I, first U.S. satellite, which was launched into orbit with a Jupiter C vehicle by jpl—abma team, explorer i has traveled around the earth 26,315 times covering some 775 million miles. With initial orbit of 1,573-mi. apogee, 224-mi. perigee, and 114.8-min. period, explorer i now orbits at 1,011.6-mi. apogee, 212.5-mi. perigee, and 104.6-min. period. It was originally expected to re-enter atmosphere and disintegrate after five years, was now expected to last until 1966. Its smaller transmitter relayed information for 105 days; the larger transmitter, 31 days. Onboard instrumentation discovered radiation belt around the earth, named after Dr. James A. Van Allen who provided the experiment. (Marshall Star, 1/29/64, 4; “nasa Chronicle of Earth Sat. & Space Probes, 1957-60”)
NASA and French National Center for Space Studies (CNES) agreed to proceed with cooperative space project of launching satellite to investigate characteristics of vlf electromagnetic wave propagation in the ionosphere. The French satellite would be launched from PMR using a Scout vehicle provided by NASA. This would be Phase II of two-phase CNES-nasa program for vlf investigations, pursuant to Memorandum of Understanding dated Feb. 18, 1963. Phase I consisted of two suborbital launches of French experiments with U.S. Aerobee sounding rockets, to demonstrate the feasibility of scientific experiments to be performed by the satellite. (NASA Release 64-61)
The ground station at Rao, Sweden, about 225 mi. southwest of Stockholm, joined the world network of communications satellite ground stations and would receive taped television messages via NASA’s relay i satellite. The station was the joint effort of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. (M&R, 11/30/64,20-22)
NASA announced it had approved a Rice Univ. proposal for a satellite to measure radiation and radiation loss in the Van Allen belts, aurorae and airglow, bombardment of the upper atmosphere by energetic particles from space, and galactic and solar cosmic rays. The 125-lb. scientific satellite, to be known as Owl, would be designed, developed, and built by a Rice group headed by Dr. Brian J. O’Brien, and would be injected into a near-circular orbit at about 400 mi. altitude by Scout launch vehicle. After achieving orbit, the satellite would be oriented by a large permanent bar magnet so that one axis would be continuously aligned with the earth’s magnetic lines of force. The Rice project would be part of the NASA University Explorers Program. Spacecraft and experiments would be tested at NASA facilities under the direction of NASA’s Wallops Station, which also was assigned project management of Owl. (nasa Release 65-29)
early bird I transmitted clear pictures and sound of live television programs between Europe and North America for 14 hrs. demonstrating its usefulness in regularly scheduled television. For three weeks, television’s use of early bird i would be restricted to Mondays; daily commercial use would not begin until fall when rates had been fixed. The satellite would be used on other days for telephone purposes and transmission of recorded information. (ComSatCorp; Gould, NYT, 5/4/65, 75)
Frederick G. Donner, chief executive of General Motors, appeared before a Senate Commerce Committee on his renomination by President Johnson as a director of the Communications Satellite Corporation. Asked about rivalry from the Soviet Union in view of their recently-launched comsat, Donner said he regarded this about the same way he did Soviet automobiles as far as competition was concerned, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/28/65)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives reached two satisfactory understandings in their New York discussions on space cooperation. The first, which reaffirmed the existing agreement for exchange of weather satellite data, provided that satellite data would be available on a continuing basis from both sides within a few months. The second, an agreement for the preparation and publication of a joint review of research in space biology and medicine, provided for a joint editorial board to receive full cooperation from both sides in the preparation of materials available in the two countries, selection of authors, and publication of their work. Barring an objection 'from either side within two months, the agreement would become effective automatically, (nasa Release 65-325)
“There are 593 objects in earth orbit today,” said Maj. Gen. Horace A. Hanes (usaf), Commander of the 9th Aerospace Defense Div., at an Armed Forces Week celebration at Selfridge AFB, Mich. He said these ranged from the six-in.-dia. Vanguard satellite through the 90-ft.-dia. Echo satellite. Hanes said the primary mission of his division was to detect and warn the U.S. of a mass ballistic missile attack: “We use radar stations in Alaska, Greenland, and England for this. But to detect satellites and other objects in earth orbit we use these radars plus a variety of other equipment including special optical cameras eleven feet high that weigh 3,000 pounds.” (Pipp, Detroit News. 5/16/65)
ComSatCorp requested industry proposals for an advanced satellite for a worldwide commercial communications system. The Corporation requested a satellite for use in a phased system at altitudes between 6,000 and 12,000 mi., or in a synchronous system at an altitude of 22,300 mi.; that had 1,000 two-way voice channels; that weighed approximately 240 lbs.; that could be launched alone or in groups of up to six satellites; that measured not more than 56-in.-dia. and 40-in. high; and that had a five-year lifetime. ComSatCorp stipulated the proposal should cover construction of six to 24 satellites, the number depending on the type of system, with the first six to be delivered within 24 months after the contract award. Proposals would be opened on October 25. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA’s PEGASUS I meteoroid-detecting satellite recorded 19 wing punctures in its 3 to 4 million mi. travels. Earth-transmitted electronic signals might have been the cause of several recorded hits, but some were definitely meteoroid particles. PEGASUS I orbited the earth every 97 min.	(ap, NYT, 3/4/65, 50; ap, Wash. Post, 3/4/65)
COSMOS XCIX unmanned satellite, carrying scientific instruments “for continued space research,” was launched into orbit by the Soviet Union, Tass announced. Initial orbital data: apogee, 320 km. (198.7 mi.); perigee, 199 km. (123.6 mi.); period, 89.6 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 12/10/65)
ComSatCorp invited 20 construction companies to bid on site preparation for the Brewster Flat, Wash., earth station. Expected to cost approximately $6 million, the station would be a U.S. link in a worldwide commercial communications satellite system. (ComSatCorp Release)
According to official sources, both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had exploded certain of their own satellites in orbit to prevent their falling into other hands, but neither nation was known to have attempted to knock down a spacecraft belonging to the other. (Clark, NYT, 4/4/65, 1)
Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite payload was launched by usaf from Western Test Range. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 132)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
USN announced the Transit navigational satellite system was operational and had been in use since July 1964. The three gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites, weighing between 110 and 160 lbs. each, were launched on Thor-Able-Star boosters into near-circular 600-mi. polar orbits from Pt. Mugu, Calif. Operational lifetime of the satellites was expected to be about two years. The satellites emitted radio signals which ships used to determine their positions, and could provide ships with navigational fixes—accurate to 0.1 mi.—about every 90 min. The shipboard computer operated automatically, beginning when the satellite approached, receiving the data, computing the ship’s position, and typing the results for the navigator. A number of fleet units were reported to be using the system. Capt. F. H. Price, Jr. (usn), who tested the system from the nuclear-powered cruiser U.S.S. Long Beach, called the system “the most reliable means of providing navigational information” and said it met the requirement of an “accurate, dependable, worldwide, all-weather, 24-hour-a-day capability.” This was the first continuous use of space technology in direct support of the fleet. It was predicted, but not officially confirmed, that the Polaris missile-firing submarines would adopt the navigational satellite system. NASA was studying commercial applications of a navigational satellite system and considering the possibility of developing its own system if it proved economically feasible, (dod Release 16-65; ap, Chic. Trib., 1/13/65; Watson, Balt. Sun, 1/13/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 14)
Study of approximately 300 photographs taken over the Antarctic by NASA nimbus I meteorological satellite had caused the U.S. Geological Survey to plan three major changes on its relief maps:	(1) Mount Siple, 10,000-ft.-high Antarctic mountain used by pilots as a navigational aid, would be repositioned 45 mi. further west; (2) a mountain group in the Kohler range, positioned by two expeditions in two different locations, would appear as one group rather than two; and (3) ice front information on the Filshner Ice Shelf, Weddell Sea, and Princess Martha Coast areas would be updated with photographs producing better definition of the ice shelfs shape, (csfc Release G-29-65)
According to a report in a West German publication, Luftfahrttechnik Raumfahrttechnik, Soviet communications satellite MOLNIYA i transmitted color television programs for nine hours in May 1965. Quality of the transmissions was good. (Luftfahrttechnik Raumfahrttechnik, 9/65, 237)
U.S. authorities had considered and rejected the idea of building orbiting nuclear missiles because it would be a clumsy, inaccurate method of waging atomic war, reported the Associated Press. U.S. experts had calculated that a warhead launched from orbit would not come within 50 mi. of its target on earth whereas U.S. ICBMS and submarine-launched Polaris missiles were accurate within one mile. In addition, U.S. had developed antisatellite rockets that could intercept enemy satellites in orbit. Disclosure was made because of a November 7 Tass announcment that one of the missiles paraded through Moscow for the Anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution had warheads that could “deliver their surprise blow on the first or any orbit around the earth.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, H2)
ITT World Communications, Inc., asked FCC for permission to use early bird I satellite for live television coverage of part of the Gemini v mission scheduled for Aug. 19. ITT would like to set up a portable ground station in the Atlantic aboard carrier U.S.S. Lake Champlain, expected to be the primary recovery ship, (ap, NYT, 7/20/65)	_ _
cosmos liii, an unmanned satellite containing scientific equipment for outer space research, was orbited by the Soviet Union. Preliminary orbital data: period, 98.7 min.; apogee, 741 mi. (1,192 km.) ; perigee, 141 mi. (227 km.) ; inclination, 48.8°. Equipment on board was operating normally. (Tass, Pravda, 1/31/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
ComSatCorp filed with FCC a notice of a proposed $300,000 contract with AT&T for research data and consultant services on ground stations for the global communications satellite network. FCC was notified that ComSatCorp had analyzed and evaluated other proposals and had held subsequent discussions with those making proposals. (ComSatCorp)
U.S. Army disclosed it had orbited a three-satellite earth-mapping system, with two of the spacecraft circling the earth from west to east and the third traveling from pole to pole. The satellites were of the Secor type. Two were fired into orbit earlier this month; the other was launched Jan. 11, 1964. The three spacecraft, each with a radio receiver and transmitter, were helping pinpoint locations on earth that were widely separated by large bodies of water, (ap, NYT, 4/1/65, 11; M&R, 4/5/65, 12)
Yemen and Pakistan had signed agreements increasing to 46 the number of countries which had joined in the international joint venture for development of a global commercial communications satellite system, ComSatCorp announced. They would share with other nations in the financing and ownership of the space segment of the global system, consisting of the satellites themselves, tracking, control, and related functions, but not earth stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
A tariff for the use of Early Bird satellites for transmission and reception of voice, record, data, telephoto, facsimile, television, and other signals was filed by ComSatCorp with the FCC. Beginning Sunday, June 27, voice channels would be available between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. edt on a daily basis. Minimum rental period, one month; rent, $4,200. Additional consecutive periods would be rented at $140 per day. Voice channels would be two-way. No refunds would be given for interruptions of less than 30 min. or for those caused by solar eclipse. Interruptions of 30 min. or more not the responsibility of the customer would be refunded at roughly $3 per 30-min. interruption. ComSatCorp could request temporary surrender of a voice channel for TV use and, in that event, would refund charges in amounts proportional to the surrender period if it falls between 5 a.m. and 8 a.m. or between 2 p.m. and 9 p.m., or in amounts twice proportional to the surrender period if it falls between 8 a.m. and 2 p.m. Also beginning June 27, television channels would be available as frequently as feasible. Hours would be 5 a.m. to 8 a.m. and 2 p.m. to 9 p.m. (Schedule i) and 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. (Schedule Ii). Channels would accept standard TV signals. TV channel rentals must be made for at least a 30-min. period. Rent: $2,400 for first 30min., $475 per immediately following 15 min. (Schedule I); $3,825 for first 30 min., $710 per immediately following 15 min. (Schedule n). Regular channels would be on one-way monochrome. Two-way monochrome and one-way color would rent for an additional 50%. Interruptions of more than 30 sec. and not the responsibility of the customer would be refunded in amounts proportional to the interrupted period. If a customer canceled his application for use of a TV channel, he would be billed as though he had not and would be required to pay any additional charges involved in acquiring temporary use of a voice channel if his application had made such acquisition necessary. TV channels would be rented on a first-come-first-serve basis. Rates covered only transmissions between Andover, Me., and the satellite. The arrangement whereby refunds would be made for temporary TV use of voice channels was necessary because early bird i cannot handle both kinds of transmissions simultaneously. (ComSatCorp Release)
Martin Co. had delivered the first pair of prototype nuclear generators for use in space to NASA, it was reported. The units contained no radioactive fuel and would be heated electrically for their qualification tests. Each generator was designed to deliver 30 watts of direct current to the weather satellite Nimbus B, first NASA satellite to use a nuclear power source, (ap, NYT, 2/23/65, 21)
National Science Foundation reported that three New Mexico State Univ. engineers were studying satellites’ radio signals in an attempt to determine exact shape of the earth. Under an NSF grant, the engineers had set up and were manning a special tracking unit at U.S. McMurdo Station in Antarctica and were tuned in on three spacecraft in polar orbit that passed near McMurdo 42 times daily. Stanford Univ. scientists had established a unit at Byrd Station to receive information from NASA’s Pogo, to be launched later this year, (upi, NYT, 4/11/65, 2)
Commenting that contributions to science made by the space probes and satellites had been “interesting, all of it useful, none of ii genuinely', eyepoppingly unexpected,” an editorial in the San Francisco Sunday Chronicle continued:	“Surprisingly enough, space research has produced several by-products with a practical end. “The most significant to the world as a whole are the reconnaissance satellites with which Russia and the U.S. are now mutually inspecting each other’s and everyone else’s military installations with the kind of accuracy that has given Washington excellent pictures of the tower on top of which the Chinese atom bomb was exploded. They can prevent any significant military move from going undetected; a byproduct of them are the weather satellites. “Less is heard about the progress of early warning satellites designed to pick up the flaming tails of enemy missiles; this could be either because they have run into trouble or, like the satellites the Polaris submarines steer by, they are too successful to be mentioned. The possibility of putting H-bombs into satellites is not mentioned either in these days, but this time because the Russians and the Americans seem to have decided by mutual consent to forget it: the risks of an unmanned satellite going wrong were too great, and the risk of a manned one going berserk was even greater.” (5. F. Sun. Chron., 4 /11/65)
tiros vn meteorological satellite completed two years in orbit without a failure, nasa had orbited tiros vii June 19, 1963, with a Thor-Delta launch vehicle launched from etr (then called amr) . (nasa Proj. Off.)
tiros lx photograph of ice-covered U.S. Great Lakes area. at 10 rpm, each camera, in turn, would roll into position and snap a picture, triggered by an infrared horizon sensor. The combination of tiros ix’s polar orbit (83.4°) and rolling wheel was expected to provide 100% photographic coverage of the earth’s cloud cover during daylight hours. Primary purpose of the tiros ix launching was to test the new cartwheel concept as a forerunner of a joint NASA-Weather Bureau Tiros Operational System (tos) of weather satellites, (nasa Release 65-7; Goddard News, 1/25/65; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/22/65; UPI, Wash. Daily News, 1/22/65; ap, Ball. Sun, 1/23/65; Appel, NYT, 1/23/65, 9; Hixson, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/23/65)
ComSatCorp announced selection of J. P. Finan General Contractor, Inc., for site preparation and construction of buildings and other facilities for ComSatCorp’s earth station at Paumalu, Oahu, Hawaii, under a contract totaling $948,362. The Paumalu station, when completed, would serve as part of a worldwide commercial satellite communications system. (ComSatCorp Release)
Sen. E. L. Bartlett (D-Alaska) introduced a bill to extend privileges and immunities, including tax and customs granted international organizations, to the European Space Research Organization (esro). ESRO was considering building a satellite telemetry command station near Fairbanks, Alaska, and was seeking the same special treatment afforded NASA with regard to its tracking stations abroad and personnel abroad. (CR, 6/11/65, 12836)
Harro Zimmer, chief of a West Berlin satellite (racking station, said the U.S.5.R. had secretly launched a second spacecraft with proton i July 16. The unannounced spacecraft, said Zimmer, had been brought back to earth, landing near Magnitogorsk. 300 mi. north of (he Aral Sea, between 3 a.m. and 3:25 a.m. iEOT) July 31. (UPl, fWash. Post, 8/6/65.1	'
President Johnson sent to Congress his annual reports on the National Science Foundation, the ComSatCorp, and U.S. participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency. In message accompanying the NSF report. President Johnson said: “Close and understanding accord between science and public affairs is an imperative for free societies today.” Science would be looked to for use in technology and industry, health programs, exploration, and, “most especially for the guidance that will permit us to proceed with greater security and greater confidence toward our goals of peace and justice in a free world.” In a message accompanying the report on the ComSatCorp, the President said the goal of the U.S. was “to provide orbital messengers, not only of word, speech and pictures, but of thought and hope” for the world. “The past year has seen important advances in the program to develop a global communications satellite system. The first launch of a commercial satellite is to take place in the early months of this year. “Through the initiative of the United States an international joint venture has been established. Under the law I have designated the Communications Satellite Corp. as the U.S, participant. The corporation is to be the manager on behalf of all participants. “The corporation has now been financed, has constituted its first board of directors to replace the original incorporators and has moved forward with its program. All agencies of the Government with responsibilities under the act have made important and faithful contributions with the sympathetic assistance of the congressional committees concerned. “The newr and extraordinary satellite telecommunications medium bringing peoples around the globe into closer relationship is nearer to fulfillment, heralding a new day in world communications.” In its second annual report ComSatCorp noted that it had ended 1964 with about $190 million in short-term holdings and more than 137,000 shareholders. It reported it had agreements with 18 countries to join in a single global system with ComSatCorp as manager and said that a satellite was being readied for launching in March. The report on the Nation’s participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency was accompanied by a covering letter which said 1963 “will possibly be marked in I.A.E.A. history as the year in which a firm foundation was laid for its system of safeguards against the diversion of materials to military use.” (Text, CR, 2/15/65, 2605; NYT, 2/16/65, 1; ap, NYT, 2/17/65, 64)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. for mission modifications on seven Agena-D second stages for future missions. Total cost of the modification would be more than $13 million. Five of the Agenas would be used with Atlas boosters to launch the Applications Technology Satellites (Ats); the other two, also to be boosted by Atlas launch vehicles, would be used for the third and fourth Orbiting Astronomical Observatories (Oao). Lockheed would design, develop, and fabricate equipment and match the Agenas with the Atlas boosters and the spacecraft, (nasa Release 65-199)
After almost 7 years, vanguard i appeared to be silenced. Its radio signals had weakened to a point where NASA tracking engineers thought the satellite might never be heard from again, according to NASA announcement. The six-inch, 3.25-lb. sphere was the second U.S. satellite, launched by USN as part of the International Geophysical Year program. For more than six years, it had transmitted radio signals from space with power from only six solar cells. Officially known internationally as 1958 Beta II, vanguard i was circling the globe every 134 min. and had an apogee of 2,442 mi. and a perigee of 402 mi. (nasa Release 65—45)
ComSatCorp was seeking establishment of a world-wide satellite communications network to be leased jointly by NASA and commercial telecommunications carriers, reported Katherine Johnsen in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Miss Johnsen reported that last week the National Communications System (the U.S. Government’s centralized communications agency) and ComSatCorp appeared to be approaching “agreement on an arrangement under which it would pay about $80 million over a 10-year period for use by NASA of the global network, primarily for the Apollo manned lunar landing program.” Several variations of the proposal were also presented and ComSatCorp executives were optimistic that one would be approved. (Johnsen, Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 35)
Launch of Geos A Geodetic Explorer satellite, originally scheduled for Nov. 2 and later postponed to Nov. 5 because of an electric circuit break, had been rescheduled for Nov. 6. Geos A would contain five geodetic instrumentation systems to more accurately map the earth and to serve as a precise space reference point for ground surveyors. (ap, NYT, 11/4/65, 24; Wash. Post, 11/5/65, A16)
In an original report on communications satellites, Soviet Prof. M. Kaplanov said: “The transmitter on the Molniya 1 Comsat had a power of 40 watts, i.e. 10 times that of the Early Bird. In this regard, the Soviet scientists and engineers have solved the most complex technical problems in the development of a sputnik equipped with onboard antennas oriented on the Earth with a strong power system assuring a supply to the transmitter throughout the entire communication session. “The development of a wideband space transmitter of 40 watts power operating continuously is an innovation in world technology. This distinguishing feature of the Molniya-1 Comsat permits a considerable simplification of the onground equipment and a great reduction in the cost of its construction and operation. Evidently the great complexity of servicing and the inadequate reliability of the [ComSatCorp] equipment compelled France, England and West Germany to organize the alternate operating of their ground receiving points of space communication. Each of these points operates only one week out of three, the second week it is in reserve, and the third is spent in repair work. We note that the Soviet onground facilities for space communication in Moscow and Vladivostok have been operating daily since the launching of the Molniya-1. This is quite important for a satellite communication system, since upon the operating cost there depends greatly its ability to compete with other means of communication.” (Izvestia, 10/17/16, 5, atss-t Trans.)
Soviet’s first communications satellite MOLNIYA i maintained direct radiotelephone communications between Vladivostok and Sofia, Warsaw, and Prague for almost three hours. (Tass, 5/12/65)
President Johnson told a group of young foreign journalists at the White House that he envisioned a day when communications satellites would be able to relay telecasts of United Nations’ sessions to the homes of “men everywhere.” He added that “from better communications must surely come better understanding.” (UPI, Houston Chron., 7/23/65)
Successful simultaneous two-way transmission of television tests via EARLY bird communications satellite between the U.S. ground station at Andover, Me., and European ground stations at Pleumeur-Bodou, France; Goonhilly Downs, England; and Raisting, W. Germany, was announced by ComSatCorp. The pictures were of good quality. (ComSatCorp Release)
Japan expected to orbit a satellite within the next three years, New York Times reported. Although Japan’s progress in the missile field had been slowed by the limited annual budget allocations of the Defense Forces, scientific advances, particularly in the field of electronics, plus stimulus to Japanese industry provided by the Korean War, had brought marked advances in rocketry and missiles. {NYT, 1/18/65)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched cosmos cii and cosmos ciii unmanned satellites to continue space investigations, Tass announced. Orbital parameters for cosmos cii: apogee, 172 mi. (278 km.); perigee, 135 mi. (218 km.) ; period, 89.24 min.; inclination, 65°. COSMOS CHI had been placed in near-circular orbit at 372-mi. (600-km.) altitude, with a period of 97 min. It was not specified whether the two spacecraft were launched simultaneously or whether there was an interval between launchings. All onboard systems were functioning normally. (Pravda, 12/29/65, 1)
A second molniya i communications satellite was launched by U.S.S.R. into a high elliptical orbit with the following parameters: apogee, 40,000	km. (24,800 mi.) ; perigee, 500 km. (310 mi.) ; period, 11 hrs., 59 min.; inclination, 65°. Tass said: “With the launching of the second molniya I satellite, verification will begin of the possibility of organizing a communications system with the simultaneous use of several Sputniks. . . . “The main purpose of the launching ... is to further develop the system of two-way long-distance television and telephone-telegraph radio communication, and its experimental operation. The entire equipment ... is functioning normally. “The second molniya-I . . . has already been used for telephone calls and an exchange of television programs between Moscow and Vladivostok.” (Tass, 10/14/65; Wash. Post, 10/15/65, A4)
echo I, launched by NASA five years ago, had traveled more than 659 million miles and circled the earth more than 22,600 times. Orbital data: apogee, 1,165 mi. (1,875.7 km.); perigee, 560 mi. (901.6 km.) ; period, 113 min. The satellite had demonstrated that large inflatable spheres could be used as passive communications reflectors in space, (gsfc Release G—19-65)
France’s newest satellite tracking station, located outside Pretoria, South Africa, was nearing completion and would probably be operational by July 1965. The $840,000 station would be used to track France’s first satellite, scheduled to be orbited around the earth in 1965. (ap, Balt. Sun,1/13/65)
A—i, France’s 88-lb. first satellite, continued orbiting, but its radio signals had become weaker. Telemetry analysis indicated part of the difficulty was damage to the antennas at launch Nov. 26 from Hammaguir Range, Algeria, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/27/65, A2; Reuters, Balt. Sun, 12/28/65, 6)
Status report on molniya i comsat, launched by the Soviet Union April 23, was given to Tass by I. P. Petrushkin of the U.S.S.R. Ministry of Communication: “Tests have demonstrated that the combinations of the terrestrial and onboard communication equipment of the ‘Mol-niya-1’ satellite assure the possibility of the reliable transmission of black and white TV. Color tv sessions yielded encouraging results. “On Sundays, via the ‘Molniya-1,’ a regular exchange of TV programs is being conducted between Moscow and the Pacific coast. During May and June, tests were also run on the quality of the multichannel telephone system. The systems were simultaneously loaded with phone conversations, tonal telegraphy, phototelegraphy, and radio broadcasting programs. Even under such an ‘optimal’ regime, the communication channels function fairly reliably. “In June, there was put into operation the commercial long-distance phone link between Moscow and Vladivostok, functioning via the ‘Molniya-1.’ ” (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/4/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
A newspaper article summarizing a report of the International Civil Aviation Organization on the safety record of the non-Communist world’s airlines in 1964 said: “. . . its more than 100 member airlines, which include U.S. carriers, ended the year with the lowest fatality rate on record, 0.61 deaths to 100 million passenger-miles flown, 22.5 percent below 1963, the best previous year.” (CR, 5/19/65, 10592) Week of May 16: A $300,000 telescope produced through gifts of parts and money was put on display at the Stamford (Conn.) Museum and Nature Center. The 22-in. photo-visual telescope, designed to track even man-made satellites, was the result of a project compared to a “barn raising.” A spokesman said that at dedication on June 13, plaques would be distributed to 51 major contributors of equipment and labor, and certificates to 81 other cooperators. (Devlin, NYT, 5/23/65)
ComSatCorp announced the selection of Vern W. Johnson & Sons, Inc., Spokane, Wash., for site preparation and construction of buildings and other facilities for ComSatCorp’s fixed earth station at Brewster Flat, Wash. The construction contract, totaling $909,382, was filed with fcc. The Brewster Flat station, when completed, would serve as a U.S. link in a worldwide commercial satellite communications system. (ComSatCorp Release)
Establishment of a Joint Meteorological Satellite Program Office (JMSPo), to identify, compile, and coordinate requirements from the military services and the Joint Chiefs of Staff for use of meteorological satellites, was announced by dod. JMSPO would continually review the NASA meteorological satellite program and would define military applications of the national system and the dod technical efforts to support the national program, (dod Release 229-65)
DOD refused request by television networks to present live coverage of the recovery portion of the Gemini v flight scheduled for Aug. 19. Equipment necessary to set up a portable ground station on the aircraft earner U.S.S. Lake Champlain “might interfere with operational requirements and shipboard communications,” DOD said. The networks had intended to send pictures to early bird i satellite for relay to the Andover, Me., ground station.	(NYT, 7/31/65, 35)
NASA postponed indefinitely the launching of a beacon Explorer satellite from Wallops Island. The launching had been scheduled for March 30. (NYT, 3/27/65)
A Scout Evaluation Vehicle (Sev) was successfully launched by NASA from Wallops Station. Primary purpose of the mission was to demonstrate in flight the operation of improved vehicle features: (1) use of new second- and fourth-stage rocket motors with improved thrust characteristics; (2) test of Scout’s capability to fly a “dog-leg” course from Wallops Station by yaw torquing, performed during the third-stage coasting period; (3) test of in-flight performance of improved spin motors to stabilize the fourth stage of the vehicle; (4) demonstration of the Scout air transportability concept by launching a vehicle which, after complete assembly at Wallops, had been airlifted from and returned to the launch site in simulation of a transcontinental trip. All flight objectives were met, including injection of Army Corps of Engineers secor v (Sequential Collation of Range) geodetic satellite into an orbit with apogee, 1,504 mi. (2,421 km.); perigee, 702 mi. (1,130 km.); period, 122 min.; inclination, 69.23°. Elliptical orbit should enable SECOR v to transmit measurements of distances up to 2,000	mi.—twice the distance possible with earlier Secor versions which had been launched into 600-mi. circular orbits. The satellite would map the surface of the earth, pinpointing the location of land bodies separated by large expanses of ocean. (Wallops Release 65-49)
NASA had requested industry to submit proposals for a study of the feasibility of a satellite capable of broadcasting directly to conventional home fm radios and/or shortwave radios. Potential contractors were expected to have their proposals back to NASA in 45 days. Following a NASA evaluation, one or more contracts would be awarded for a detailed six-month mission study, (nasa Release 65-363)
Sir Francis Vallat, acting director of McGill Univ.’s Institute of Air and Space Law, told a news conference that if a piece of a satellite were to hit an individual on the head, he could sue the government that launched it and probably win the case, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/65, A8)
Fee vetoed a proposed Communications Satellite Corp. contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for the design of satellites to be used by DOD. In a letter to ComSatCorp, the FCC took note of a protest by Philco Corp. (see Feb. 2), that it was as qualified as Hughes to bid on the proposed contract and said ComSatCorp must award the contract only after competitive bidding. ComSatCorp had asked the FCC to approve the proposed contract, waiving requirements for competitive bidding, (fcc Public Notice-C)
U.S.S.R. launched its first communications satellite molniya i into orbit: apogee, 39,380 km. (24,459 mi.); perigee, 497 km. (309 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 48 min.; inclination, 65°. Krasnaya Zvezda reported that the “basic purpose of launching the Molniya-1 communications satellite is to accomplish the transmission of TV programs and to perform two-way multichannel telephone, phototelegraphic and telegraphic communication. All the onboard equipment on the satellite and the ground radio network are operating normally, and the first transmission of TV programs between Vladivostok and Moscow were successfully completed.” (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/ 24/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
USAF launched Atlas-Agena D from WTR with unidentified satellite payload.	(U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 143)
usn would build new stations at Raymondville and Roma, Tex., as part of its SPADATS (Space Detection and Tracking System) surveillance network for detecting satellites passing over the U.S., reported Warren Burkett in the Houston Chronicle. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 5/12/65)
Dr. Burton I. Edelson, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke on communications satellites at the aiaa meeting in Las Cruces, N.Mex. He said: “There is a general growing interdependence of politics, economics, and technology, and in no area do these forces interact more noticeably, than in international communications. When we try to predict the course that communications satellites systems will follow in the years to come we must consider not only decibels and megacycles, rocket thrusts and orbital elements, but the competitive economic pressure of transoceanic cables and the political aspirations of developing nations. . . . “Finally, I believe the words of Arthur Clarke, the visionary who first conceived of the communications satellite, will be fulfilled: ‘Com-sats will end ages of isolation making us all members of a single family, teaching us to read and speak, however imperfectly, a single language. Thanks to some electronic gear twenty thousand miles above the equator, ours will be the last century of the savage.’ ” (Text)
ComSatCorp invited 29 manufacturers to submit by September 30 proposals for communications and control equipment to be installed at two ground stations in Hawaii and Washington state—-U.S. links in the proposed worldwide communications satellite system. Two sets of ground communications equipment with one control unit would be integrated with two antenna systems in both earth stations. Each station was expected to cost about $6 million. Work was to begin in the fall and to be completed in about a year. (ComSatCorp Release)
cosmos xciii unmanned satellite was launched by U.S.S.R. Onboard was scientific apparatus for continuing studies of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962. Orbital data: apogee, 522 km. (324.2 mi.); perigee, 220 km. (136.6 mi.); inclination, 48°24'. All instrumentation was functioning normally. (Tass, 10/19/65)
France postponed her first attempt to orbit a satellite. No reason was given, (upi, NYT, 11/23/65, 52)
Western Union International, Inc., asked fcc for authority to conduct a series of satellite communications tests should NASA and DOD permit live coverage of the Gemini 6 recovery in October. The proposal included testing a portable ground station at Taylor’s Island, Md., and then on a ship at sea. Trials would include live television transmission from the portable ground station to early bird i communications satellite, which would relay the transmission to U.S. and Europe. ComSatCorp approval would also be necessary before tests could begin. {Wash. Post, 9/15/65)
Radio Prague disclosed that at a November meeting in Moscow of Soviet-bloc countries the U.S.S.R. had agreed to launch Communist nations’ artificial satellites, sounding rockets, and probes for scientific research. Countries involved were preparing research programs which would be announced in 1966. (NYT, 12/12/65, 141)
In a brief filed with the Fee, ComSatCorp commented on the problem of direct purchase of communications services:	“. . . Comsat believes that as a general rule it should afford the other carriers the first opportunity to provide satellite services desired by users other than the U.S. Government and foreign communications entities. However, in the event that the other carriers, owning and operating non-satellite facilities in which they have substantial investments, do not provide a satellite service to any customer who desires such service, Comsat should be able to provide such service directly to that customer. . . .” (Text)
Operation of syncom n and syncom hi communications satellites was transferred to DOD by NASA, which had completed its R&D experiments. Telemetry and command stations and range and range-rate equipment operated by NASA for the Syncom program would be transferred to DOD along with the satellites. DOD had furnished the communications ground stations used to relay transmissions via the two Syncoms for the past two years and would provide NASA with certain telemetry and ranging data of continuing scientific and engineering interest, syncom ill was to prove useful in DOD’s Vietnam communications. (nasa Release 65-5)
Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc., received the first patent for a satellite communication system with its own orbit pattern. The satellite would linger for a considerable period over each of two widely separated areas; while hovering virtually stationary, it could relay television and radio programs within its range, and also store programs from one area to play later on the other side of the globe. (Jones, NYT, 1/2/65; Chic. Trib., 1/3/65)
High-speed transmission of weather data between the U.S. and France was provided by early bird i communications satellite. Information gathered by tiros ix weather satellite during a 24-hr. period and assembled on a chart at the World Weather Center in Maryland, was relayed to the Andover, Me., ground station; then, via early bird I, it was transmitted to the French ground station at Pleumeur-Bodou and on to the French National Weather Center in Paris. Conducted jointly by the Weather Bureau and ComSatCorp, in conjunction with Press Wireless, Inc., and Alden Electronics Corp., the demonstration illustrated a new and advanced forecast method which would include transmissions of facsimile charts and data at eight times the speed of present networks. (ComSatCorp Release; ap, Balt. Sun, 6/16/65)
NASA had awarded a contract to the Univ. of Iowa for preparation of an Injun spacecraft to be used in a dual satellite launch in 1967. The Injun Explorer would be teamed with a 12-foot inflatable Air Density Explorer and flown on a single Scout launch vehicle in the same way explorers xxiv and xxv were orbited Nov. 21, 1964. The contract, valued at $1,070,488, covered construction of the Injun spacecraft, preparation and integration of the onboard experiments, and integration with the Air Density Explorer spacecraft as a single Scout payload. Dr. James A. Van Allen of the Univ. of Iowa would be the principal scientific investigator, (nasa Release 65-338; LaRC Release)
explorer xxix Geodetic Explorer satellite (Geos A) was successfully launched by nasa from etr by a Improved Thrust-Augmented Delta with a new enlarged second-stage fuel tank to provide longer engine burn. Because the guidance system did not shut down the second stage at the desired time, the achieved orbit had the following parameters: apogee, 1,412.4 mi. (2,274 km.); perigee, 695.6 mi.
Aerospace Research Satellite was placed in orbit as a pick-a-back satellite on usaf Atlas D missile test from Western Test Range, the satellite entering the first highly retrograde orbit. Orbital data: apogee, 2,141 mi. (3,447 km.); perigee, 255 mi. (410.6 km.); period, 125.7	min.; inclination, 144.3°. Carrying onboard instruments to map and monitor energetic particles, mass spectrometers, detectors imbedded in radiation shield, and instruments measuring dose rates in tissue-equivalent medium, the satellite successfully returned data. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/65)
A special educational television satellite station to carry color or blackand-white TV direct to home receivers was proposed to NASA by Hughes Aircraft engineer Dr. Harold Rosen. (Time, 5/14/65; CR, 5/20/65, A2549)
Japan’s Ministry of Telecommunications said signals from what they had thought a new Soviet satellite turned out to be Italian-U.S. SAN marco i, launched Dec. 15, 1964. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/2/65; ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 1/3/65)
Pravda announced the birth of Russia’s third “space baby”: a son to Cosmonaut Valery F. Bykovsky and his wife Valentina, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 4/13/65) Week of April 12: European Space Research Organization (esro) selected Laboratoire Central de Telecommunications (lct), a wholly-owned French subsidiary of International Telephone and Telegraph Corp., as prime contractor for development of Esro 1 polar ionosphere satellite. The $3-million contract awarded called for development and production of one prototype and two flying satellites—one a backup—to gather information on ionospheric and particle conditions in the northern polar region. (Av. Wk., 4/12/65, 37; Av. Wk., 4/19/65, 30)
USAF launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from WTR with an unidentified satellite. (17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965,153)
ComSatCorp’s early bird i communications satellite reached its permanent station over the Atlantic Ocean:	apogee, 22,243 mi. (35,811 km.); perigee, 22,224 mi. (35,780 km.); period, 23 hrs. 56 min. 57 sec.; inclination, .085°; location, 28.0° west longitude. (ComSatCorp)
Dr. C. 0. Bostrom and Dr. D. J. Williams of the Space Research Div. of Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory said danger of radiation damage to satellites from the artificial radiation belt created in July 1962, following the nuclear detonation over Johnston Island, was “now significantly less severe.” Results of measurements by instruments aboard Navy research satellite 1963 38C showed that the number of high-energy electrons in the artificial radiation belt decreased by 50% in from three months to one year in different parts of the belt. The decrease in intensity as time passed would continue until natural levels of intensity were reached. Dr. Bostrom said, “. . . the observed time decay does show that the satellite radiation damage problems have been reduced by a factor of ten from what they were two years ago.” (Balt. Sun, 3/11/65)
tiros X meteorological satellite photographed an area of unusual cloudiness in the Atlantic about 2,400 mi. east-southeast of Miami, the Miami Weather Bureau said. A hurricane-hunter aircraft would be sent to check. (Miami Her., 8/5/65)
French scientists bounced laser beams off NASA satellite EXPLORER XXII three times, according to French Ministry of Scientific Research on Feb. 3. Laser beams were reflected from glass prisms on the satellite, (ap, NYT, 2/4/65, 3)
Danish satellite tracking station official reported what he believed to have been the explosion of a U.S. satellite launched by usaf Mar. 25. About ten brilliantly lighted objects crossing the sky were at first assumed to have been meteors. (M&R, 4/26/65, 11)
ComSatCorp announced that clear test signals transmitted via EARLY BIRD between Andover, Me., and stations in Goonhilly Downs, England; Pleumeur Bodou, France; and Raisting, W. Germany, had demonstrated that communications satellite’s equipment to receive messages from the European stations was functioning properly, as was its receiver tuned to the Andover station, (ap, Chic. Trib., 4/13/65)
NASA had awarded a contract to Rice Univ. for a new type of Explorer satellite designed to extend studies of near-earth atmosphere phenomena, especially auroral phenomena. Under a cost-reimhursement contract, the university would provide two Owl Explorer spacecraft and a flyable prototype at a total estimated cost of $3,676,100. Earliest launch would be in 1967 from the Western Test Range. Launch vehicle would be a four-stage Scout, (nasa Release 65-266; Wallops Release 65-46)
Use of ComSatCorp’s Early Bird communications satellite was subject of a London meeting between U.S. and European participants in the program. A general understanding was reached that once commercial service started, television networks could use the satellite system outside peak transatlantic telephone hours. The peak traffic hours were generally considered from about 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. EST. Exceptions could be made if major news stories broke in Europe during this period. (Farnsworth, NYT, 2/27/65, 51)
United Press International had announced it would seek to establish a worldwide satellite communications system, either on its own or in partnership with others, if the governments concerned granted the necessary permission. {NYT, 5/23/65)
Data from SOLRAD, the Naval Research Laboratory’s satellite monitoring the sun’s x-ray behavior during the 1964--65 International Years of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), indicated that the sun was at its quietest during May, June, and July, 1964. Information from SOLRAD also suggested that the x-ray region of the corona, instead of being a homogeneous region of a million miles or so, was a series of small cells that flared up to emit hard x-rays and then decayed rapidly. What was seen on earth was the net effect of many knots of very hot, flashing gas giving the appearance of a homogeneous region. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/11/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/65; M&R, 1/18/65)
Soviet communications expert Dr. N. I. Chistiakov, speaking at the UNESCO-sponsored space communications conference in Paris, called for an international convention to govern the use of satellites for broadcasting. He said a draft agreement should be drawn up by the International Telecommunications Union and should make satellite communications available to all countries on a non-discriminatory basis. (Wash. Post, 12/8/65)
ComSatCorp asked 24 firms to propose earth station construction plans for antenna systems in Brewster, Wash., and Paumalu, Hawaii, by Sept. 17. The rfp specified four 85-ft. parabolic antennas capable of working with satellites at altitudes from 6,000 mi. to 22,300 mi. Requirements were for one operational antenna system at each of the earth stations within a year after the contract award, and the second antenna system at each station two months later. The stations would provide high quality two-way commercial communications, track spacecraft, and send commands and receive data from satellite both during launch and while satellites were in orbit. (ComSatCorp Release; UPI, NYT, 8/20/65, 41)
fcc received 27 statements on the question of direct purchase of communications services from ComSatCorp. A brief submitted by the American Newspaper Publishers Assn, argued that “a basic policy determination [should] be made at this time, assuring access by the press to ComSat facilities for news media dissemination. ...” A brief by AT&T argued that “authorized users” of ComSat services should be common carrier companies only not any communications organization wishing to rent satellite channels. The “only interpretation . . . consistent with the specific language of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962,” argued at&t, is “the view that ComSat is to function as a ‘carriers’ carrier,’ except possibly in the case of the U.S. Government. . . .” Weekley, Wash. Post, 11/4/65, C9)
early bird i began commercial operations when President Johnson formally inaugurated telephone service via communications satellite in a 25-min., 6-nation conference call with European officials, including British Prime Minister Harold Wilson, West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard, and Swiss President Tschudi. Participants reported satisfaction with results. (ComSatCorp Release; Robertson, NYT, 6/29/65, 12)
ComSatCorp announced a $4,650,000 contract with Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., for two large antenna systems to be installed at earth stations in Paumalu, Hawaii, and Brewster Flat, Wash. Movable portions of the 85-ft. dish antennas would weigh more than 135 tons and, when in place atop concrete foundations, be up to 110 ft. high. When completed, the stations would serve as links in a worldwide commercial satellite, communications system. I.ComSatCorp Release)
AH five geodesy experiment systems on the new NASA EXPLORER XXIX satellite had been tested successfully and operational programing of the spacecraft was expected within a few days, NASA announced. explorer xxix, popularly referred to as geos i, was launched from Eastern Test Range Nov. 6. (nasa Release 65-359)
early bird I communications satellite experimentally transmitted to a Paris physician an electrocardiogram of a passenger on the S.S. France, 2,000	mi. at sea, the French Line reported. {NYT, 6/15/65, 70; ap, Wash. Post, 6/15/65, A14)
Philco Corp. had been awarded a $3 million increment to a contract with usaf for work on a satellite tracking network, (dod Release 651-65)
COSMOS LViu satellite, containing “scientific equipment,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 659 km. (409 mi.); perigee, 581 km. (360 mi.); period, 96.8 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/27/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
18 additional countries were applying for ownership in the $200-million international consortium to operate a global communications satellite system, it was reported. Eighteen nations and Vatican City had originally participated in forming the consortium in July 1964. U.S.’s ComSatCorp acquired 61% ownership and would serve as manager for the consortium. The new nations applying for ownership participation were Monaco, South Africa, New Zealand, Syria, Kuwait, Libya, Yemen, Brazil, Morocco, United Arab Republic, Sudan, Iraq, Lebanon, Tunisia, Argentina, Jordan, Indonesia, and Ceylon. (Av. Wk., 2/8/65, 25) February 8: The world’s first nuclear-powered weather station, designated Navy Oceanographic and Meteorological Automatic Device (Nomad), began its second year of successful operation 300 mi. out of New Orleans in the Gulf of Mexico. Developed by the Navy, the unattended station was powered by the aec generator, Snap-7D. (NYT, 2/14/65, 90)
Dr. Homi J. Bhabha, chairman of India’s Atomic Energy Commission, denied reports that India was secretly preparing to explode a nuclear device. In an interview, he said: “We are still eighteen months away from exploding either a bomb or a device for peaceful purposes and we are doing nothing to reduce that period.” (NYT, 11/29/65, 8) November 27: Soviet Union launched COSMOS xcvm unmanned satellite with “scientific apparatus to continue space investigations,” Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 570 km. (354 mi.) ; perigee, 216 km. (134 mi.); period, 92 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 11/28/65, 4)
usaf announced that data from aec’s Snap-10A satellite indicated “an extremely high noise factor” when the ion engine was turned on, making it impossible to determine whether it was operating properly. Scientists said the engine, which on Apr. 2 had operated normally for an hour, would not be tested further until additional analyses were made. The difficulty had not interfered with the major experiment— operation of the Snap-10A nuclear reactor, (upi, NYT, 4/8/65)
explorer xxiii and pegasus i meteoroid technology satellites continued to transmit useful information after months of operation in the space environment, reported Milton B. Ames, Jr., NASA Director of Space Vehicles Research and Technology. explorer xxiii, launched by Scout rocket from Wallops Station, Va., Nov. 16, 1964, was last of three S—55 series satellites which were the first spacecraft orbited specifically to measure meteoroid penetrations through spacecraft structures. Performance of explorer xxiii had been entirely satisfactory, and indications were that it would have a useful life of more than a year, Ames said. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 615 mi. (990 km.); perigee, 290 mi. (467 km.); inclination to the equator, 51.95°. pegasus i, launched Feb. 16, 1965, was first of a series of three satellites intended to measure meteoroid penetrations of greater structural thicknesses and contained a meteoroid penetration area of almost 2,300	sq. ft. Ames said that although useful results had been obtained with ,0015-in.-thick panels, the data obtained with .008-in.-thick and .016-in.-thick panels had not been fully satisfactory because of difficulties in the operation of the detection system. Still, PEGASUS I had provided significant information leading to improvement of detection systems on the remaining two Pegasus spacecraft. Orbital parameters for PEGASUS I were: apogee, 451 mi. (726 km.); perigee, 311 mi. (500.7 km.) ; inclination, 31.75°. (NASA Release 65-157)
NASA had already received 170 suggested experiments for Voyager—the largest response to any scientific satellite program NASA had conducted, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology. NASA would refine the experiments in consultation with the originators by November 19; preliminary selection would be made by March, and final one by July. (Av. Wk., 8/30/65, 21)
U.S.S.R. orbited cosmos lii earth satellite. Orbital data: apogee, 304 km. (188.9 mi.) ; perigee, 205 km. (127.4 mi.) ; period 89.5	min.; inclination to the equator, 65°. The satellite carried scientific equipment “for the further investigation of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass on the 16th of March, 1962.” (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/12/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
COSMOS LVii earth satellite was launched by the U.S.S.R. Orbital data: apogee, 512 km. (318 mi. I ; perigee, 175 km. (109 mi.) ; period, 91.1 min.; inclination, 64°46'. Tass said the satellite carried scientific apparatus “intended for the further investigation of outer space.” Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/23/65, atss-t Trans.)
Five surcal satellites and one unidentified satellite were orbited by single USAF Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from Western Test Range. The satellites all were in similar orbits of about 735-mi. (1,183-km.) apogee, 677-mi. (1,090-km.) perigee, 108-min. period, 90° inclination. (U.S. Aeron & Space Act., 1965, 150)
EARLY BIRD communications satellite would relay a sampling of scientific, cultural, and entertainment events televised live at 35 sites in North America and Europe during an hour-long inaugural program, “This is Early Bird,” scheduled for 1 p.m. est, May 2, ComSatCorp announced. (ComSatCorp Release; Adams, NYT, 4/21/65, 91)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite from Western Test Range. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 152)
explorer xxix launch with first NASA Improved Thrust-Augmented Delta from Cape Kennedy. 1.1,118.1 km.); period, 120 min.; inclination, 59°. Planned orbit had called for apogee of 920 mi. The 385-lb, satellite, designed ar.d built by Johns Hopkins Univ, Applied Physics Laboratory, contained five geodetic instrumentation systems to provide simultaneous measurements necessary for a more precise model of the earth’s gravitational field and to map a world coordinate system relating points on or near the surface to the common center of the mass: 111 four Hashing light beacons to be photographed against the background of stars to define the arc of orbit and angular data; (2) corner cube quartz reflectors to pinpoint the satellite's position by reflecting laser beams; (3) three radio transmitters for Doppler-shift determination of the precise orbit; (4) radio range transponder to hx the positions of the satellite and interrogating ground stations; and (5) range and range-rate transponder to determine the changing range and radial velocity of the satellite. Simultaneous operation of the five independent and diverse geodetic-tracking systems would permit cross-checking and evaluation of the different techniques and was expected to enhance the accuracy of each system. Other objectives of the Geos program were: (1) to map with a high degree of mathematical exactness the structure of the earth’s irregular gravitational field; and (2) to compare and 'correlate results from different instrumented techniques employed simultaneously so as to assure greater accuracy and reliability. Critical to optimum use of the radio and optical beacons on EXPLORER XXIX was the gravity-gradient attitude stabilization system to keep the satellite antennas, laser reflectors, and optical beacons pointing earthward at all times. In two to three days the attitude control would be initiated, (nasa Release 65-333; nasa Proj. Off.; ap, NYT, 11/7/65, 10; upi, Wash. Post, 11/7/65, A16)
In a speech before the National Association of Broadcasters in Washington, D.C., Gen. Bernard A. Schriever ( usaf) remarked that the Soviet’s space science timetable “always seems to put them one step ahead of us.” He said: “It is still true that we lead in some aspects of space exploration, such as the total number of space shots, number of scientific probes, and practical applications of space satellites for such purposes as communications and weather observation. On the other hand, the Soviets lead in a number of areas with both propaganda and practical implications. “. . . Thus, they have put into space the first satellite, the first living creature, the first man, the first woman, the first multi-man space ship and now the first man to step out of the capsule and into space itself. They also hold the world record for time in orbit, orbital distance, orbital weight lifted, and highest orbital altitude. . . . “How will the Soviets use their space capabilities? ... we are interested. . . .” Gen. Schriever said ground tests would begin shortly for a collapsible and expandable space laboratory for possible use as a space station: “The structure can be compressed into a small package and expanded to a cylinder 10 ft. in dia. and 25 ft. long.” (Text)
usaf launched Titan m-c from etr with triple-satellite payload: LCS II radar calibration sphere, Ov2-l radiation sensor satellite, and a metal-ballasted dummy. About the time of the second burn of the transtage engines, the total assemblage exploded into hundreds of fragments and therefore the satellites were not useful beyond the earlier steps of launch vehicle testing. The Titan iii-c transtage was to have ignited its engines 10 times, changed course 4 times, and ejected the satellites. Primary mission of the flight was launch vehicle testing, and USAF officials noted most major objectives were met. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 153; ap, Newport News Daily Press, 10/17/65)
ComSatCorp announced delay of Early Bird synchronous satellite launch, previously targeted for end of March, because of decision to replace defective transistors and retest replacements. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle with unidentified satellite payload from Western Test Range. (Z7.S. Aeron & Space Act., 1965, 146)
A 22-nation European Post and Telecommunications Congress ended its 12-day meeting in Lisbon after appointing a coordinating committee to deal rapidly with problems of international radio and television communications by satellite. Discussions in the congress, which was closed to the press and public, centered on improving postal services and satellite-relayed radio and television transmissions, (ap, WSJ, 6/14/65, 24; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, A-ll)
Defense Communications Agency and the U.S. Army had announced that site preparation had begun at Helemano, 20 mi. north of Honolulu on Oahu Island, for installation of the first earth terminal of a planned worldwide military experimental satellite communication system. Southwest Constructors had been awarded the contract for construction expected to begin in mid-October. (J/Armed Forces, 9/18/65, 16)
ComSatCorp requested 26 design-engineering companies to submit proposals by July 20 for architectural and engineering services for construction of a ground station site at Brewster Flat, Wash. The proposed station would provide communications services to Hawaii and nations of the Pacific as part of a global commercial satellite system. The RFP’s asked for plans sufficiently detailed to enable interested contractors to bid on construction and to enable the station to be operational by September 1, 1966. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp may well face competition from foreign satellite communications systems in the next few years, David Sarnoff, chairman of the Board of Radio Corporation of America predicted at the convention banquet of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “We can expect that ultimately Russia will set up a satellite communications system competitive to our own and offer it to other nations on favorable terms determined more by political than economic considerations.” Mr. Sarnoff advocated creation of “a single, privately owned American company” to handle all international communications currently handled by six private carriers. He argued that, among other benefits, a single “unified carrier” was the only way the U.S. could “deal on equal terms with foreign government [communications] monopolies. The RCA chairman warned that in only five years the interim agreement between ComSatCorp and the 45 participating nations would be up for re-evaluation. The U.S., he said, “will have to negotiate a new contract under different circumstances and possibly vastly altered bargaining conditions.” It was technically feasible, Mr. Sarnoff said, that direct radio/TV broadcasting by satellite could be undertaken by 1975. Three equatorial, synchronous orbit satellites powered by nuclear energy, each equipped with a three-TV-channel capability, would be able, he said, to broadcast programs to the entire United States and parts of Canada. He estimated that the three satellites, exclusive of ground stations, would cost $30 million and compared this with the $50 million annual cost to the three major networks for leasing circuits to transmit programs to their affiliated stations or to the $30 million cost of a single large city television station. {WSJ, 5/27/65, 6; Wash. Eve. Star, 5/27/65)
David Sarnoff, Chairman of RCA, accepting National Commander’s Award for Distinguished Service, said at the American Legion’s fifth annual Washington conference: “The same sense of mission that ignited our young nation’s Westward expansion a century ago should now be brought to bear in support of the President’s space objectives. . . . “Leadership in space and in the communications art which is the key to mastery in space, translates itself today into political, military, economic and social leadership among the nations of the world. Technological leadership resembles a magnet which attracts other forces. When it is weakened, these forces are drawn into other orbits.” President Johnson sent a message endorsing the award and praising Mr. Sarnoff’s achievements “on behalf of a grateful nation.” (NYT, 3/2/65) Editorializing in Missiles and Rockets, William Coughlin suggested a “useful mission” for which ranger ix might be adapted: “Our unsolicited proposal to NASA is that Ranger be employed to return to Earth photographs of Earth from space. Satellites have told us the Earth is ‘pear-shaped’ rather than round and that it draws a perhaps invisible but comet-like tail after it through space. Photographs of the entire Earth globe as seen from space would have high scientific value. As a propaganda triumph, it would be unequalled. . . .” H/fjp.j? q /l /fit; Lfi U.II, tJ/ J./ Vi), I V; President Johnson, addressing 40 winners of annual science talent search, said science and politics should strive to "serve humanity.” He added that this country was “very anxious to produce all the scientists that we can,” and expressed hope that scientists would learn about government and politics. Larry Dean Howard of Canoga Park, Calif., won first prize for having developed a method of accurately defining the orbits of earth satellites through the use of differential calculus. Prize was a $7,500 Westinghouse scholarship. (ap, NYT, 3/1/65; Loftus, NYT, 3/2/65,14)
LES IV communications satellite, released into an unplanned orbit Dec. 21 by Titan m-c, had been activated and was operating well, Lincoln Laboratory reported. Tumbling had prevented restart of Titan III-C for intended orbit, (ap, NYT, 12/30/65, 11)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xcvii artificial earth satellite “containing scientific equipment for continuing outer space research,” Tass reported. Orbital parameters were close to the calculated ones: apogee, 2,100 km. (1,304 mi.); perigee, 220 km. (136.6 mi.); period, 108.3 min.; inclination to equator, 49°. Onboard equipment was operating normally. (Pravda, 11/27/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
U.S.S.R. transmitted a color television program by satellite to France for the first time. Tass said the transmission, using the French Secam color system, followed a series of technical tryouts through MOLNIYA I, first of the Soviet Union’s two communications satellites now in orbit. (Reuters, NYT, 11/30/65, 49)
COSMOS LIX satellite, containing “scientific apparatus,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 339 km. (210.9 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (129.6 mi.); period, 89.7 min.; inclination, 65°. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/9/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Data were summarized from nimbus i meteorological satellite, which had provided first high-resolution, nighttime, cloud-cover pictures and cloud-top temperatures taken from a satellite. Circular 575-mi.-altitude orbit had been planned for the 830-lb. spacecraft; but short burn of the Agena stage—resulting when about 100 lbs. of fuel which should have been loaded on board the Agena had escaped through a faulty valve prior to launch—had injected nimbus i into an elliptical orbit. Launch was made Aug. 28, 1964. Results from Hrir (High Resolution Infrared Radiometer) data had demonstrated: (1) feasibility of complete nighttime surveillance of surface and land features on a global scale; (2) detailed vertical structure of intertropical convergence zone and formation of tropical storms and of frontal zones; (3) capability to detect temperature gradients over earth’s surface under clear skies; (4) applicability of high-resolution radiometry for glaciology, geology, and oceanography. Apt (Automatic Picture Transmission) system experiments provided almost instantaneous data on clouds for thousands of square miles around Apt ground stations, demonstrating that the system could provide cloud-cover data for almost all local forecast requirements; thus, it would be a basic element in the Tiros Operational Satellite program. Avcs (Advanced Vidicon Camera System) experiment provided first near-global, relatively high-resolution cloud pictures ever assembled. Proved capabilities of camera assembly and confirmed decision to use it as basis for first operational meteorological satellite system. On Sept. 3, 1964, during 381st orbit, nimbus i stopped operating. Deterioration of the bearing grease at high temperatures had caused the paddles in the solar array drive system to lock. Final contact with nimbus i occurred Nov. 20, 1964. Data revealed that (1) all batteries were in trickle charge; (2) voltage regulation had failed; (3) both Pcm and command clock subsystems were operable; (4) spacecraft tape recorders were not operating; and (5) controls power supply had failed. (NASA Proj. Off.)
U.S.S.R. formally protested to Norway plans of the European Space Research Organization to establish a satellite tracking station in Spitsbergen. The U.S.S.R. said such a ground station for tracking space satellites could be used for “military purposes” in violation of the 1920 Spitsbergen treaty. Norway later rejected the Soviet charge. (.NYT, 2/20/65, 2)
AT&T and ITT asked the FCC to reverse its May 12 decision awarding ComSatCorp temporary control over the initial three U.S. ground stations which would comprise important segments of a global satellite communications system. ITT, in its petition, contended that the ruling supported an “unwarranted monopoly in international communications.” AT&T argued that the licensing policy was not in the public interest. {WSJ, 6/14/65, 24)
Philco Corp., opposing the bid by the Communications Satellite Corporation to supply dod with communications satellite service, asked the FCC to prevent ComSatCorp from signing a “sole source” contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. Philco, which was already preparing a satellite system for DOD under a contract awarded in July 1963, said ComSatCorp’s proposed contract “is in violation of the letter and spirit of the FCC rules and regulations which require competition in ComSatCorp procurement.” Since ComSatCorp apparently had been negotiating the matter for some time, “its present statement that stringent time requirements impel waiver of the Fee’s rules and regulations is insupportable,” Philco said. Under ComSatCorp’s plan, dod would be supplied 24 satellites built by Hughes Aircraft Co. and would pay for service only if the satellites worked. ComSatCorp would absorb the costs if they did not. DOD had made no decision for or against the offer. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/2/65; upi, NYT, 2/3/65, 54)
cosmos lx satellite, containing “scientific apparatus,” was orbited by the U.S.S.R. Initial orbital data: apogee, 287 km. (177.9 mi.); perigee, 201 km. (124.6 mi.); period, 89.1 min.; inclination 64° 42'. Equipment was said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 3/13/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans)
Launch Dec. 15 of Pioneer 6 sun-orbiting satellite was postponed to avoid conflict with launch of Gemini vi. (ap, NYT, 12/15/65, 22)
ComSatCorp had awarded three six-month study contracts totaling $240,000 to the U.K. General Post Office (gpo) for research into certain aspects of satellite communications. Studies would be carried out in cooperation with U.K. industry—Marconi, Plessey, General Electric Co., Mullard, and Standard Telephone Labs.—and would involve research into three major areas of technology involved in commercial communications of all types via satellite. (ComSatCorp Release)
AFCRL experiment proved- that a radio signal transmitted by an orbiting satellite could be trapped between two layers of the ionosphere and, upon emergence, channeled to ground stations half way around the world. Scientists had been aware of the ionospheric ducting capability for a number of years, but it had not been fully explored before the orbiting satellite experiment, (oar Release 4-65-1)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxvii, 13th Soviet spacecraft orbited in the last two months. Initial orbital data: apogee, 300 km. (187 mi.); perigee, 184 km. (114 mi.) ; period, 89.3 min.; inclination to the equator, 51.8°. Tass said the unmanned satellite would gather data to prepare equipment for manned flights; instruments were functioning normally. (Pravda, 8/4/65, 1; upi, NYT, 8/4/65, 4)
Defense Communications Agency had awarded contracts to six firms to conduct parallel systems design studies for the Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project: ComSatCorp, General Electric Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., Philco Corp., rca, Defense Electronic Products, and Space Technology Lab. The fixed price contracts ranged from $135,000 to $196,000. The studies, to be completed in three or four months, would be used as a basis for design of any advanced operational satellite communications system, (dod Release 402-65)
explorer xxix, first nasa satellite to use a gravity-gradient system for stabilization, had pointed its instrumentation toward earth and was expected to be programed for operation within several days. Achievement of the desired attitude was confirmed by magnetic and solar sensors and by marked increase in the strength of radio signals. Project officials at NASA gsfc and Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory reported four explorer xxix geodetic measurements systems had been checked out and were performing as expected; the fifth, using laser beam reflectors, would be tested when the spacecraft had completed its stabilization phase, (nasa Release 65—354)
More than 50 million Europeans—including viewers behind the Iron Curtain—had received same-day transmission of the Tokyo Olympic Games via U.S. satellites syncom iii and relay i last October, nasa announced, (nasa Release 65—2)
cosmos lxxix was orbited by U.S.S.R., Tass announced. The satellite contained instrumentation “to continue space research under the program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962.” Orbital data: apogee, 359 km. (223 mi.); perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.); period, 89.7	min.; inclination, 64.9°. (ap, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 8/26/65; gsfc SSR, 9/1/65; U.N. Registry/inf. 117)
ComSatCorp filed with the FCC its intent to contract for 24 satellites that could be used by ComSatCorp to provide a global communications service for DOD. The satellites would be made available for three launchings which DOD had slated for the early part of 1966 on either a Titan me or Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. DOD would pay only for service rendered following successful launch, with Com SatCorp assuming the risk if the satellites did not work satisfactorily in orbit. This proposal was separate from the program managed by ComSatCorp to develop an international commercial communications satellite system. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp asked the FCC for authority to assemble a third Early Birdtype satellite from existing parts for a future launch. A back-up satellite to early bird i was already assembled; components for a third comsat were completed earlier this year. The application before the FCC requested permission to assemble these components. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp had selected Holmes and Narver, Inc., Los Angeles architectural and engineering firm, for design work on two new earth station sites in Hawaii and Washington—the U.S. ground links in a worldwide commercial communications satellite system. The contract provided for $186,000, plus additional costs for optional on-the-site construction supervision and related services. Detailed drawings and specifications would be supplied to ComSatCorp no later than December 1. (ComSatCorp Release)
U.S.S.R. satellites electron i and electron ii were among the new exhibits in the “Kosmos” (Space) Pavillion at the Soviet exposition on achievements of the U.S.S.R. national economy, reported KryVya rodiny. These satellites, launched to study the near-earth radiation belts, were said to have made it possible for Soviet scientists to safeguard the cosmonauts during their flights in this region. (KryVya rodiny, 7/65, 1)
The Wall Street Journal, commenting on President Johnson’s decision to develop Manned Orbital Laboratory, wrote: “The President didn’t enumerate the MOL experiments, but there is little doubt they would involve such possible missions as: —High-altitude reconnaissance over the Soviet Union and China; —Inspection and possible destruction of non-U.S. space satellites; —Antisubmarine surveillance of the oceans . . .” (Beecher, WSJ, 8/26/65, 2)
All but six of the 170 pieces into which Soviet satellite cosmos LVII had shattered after being orbited Feb. 22 had fallen to earth, according to GSFc’s Satellite Situation Report. Another disclosure of the report was that a U.S. satellite orbited March 9 from wtr was orbiting in eight pieces, four of which were transmitting signals, (gsfc SSR. 3/31/65)
Four nasa Tiros meteorological satellites observing Hurricane Betsy were providing the most extensive picture coverage of a storm ever obtained in space, tiros X had photographed Betsy Aug. 27 before she reached hurricane strength; since then TIROS VII, VIII, and IX had been photographing her about eight times daily, (gsfc Release G—26—65)
Hughes Aircraft Co. was the only concern to respond to ComSatCorp’s request for proposals to build four advanced Early Bird-type satellites with options for additional satellites, ComSatCorp announced. Five companies had bid for construction of four transportable ground stations with options for additional stations: Hughes Aircraft Co.; International Telephone and Telegraph Corp.; Page Communications Engineers; and Radio Corp. of America. Delivery of the first satellite and the first two stations would be within eight months. (ComSatCorp Release)
Viewers in Great Britain and at least 11 Western European nations were able to watch the Gemini 4 lift-off live via early bird i satellite. Picture reception was reportedly clear. ComSatCorp, cooperating with European ground station owners, arranged for free use of EARLY bird I between 8:00 a.m. and 12 noon edt. (Wash. Post, 6/4/65; ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp requested bids from 12 companies by Nov. 22 for site preparation and construction of buildings and facilities for a fixed earth station at Paumalu, Oahu, Hawaii—a U.S. link for worldwide commercial satellite communications. The Hawaiian station and one at Brewster Flat, Wash., were the only fixed stations planned by ComSatCorp. (ComSatCorp Release)
nasa explorer xxiii meteoroid-detection satellite had successfully completed its one-year expected lifetime, NASA announced. The 295-lb. satellite, launched November 6, 1964, from Wallops Station to measure the rate of meteoroid punctures at 300-mi. to 600-mi. altitude, had recorded 122 punctures as of September 30. These results indicated that an exposed area of 10 sq. ft. made of metal one-thousandth of an inch thick would experience penetration by a meteoroid about once a week, (nasa Release 65-351)
cosmos ci unmanned satellite was launched by the U.S.S.R. “to continue space investigations,” announced Tass. Orbital data: apogee, 550 km. (341 mi.); perigee, 260 km. (165 mi.) ; period, 92.4 min.; inclination, 49°. Equipment was functioning normally. (.Pravda, 12/22/65, 1)
aec said in its Annual Report to Congress that the United States now had four Vela satellites in distant orbits to detect nuclear explosions in space. Two more would be launched this year. U.S. facilities in the Pacific had been brought to a state of instant readiness to resume atmospheric testing should the Soviet Union violate the limited nuclear test ban treaty, (aec Annual Report, 76-77)
An article published in The New Scientist reported that experts at the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, England, believed that the U.S. communications satellite ECHO II—launched Jan. 25, 1964, and still in orbit—had been pierced by its own launching canister shortly after injection into orbit. According to The New Scientist, the shape of echo ii after launching was flabby and elongated rather than the perfect sphere wanted for some of its communication experiments. Analysis of Malvern’s radar tracks on ECHO II revealed writhing echoes that, according to their theory, arose when the very short radar pulses entered a hole and rebounded from the aluminum-coated interior of the balloon. The Malvern team thought the balloon had a puncture about 18 in. long and 27 in. wide in one side. NASA spokesmen said they did not believe echo II had been punctured by either its launching canister or its launching vehicle and that sightings from more than a dozen radar stations had contradicted the Malvern theory. They added that echo Il’s ability to reflect radio signals had not been seriously impaired and many messages had been bounced off in the last year. (Hillaby, NYT, 1/31/65, 29)
TELSTAR II had successfully turned off its tracking beacon as scheduled after two years and nine days of service and 4,736 orbits of the earth, Bell Telephone System engineers announced. This would not affect the comsat’s usefulness, but would conserve energy and permit other satellites to use the channel that was cut off. telstar ii was expected to remain usable for at least three more vears. (UPI, NYT, 5/20/65, 18)	'
Funeral services for Sir Winston Churchill were televised live and by delayed transmission from London via telstar ii communications satellite. Churchill died on Jan. 24. Earlier in the week, pictures of Sir Winston’s body lying in state in Westminster Hall had also been transmitted live via telstar ii. (nbc; cbs; Wash. Post, 1/27/65)
Scientists and broadcasting executives from 20 countries began a fourday conference in Paris, sponsored by UNESCO, on communications satellites and their probable effect on press and radio. (Reuters, NYT, 12/6/65, 3)
ComSatCorp announced it would request proposals from several U.S. manufacturers for a new space exploration communications system that would be associated with “certain space exploration activities, particularly the Apollo program.” Proposals would be for five synchronous-orbit satellites each capable of being launched with a thrust-augmented Delta booster, with options for additional satellites. First delivery would be within eight months. ComSatCorp also established requirements for four transportable satellite earth stations with options for additional stations—first two stations to be delivered in eight months. (ComSatCorp Release)
“The world’s first international school for training specialists in satellite tracking,” would be opened in Tashkent, capital of Uzbekistan in Soviet Central Asia, Tass announced. Fifteen young scientists from Soviet satellite countries and 20 Soviet scientists would pursue each nine-day course. The school was set up within the framework of the U.N. International Commission for Space Research, (ap, NYT, 9/8/65, 5)
ComSatCorp announced it was negotiating with trw Systems, Inc., for development of at least six and perhaps 24 satellites for use in a global system. ComSatCorp said the global system should be in operation by 1968, relaying telephone, television, and data messages between continents. No estimate of the value of the contract was made. (ComSatCorp Release)
British Broadcasting Co. filed a petition with the FCC to request halving suggested fee of $3,825 for a half-hour’s television use of early bird i communications satellite. In addition to ComSatCorp’s charge, any television user must pay an identical fee to the group of 17 European countries that helped finance EARLY BIRD I; this combined fee of $7,650 would cover the cost of transmission only between Andover, Me., ground station and one European point and would not include costs for ground lines to broadcasting stations. One bbc expert, who estimated that at the proposed rates a half-hour transatlantic program would cost more than $11,000, concluded that British broadcasters would be able to use the satellite only for the “most compelling matters.” (Lewis, NYT, 6/13/65, 1)
European Broadcasting Union’s administrative council issued a statement saying it was concerned by the possibility that “prohibitive” charges might make it impossible to transmit television programs over EARLY bird i communications satellite. The council expressed the hope that the first three experimental years of intercontinental satellite television would not be “cut off at the start of commercial satellite operation.” (Reuters, NYT, 5/23/65, 19)
Federal Communications Commission approved live television coverage from the aircraft carrier Wasp of Gemini vi recovery in the Altantic Ocean. This would be the first live transmission from a recovery area since the U.S. man-in-space program began. Television signal from the Wasp would be sent to early BIRD I which would relay it to the satellite ground station in Andover, Me., for transmission to the three television networks. (NYT, 10/22/65, 3)
alouette i, Canadian scientific satellite launched by NASA on September 29, 1962, had completed its third year in space and was still operating normally. Satellite was using the swept-frequency topside sounding technique to gather information about ionospheric electron density and distribution during the four-to-six hours daily it was activated by command from the ground, (nasa Release 65-312) September 29: Bureau of Naval Weapons announced it had placed two more navigation satellites in orbit. The two 135-lb. spacecraft, launched June 24 and Aug 13, were intended “to augment the now operational all-weather satellite navigation system and to allow for more frequent position fixes by ships at sea.” (ap, Balt. San. 9/29/65)
Sigvard Eklund, general director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, told Tass that Soviet Union had a new type of nuclear reactor that could be used as a power station in space. He said the Romashka (Daisy) reactor provided electricity “on the basis of direct conversion of heat given out by a chain reaction from nuclear fission,” and that such a source could “feed scientific instruments on sputniks or satellites.” (Wash. Post, 12/12/65, A28)
ComSatCorp, rejecting petitions by seven communications carriers to reduce its authority, strongly supported Fee’s decision giving ComSatCorp “sole responsibility for the design, construction, and operation” of three ground stations to support the Corporation’s global satellite system for commercial communications. Answering the charge that station ownership and operation should be assumed by the carriers on a competitive basis, ComSatCorp said the operational date of the global system would be needlessly delayed if ownership of stations were decided on a case-by-case basis. To the complaint that the Fee decision gave ComSatCorp control of “terrestrial facilities” for traffic-processing between interface points and the stations themselves, ComSatCorp replied that it would “look first to the carriers to provide” the facilities. Further, “should Com-SatCorp determine, in any particular situation, to propose construction of its own communications links, the soundness of any such proposal would, of course, be subject to scrutiny by the Commission with full consideration of the views of all interested parties.” Against the allegation that ComSatCorp-constructed terrestrial facilities would introduce costly “backhauls,” ComSatCorp said backhauling was “routine and unavoidable” throughout the communications industry. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA disclosed plans for the new Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) that would appear to hover over a given spot on earth to check out communications, weather, scientific and engineering ideas. There would be five in all, with four in synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude. First Ats was scheduled for launch in 1966; two more would be launched in 1967; the last two in 1968. Primary aim of the Ats program would be to find out (1) what happens to satellites in synchronous orbit, and (2) what can be done by a satellite continuously above one area of the earth. Among experiments planned were color television transmission, the first attempt to “talk” among unmanned satellites and aircraft, and photographing cloud formation changes in one place over a long period of time, (nasa Release)
David H. Hoffman, aviation editor of the New York Herald Tribune and Arthur C. Clarke, British science writer, were cited by the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association for outstanding articles in 1964. Mr. Hoffman received the James J. Strebig memorial award for his series on air safety. Mr. Clarke was honored for an article published in Life magazine on communications satellites. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/23/65)
Plans for the side-by-side orbiting of Canadian Alouette and U.S. Explorer satellites to study the ionosphere were announced. Previously scheduled for Nov. 23 from Western Test Range, the launch had been postponed until at least Nov. 26 because of telemetry problems with the U.S. satellite. Double-launch project was called Isis-X (International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies), (ap, NYT, 11/21/ 65, 11; Wash. Post, 11/21/65, A14)
Soviet-French communique was issued after six days of talks between Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and French Foreign Minister Maurice Couve de Murville in Moscow expressing the desire to sign “an appropriate agreement” on space cooperation. This apparently referred to a Soviet invitation that France join in a communications satellite system which would compete with the U.S.-led ComSatCorp, to which France already belonged. (Rosenfeld, Wash. Post, 11/3/65, A9)
Group headed by Junkers Flugzeug- und Motorenwerke AG, and including Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., had been selected by the European Space Research Organization (esro) to develop the Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite (Heos). Junkers team was selected from eight international groups competing to build Heos, which would gather interplanetary particle data. Heos would be the first satellite developed in West Germany, but it would include the combined technology of several nations. Value of the over-all contract for satellite development was about $6.5 million. (Av. Wk., 12/13/65, 36)
Soviet Union launched cosmos LXIX artificial earth satellite containing scientific equipment for the study of outer space. Orbital parameters: apogee, 332 km. (206 mi.) ; perigee, 211 km. (131 mi.) ; period, 89.7 min.; inclination to the equator, 65°. All instruments were operating normally. (Jzvestia, 6/26/65, 1, atss-t Trans.; Prav-da, 6/26/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Self-organizing flight controller,” featuring device that could cope with unexpected flight conditions of satellites and aircraft, was being developed by afsc Research and Technology Div. Applying “probability state variable devices,” bionics researchers had recreated function of a living nerve cell in a device called “Artron” (artificial neuron). Networks of Artrons in electronic cluster functioned like living neurons: they became self-organizing, achieving problem-solving, and learning new ways to capitalize on their mistakes and find new ways of performing a given task. AFSC stressed that flyable self-organizing flight controller was 5-10 yrs away, (afsc Release 50.65)
ComSatCorp invited design proposals for a multi-purpose satellite having at least 20 times the communications capacity of EARLY bird I. Firms throughout the world were asked to submit proposals. ComSatCorp said more than one study contract could be awarded. Proposed new satellite would make nationwide and international distribution of television feasible, provide a sending and receiving capability between ground stations and ships at sea or aircraft in flight, provide complete interchangeability from one type of service to another within a single satellite, and permit access to these services by any number of earth stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
Transfer of control of syncom ii and SYNCOM ill communications satellites from NASA to DOD was completed. Under direction of the Defense Communications Agency, the three telemetry and command stations for maintaining precise control and positioning of the satellites would be operated by usaf at locations in the Seychelles Islands, Hawaii, and Guam. Army would be responsible for earth communications facilities used with the Syncom satellites except for two shipboard terminals owned and operated by USN. Army’s Strategic Communications Command would continue to man and operate all ground terminals. syncom ii—launched by nasa July 26, 1963—would be maintained at a position between 60° and 80° east longitude; syncom III— launched by NASA Aug. 19, 1964—would be positioned between 170° and 174° east longitude. Both satellites were in orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude. NASA would continue to receive reports on the telemetry from the two satellites from DOD and would continuously evaluate their performance in space, (dod Release 451—65)
U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS XCII unmanned satellite, equipped to continue studies of the infrared and ultraviolet radiation of the earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 329 km. (204 mi.) ; perigee, 199 km. (123 mi.); period, 89.8 min.; inclination, 65.02°. All systems were functioning normally. Soviet Prof. Aleksandr Lebedinskiy told Tass that two spectrophotometers would point vertically part of the time and at the horizon part of the time. One instrument would cover the spectrum from seven to 20 microns and the other from 14 to 38 microns; it would take 20 sec. to obtain one spectrogram. (Tass, 10/16/65)
nasa would negotiate six-month study contracts totaling $200,000 with General Electric Co. and rca to determine "feasibility of a satellite capable of broadcasting directly to conventional home FM radio and/or short wave radios.” Contracts would be managed by nasa ossa, (nasa Release 66-161)
Global television relayed by U.S. and U.S.S.R. satellites could be used as a political instrument, threatening the independence of some countries and causing far-reaching changes in world relationships, warned Eurospace, organization of 160 European aerospace industries, in a memorandum released in London. When ordinary home television sets began to receive programs from these satellites "the national independence of developed countries without similar means of expression might be threatened by this persuasive new weapon,” memorandum said. Eurospace warning, released three days after an announcement that U.K. and other European nations had joined U.S.-dominated Intelsat consortium to launch system of world-spanning comsats by 1968, urged Europe to play its own major role in space "before it is too late.” Intelsat’s space communications system would utilize Early Bird-type satellites which Eurospace did not consider "powerful enough to have noteworthy political or economic repercussions.” (Reuters, Wash. Post, 3/15/66, A16)
First test transmissions of long-range radio and television communications between Moscow and the Far East via third molniya i comsat, launched April 25, were successful. Pictures were of good quality. Tass said the satellite would be used to "further refine the system of long-range, two-way television and telephone-telegraph radio communications and pilot operations.” (Tass, 4/27/66)
Australian mobile space tracking station soon would begin seven-week, nonstop operation on Thursday Island off Cape York Peninsula, according to Australian News and Information Bureau announcement. Minister of Supply Denham Henty had said mobile station, part of nasa’s Anna geodetic satellite project for measurement of size and shape of the earth, would transmit data to U.S., via a fixed station near Adelaide, for analysis at Johns Hopkins Univ.’s Applied Physics Laboratory. (NYT, 5/1/66, 70)
aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg believed man could modify weather in this century through a global center operating a vast satellite system, AP reported. With international cooperation, he said, a worldwide forecasting system could become operational in 20 yrs.; later it might be possible to actually control the weather. (AP, NYT, 12/2/66)
NASA Convair 990 jet aircraft began ARC-managed, preliminary flights in support of NASA’s Nimbus C weather satellite scheduled for launch from wtr May 13. Four gsfc experiments installed in jet would test new spacecraft sensors for weather measurement and collect data at altitudes over 40,000 ft. for comparison with data obtained by Nimbus spacecraft over the same areas, (nasa Release 66-107)
ComSatCorp asked fcc for authority to construct a $6,500,000 highcapacity earth station in Peach Tree Valley, Calif., to communicate with, and perform tracking, telemetry, and command duties for, orbiting satellites. ComSatCorp would withdraw Oct. 6 application for a second antenna at Andover, Me., station pending fcc action on California application. (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp requested fcc authority to build six 250-lb. advanced synchronous satellites, for global commercial communications system. Launches would begin in 1968. (ComSatCorp Release)
Accelerated programs for launching communications satellites had improved prospects of earning profit in 1967, reported ComSatCorp president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk at annual shareholders’ meeting in Washington, D.C. Predicting a 100-fold increase in ComSatCorp’s revenue potential during five-year development plan, Dr. Charyk said: ". . . we have taken firm steps for the development of even larger and more versatile satellites for deployment on a global basis in 1968. These spacecraft will weigh approximately 240 pounds in orbit and will have a capacity for 1,200 two-way telephone circuits or four television channels.” He also noted ComSatCorp had proposed to essa that it conduct joint feasibility study with IBM to develop satellites to collect, process, and disseminate weather data on a global basis. (Vartan, NYT, 5/11/66, 65; Fouquet, Wash. Post, 5/11/66, E6)
Two tape recorders in nasa’s nimbus ii meteorological satellite had failed but spacecraft continued to transmit daytime and nighttime cloud-cover photos. Loss of first recorder, used to store data from Medium Resolution Infrared Radiometer (Mrir), would prevent scientists from receiving information on earth’s heat balance, water vapor, and temperatures in the atmosphere. Failure of second recorder, used in measuring satellite’s engineering performance, would force nimbus ii to transmit information each time it passed a ground station instead of storing it for more convenient playback. Since its launch by nasa May 15, nimbus ii had met all mission objectives and transmitted more than 200,000 weather photos on a global scale, (nasa Release 66-203)
ucla announced plans to build its own satellite to study earth’s magnetic field and interplanetary space. Feasibility studies financed by 155,000 NASA grant were being conducted by Hughes Aircraft Co. and Philco Corp. (dpi, NYT, 10/15/66, 33)
Home-built photo-receiver set of rca electronics engineer Wendell Anderson in Morristown, N.J., received photos of North Atlantic storm taken by essa i meteorological satellite—first known usable pictures ever received from an orbiting satellite on home-made set. Equipment, which included 25-yr.-old ham radio, 20 ft. of copper tubing, television antenna, mast, sheet of chicken wire, wooden laundry hangers, sawed-off rolling pin, and $25 microscope, cost $600—$31,000 less than an essa ground station. Anderson used antenna to pick up signals on ham radio, taped signals on recorder, reducing them to series of electrical impulses that could be changed into light signals, then beamed light through reverse end of a microscope onto spinning sheet of film to record photos. (O’Toole, NYT, 3/3/66, 31)
Summarizing two years of negotiations between France and U.S.S.R. on cooperative satellite communications program in Astronautics & Aeronautics, Andrew G. Haley said questions of (1) access of French scientists and technicians to Soviet launch sites, and (2) size of orbit for French satellite to be launched with Soviet vehicle were still unsettled. (Haley, A&A, 8/66, 15-6)
nasa explorer xxix (Geos-A) geodetic satellite, orbited Nov. 6, 1965, had developed problems which affected planned investigations: accurate measurement of spacecraft’s attitude had become difficult; had precise attitude information could not be included in Mutual Visibility Program for observing stations. Failure of one of four flashing lights had reduced utility of some observing cameras, and interference had occurred between secor transponder and Doppler beacons, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Government of Pakistan announced plans to use comsats to relay telephone communications between East and West Pakistan. Two satellite tracking stations would be built—one in each province—and would be operative by 1968. (Reuters, NYT, 8/18/66, 38)
Fee’s Oct. 1 deadline for filing comments on whether or not private entities should be allowed to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use was extended to Nov. 3. Initially fcc had requested that comments and proposals be submitted by Aug. 1. Complexity of proposals submitted by ComSatCorp and the Ford Foundation on that date and resulting questions and discussion had necessitated two extensions of the deadline. (Adams, NYT, 9/9/66, 77)
ComSatCorp would conduct communications test in which U.S. and European computers would "talk with each other” for a month in fall 1966 via early bird i comsat, reported New York Times. Test could lead to daily exchange by satellite of business, scientific, and technical information, and to establishment of U.N. "voice of peace” agency—a world bank of medical, technical, and educational knowledge—proposed at November 1965 White House conference on international cooperation. (Clark, NYT, 7/10/66, 43)
Third year in space began for two experimental Vela nuclear detection satellites launched by dod Oct. 16, 1963, into near-circular orbit at 52,174-mi. (84,000-km.) altitude. Satellites had demonstrated successful R&D program and had provided effective capability to detect nuclear explosions in space, dod had overall responsibility for Vela program; arpa had overall direction with support of aec. (afsc Release
fcc adopted a Notice of Inquiry inviting comments by interested parties to be submitted by Aug. 1, 1966, on five specific questions concerning legality, compatibility with the Communications Satellite Act of 1962, and economic and technical feasibility of proposed fcc authorization of nongovernmental communications satellite facilities. (Text)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xii, launched into lunar orbit Oct. 22, had completed 220 orbits, taken "unique photographs,” and was continuing its mission, Tass reported. Satellite had transmitted data on lunar x-ray and gamma radiation and micrometeoroids. (Tass, 11/26/66)
U.N. World Meteorological Organization—in report on plan for World Weather Watch to be initiated between 1968 ana 1970—warned it would be "foolhardy” for man to attempt to modify weather on large scale with current limited knowledge of atmospheric forces. Plan called for use of satellites; a relatively dense network of land and ocean weather stations, manned and unmanned; drifting sea buoys; balloons; and other instruments to probe the world’s atmosphere. High-speed telecommunications systems would centralize findings for analysis and relay latest detailed information to meteorologists everywhere. This would enable them to forecast the weather "both with improved accuracy and for a longer time ahead.” (NYT, 10/22/66,,12)
Thailand and Malaysia joined Intelsat-—International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium headed by ComSatCorp—bringing total number of member nations to 50. ComSatCorp said it "warmly welcomes this aspect of the development of the consortium and the intention of other countries to increase Intelsat membership even further in the near future.” Yugoslavia and Romania had also shown interest in Intelsat and were considering joining. (ComSatCorp Release; Clark, NYT, 5/3/66, 9)
Edgar G. Bush, senior technician at gsfc since 1959 and designer of first micro-electronic circuitry used for flight computers, died of a heart ailment. Bush had designed computers for vanguard hi, Explorer satellites, and Lunar Orbiters. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/66, B5)
170 usable terrain photographs from Gemini v mission flown by Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., Aug. 21-29, 1965, included pictures of South Africa which would provide valuable information about continental drift, gsfc geologist Dr. Paul D. Lowman said in interim report at NASA Hq. on 13 scientific and technological experiments carried aboard gemini v. Color photos of South Africa’s Namib Desert revealed 7-million to 8-million-year-old rock formations. Presence of similar formations along east coast of South America could indicate two continents had once been closer together, Lowman explained. Photos also pinpointed "a major diamond area” between rock formations and the sand dunes. Kenneth Nagler, U.S. Weather Bureau, told the meeting that gemini V pictures, some in color, had provided meteorologists with more detail of cloud systems than had orbiting Tiros satellites. (Text)
lunar orbiter ii executed plane change—possibly the first ever accomplished by satellite in lunar orbit—to obtain information about moon’s gravity field and gain experience in flight operations at high inclinations, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-316)
ComSatCorp asked fcc for authority to build six advanced synchronous satellites—four to be launched and two as backups for development of global commercial communications system. Proposed satellites would weigh 250 lbs., and have 1,200 voice-quality telephone channels and five-year operational life compared with 85-lb. early bird i’s 240 voice-lity channels and 18-mo. planned life. (ComSatCorp Release;
Communist sources speculated that U.S.S.R. would launch "a large satellite carrying several men . . . just before the Nov. 7 anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution,” and another, the world’s largest satellite and carrying eight men, by the end of 1966, AP reported. (AP, NYT, 10/16/66, 28)
ddr&e Deputy Director (Strategic & Space Systems) Daniel J. Fink, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., said: "We in the Department of Defense have always looked upon space less as a matter of adventure and more as a matter of necessity; we explore its potential not because it is 'there’ but because we have needs that are 'here.’ It is not that wre have identified fundamentally new missions since the early days of our space effort. We have, however, begun to recognize new applications for space-based systems, particularly in the tactical field. The opportunities are tremendous—and sometimes so are the problems. We are no longer as enamored with the 'how’ of developing a satellite system. We now take a hard look at the 'why’ of choosing one approach to solving a military need over another—and this most assuredly includes competing earth-based systems as well. We have come to recognize that our launch vehicle capability coupled with better sensors permits us to do more missions from synchronous orbit. We also are beginning to sense that there is a high potential for combining operational functions in a multiple-purpose satellite where common sensor packages and orbital parameters exist.” (dod Release 341-66)
ComSatCorp petitioned fcc to deny itt’s request to construct a fourth satellite earth station in Puerto Rico. ComSatCorp said "public interest would best be served” if it, rather than itt, owned the station, and revealed plans to seek permission to construct and begin operating the facility by mid-1968. (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/1/66, Ell; NYT, 3/12/66, 22)
fcc ruled that users of satellite communications must operate through common carriers instead of dealing directly with ComSatCorp to prevent "serious adverse effects upon the well-being of the commercial telecommunications industry and the general public it serves.” Ruling, which resolved controversy between ComSatCorp and common carriers, would protect carriers from reduced traffic volume resulting from direct user-ComSatCorp relations, (fcc; WSJ, 6/24/66, 6)
European conference on satellite communication, meeting at The Hague, Netherlands, requested ESRO to study feasibility and desirability of European comsat. (NYT, 11/25/66, 4)
nasa would negotiate $800,000 contract with rca for design sludy of imp oved Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) for national operational weather satellite program. Proposed 500-lb., cylindrical satellite would be 5 ft. high and 4li ft. in diameter—compared with current 300-lb. satellites 2 ft. high, 3H ft. in diameter—and would incorporate camera system now carried in two operational spacecraft. Stabilized by flywheel and magnetic attitude control system, satellite would always point to earth, and its infrared radiometers would scan entire world’s cloud cover at night, (nasa Release 66-115)
ComSatCorp filed with fcc a $31,985,000 fixed-price contract with trw Systems, Inc., for research, development, and production of six advanced synchronous satellites for global commercial satellite service. Cylindrical, 240-lb. satellites would have 1,200 two-way voice channels and five-year operational life and would handle all types of communications. (ComSatCorp Release)
White House announced agreement for establishment of an esro station near Fairbanks, Alaska, to receive telemetry from and send commands to esro scientific satellites. This would be first foreign ground station on U.S. soil. (Pres. Doc., 12/5/66, 1740)
Dr. Clifford A. Spohn (Col., usaf, Ret.) had been appointed director of operations at essa’s National Satellite Center, succeeding Arthur W. Johnson, who had been appointed deputy director of the facility, (essa Release 66-8)
nasa selected Westinghouse Electric Corp. for an $8-million contract to install semiautomatic systems in tracking stations to speed compilation of satellite data. The data acquisition system would be used in nasa’s Applications Technology Satellite (Ats) program; it would make possible reduction of data within 90 days of satellite launch. Systems would be installed at Rosman, N.C., Goldstone facility, and Toowoomba, Australia, tracking stations. (WSJ, 12/1/66, 8)
Industry bids to AFSC for study of new integrated satellite system as followon to the Midas early warning satellite would be due June 24, Aviation Week reported. Proposal request included studies for sensor payload and spacecraft. Primary sensors would be optical, covering the infrared, ultraviolet, and visible spectra. (Av. Wk., 5/9/66, 23)
France’s report for the Register of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of her successful Nov. 26, 1965, launch of A-l scientific satellite from Hammaguir Range, marked first such report by nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. (Text)
ComSatCorp Chairman of the Board James McCormack said ComSatCorp was contacting communications and broadcasting companies to get largest possible consensus on costs and technological feasibility of domestic multipurpose communications satellite system, and would present plans to fcc by Aug. 1. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/23/66, E7; Bishop, WSJ, 4/25/66, 32)
msfc awarded Univ. of Michigan two-month, $29,930 study contract to develop 20-channel "infrared sensing technique to survey the earth’s natural resources.” Operating on orbiting satellite, system would survey possible mineral deposits, analyze soil for growth potential, diagnose "health” of crops, and predict bountiful fishing areas, (msfc Release 66-167)
dod awarded General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. $4-million contract to refurbish and update 23 retired Atlas icbm’s to launch upper-stage vehicles for Abres (Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems), Nike target, and scientific satellite programs. (General Dynamics Release)
U.S.S.R. announced that cosmos cxxii, launched June 25, was collecting meteorological data which would be sent to other nations in accordance with 1962 agreement with U.S. Satellite carried "instruments for taking TV pictures of the clouds, cameras to photograph clouds by infrared rays on the day and night sides of the earth, and instruments to measure radiation in the earth’s atmosphere.” (Tass, 8/17/66)
Patent for system with direction finder that would assure ground stations continuous and efficient communication with orbiting satellites was granted electronics engineers Henry P. Hutchingson, Applied Research Lab., Sylvania Electronic Systems, and Dr. Paul R. Arendt, Army Electronic Command Labs., Fort Monmouth, NJ. Equipment could also correct "Doppler frequency effect” caused by relative movement of satellite and station. (Jones, NYT, 7/23/66, 29)
A laser to function as a ground-based device to recharge an orbiting satellite’s batteries was suggested by Dr. Charles H. Townes, MIT, and Dr. Arthur L. Schawlow, Stanford Univ., co-inventors of the laser, in a paper before the Optical Society of America’s meeting in Washington, D.G. Report predicted exploitation of the laser would grow into a billion-dollar industry by 1970. (Clark, NYT, 3/16/66, 45M)
U.S.S.R. launched spacecraft, possibly from Cosmos series, which exploded into 32 pieces detectable by radar, gsfc Satellite Situation Report would later reveal that 12 pieces of debris remained in orbit Nov. 15; 20 had reentered. Spacecraft was second Soviet satellite to explode in six weeks [see Sept. 17]. (gsfc SSR, 11/15/66)
usaf had launched reconnaissance satellite over U.S.S.R. that could photograph Soviet military bases and return film packages on command from ground control, Dick Lyons reported in Washington Post. Key components were high-powered camera that could photograph objects several feet in diameter from 100-mi. altitude; cluster of film packages— cassettes—that could be dropped from satellite at random and picked up by recovery aircraft; and an Agena vehicle which could be maneuvered from ground. A new version of Samos spacecraft, satellite could remain in orbit for weeks or months—until its supply of film packages was exhausted—and might also be able to transmit TV pictures to U.S. ground stations. (Lyons, Wash. Post, 9/12/66)
NASA awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and RCA $90,000, six-month contracts to study characteristics for proposed Orbiting Data Relay System (Odrs) which would eliminate gaps in communications and provide continuous contact with spacecraft. Studies would probe kind of synchronous satellite and ground facilities required to relay data from spacecraft in earth orbit to NASA’s mission control centers at GSFC, JPL, and msc. (nasa Release 66-119)
Soviet Foreign Minister Audrey Gromyko and French Foreign Minister Maurice Couve de Murville signed agreement in Moscow providing basic framework for space cooperation during next ten years. Major objectives of compact—which initially scheduled several common experiments, including an astronomy test to be conducted from Archangel, U.S.S.R., and Kerguelen, French islands in the Indian Ocean —were missions with Imp-type satellites and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft. (SBD, 6/28/66, 344)
ComSatCorp proposed to faa an aeronautics satellite to handle complex communications for airlines and aid in faa’s air traffic control. Two-channel, 210-lb. satellite would be launched in late 1967—two or three years earlier than previous proposals—into 22,300-mi.-altitude synchronous orbit to provide more reliable very-high-frequency radio communications over North Atlantic area currently served by high-frequency radio system affected by had weather and sunspot activity. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/11/66, D6; Cooke, WSJ, 3/10/66, 32; Clark, NYT, 3/10/66, 19; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/66, A8)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara and U.K. Minister of Defence Denis Healey signed memorandum providing for cooperation in r&d for U.S. Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project—system of up to 22 comsats in near-synchronous, equatorial orbit. U.K. would provide, operate, and fund several ground terminals for communications tests and experiments using dod comsats free of charge, (dod Release 87-66)
Planned expansion of the global communications satellite network of the 50-nation Intelsat was being postponed two years as a result of pressure by the fcc on ComSatCorp. ComSatCorp was majority shareholder and served as manager for Intelsat. Basic question raised by fcc was whether the expansion was too ambitious for the traffic that would be available. Threatened with fcc veto or modification of its application to construct six 1,500-channel satellites for launch in 1968, ComSatCorp notified fcc that deployment of the follow-on 6,000-channel multipurpose satellite had been postponed from 1969-70 to 1972 or later. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 31)
U.K.’s Cable & Wireless, Ltd., would build three ground stations—at Hong Kong, Bahrein Island, and an undisclosed site—for satellite communications, reported the Wall Street Journal. Hong Kong station would cost $7 million and would be operational by 1968. Seventeen firms—including seven U.S. companies—had been asked to bid on the project. {WSJ, 6/17/66, 12)
New Soviet launch site near Archangel was discovered by British schoolboys after they had tracked several Cosmos satellites and fed information, including data on orbital intersections, into a computer. U.S. later confirmed U.S.S.R. had been launching satellites from large military base south of Archangel. Only two Soviet launch sites—Baikonur and Kapustin Yar—had previously been publicized. Schoolboys’ information, which appeared in Flight International, represented important break in secrecy surrounding Soviet reconnaissance satellites. (Wash. Post, 12/13/66; 12/19/66, Al, A8; NYT, 12/21/66, 25; Time, 12/ 30/66)
Synchronous-orbit television relay satellite capable of providing direct service to home receivers for an area equivalent to one sixth of continental U.S. could be launched before 1970, according to preliminary company-funded design studies conducted by rca and ge and presented to NASA Hq. officials, Aviation Week reported. Both companies conceded the existence of technical problem areas, including the design of solar cell arrays 15 to 30 times larger than any previously attempted and the lack of a suitable launch vehicle for orbiting 6,000-lb. to 8,000-lb. satellite, but believed solutions could be devised within the existing state-of-the-art. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 115)
U.S.S.R. planned to build two additional satellite tracking stations in Cuba and had sited one near Santiago, Aviation Week reported. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 23)
President Johnson issued Executive Order 11277 designating International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) as an organization "entitled to enjoy, from and after August 20, 1964, all of the privileges, exemptions, and immunities provided by Section 4(a)” of the International Organizations Immunities Act. (Text, Pres. Doc., 5/9/66, 600)
Gamma-ray spectrum of the lunar surface obtained by luna x indicated that the moon’s crust was similar to the earth’s, Tass announced. The satellite had detected lunar gamma rays from two sources: one was "an increased intensity of gamma radiation caused chiefly by interaction of cosmic rays with the surface layer of lunar material”; the other was "natural radioactivity from the lunar rocks associated with uranium, thorium, and potassium. "Compared with the analogous radioactivity of earth rocks, the observed spectrum comes close to the radioactivity of basic rocks— basalts.” (Sullivan, NYT, 4/14/66, 1, 21)
ComSatCorp’s Intelsat ii-a ("lani bird”) comsat, launched by NASA from etr Oct. 27, began commercial service under temporary fcc authorization which would expire Feb. 2, 1967. Satellite, which had failed to achieve planned synchronous equatorial orbit Oct. 30, had been moved into modified 12-hr. orbit Dec. 1, to provide maximum visibility: eight to nine hours daily between U.S. mainland and Hawaii; over seven hours between U.S. and Japan; and about four hours between U.S. and Carnarvon, Australia. Authorized communications carriers could use satellite for television and telephone communications about eight hours daily. (ComSatCorp Release; Wash. Post, 12/2/66, FI; AP, WSJ, 12/5/66, 15; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/66, A3)
Dr. Wallace J. Eckert, Columbia Univ. prof, of celestial mechanics and director of ibm’s Watson Laboratory, received National Academy of Sciences’ 19th James Craig Watson Medal "for his pioneering contributions to the scientific application of electronic computers and to the theory of the motion of the moon.” (nas Release, 3/29/66) Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, examined management role of scientifically trained people and invited their participation in the "governmental decision-making process.” Brown, a former physicist, attributed rising influence of technocrats "to the increasing technical content of modern life” and to "the less narrowly technical orientation of the technically trained.” He noted transition from parttime to full-time scientific advisers in the late 1950’s as "one of the major lasting consequences of the Soviet Sputnik achievement.” (Text) nasa’s ogo i, launched Sept. 4, 1964, and explorer xxviii (imp-c), launched May 29, 1965, had yielded data essential to evolution of an accurate physical description of the universe, according to paper on low-energy cosmic rays presented at aps meeting by Dr. Donald E. Hagge of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Hagge noted satellite measurements and recent "quiet sun year” had given physicists "an unprecedented opportunity . . . for meaningful cosmic ray research.” High-apogee satellites permitted measurement of low-energy particles "not directly observable on the surface of the earth” due to protective atmosphere and influence of earth’s magnetic field. Minimum of "solar modulation”—suppression of galactic particles by sun’s magnetic field upon attempted penetration of solar system—meant that "particles observed during 1965 most nearly represent the true situation outside the solar system.” (gsfc Release, 3/27/66) J. A. Simpson of Enrico Fermi Institute, Univ. of Chicago, reported these satellite experiments had revealed "new features in the cosmic radiation regarding the energy distribution, the chemical and isotopic composition of the cosmic rays at hitherto unattainable energies.” Origin of "ultra-low-energy nuclei,” which reached vicinity of earth during 1965 period of minimum solar modulation, may be supernovae, Simpson suggested. (Fermi Institute Release, 4/27/66) Simpson and J. J. O’Gallagher, also of Fermi Institute, presented results of study of solar flare particle propagation based on simultaneous observations by mariner iv space probe and Imp satellites. Evidence showed that "protons are confined by interplanetary magnetic fields to narrow channels extending outward from the sun” and "particles in these channels are carried around the sun by magnetic fields which co-rotate with the sun.” (Fermi Institute Release, 4/29/66) Paul J. Coleman, Jr., of ucla, presented results of "a recently completed statistical analysis of records of the magnetic field and plasma velocity, obtained in late 1962 with instruments aboard the spacecraft mariner ii,” including "experimental evidence that [hydromagnetic] waves do exist in interplanetary space.” Discussing properties of solar wind, Coleman said mariner ii’s measurements had indicated average temperature of positive ions in plasma was about 200,000°K. He,noted that its high temperature and low density "suggest that the plasma is completely ionized.” (aps Release, 4/26/66) Discussing importance of their NASA-sponsored stellar wind study, S. H. Lam of Princeton Univ. and G. Sandri of Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, Inc., said: "The cosmic radiation that reached the Earth, or any satellite that has been sent into space by man, has been attenuated, or as the specialists say 'modulated,’ by the solar wind. Therefore, we cannot measure directly the constitution of the cosmic radiation as it exists in interstellar space unaffected by the solar wind. Yet, to be able to understand the origin of the cosmic radiation, we must know its true constitution in interstellar space. A proper understanding of the solar wind will greatly facilitate this difficult task.” Lam and Sandri presented electrostatic model for stellar winds at APS meeting, (aps Release, 4/29/66) Discovery of first celestial body, "Cygnus GR-1,” identifiable as a "point source of high energy gamma radiation,” was announced to aps by Univ. of Rochester physicists J. G. M. Duthie, Roland W. Cobb, and Joseph Stewart. Discovery of source, which coincided with a region already identified as an x-ray source known as "Cygnus XR-1,” climaxed five years of research sponsored by NASA and nsf. (Univ. of Rochester Release, 4/29/66) Describing the Alfven Propulsion Engine (Ape) in a paper on hydromagnetic propulsion and drag in space vehicles, M. A. Ruderman, New York Univ., said: "A source of electrical power (nuclear, or solar panels) sufficient to power one hundred common light bulbs could raise the altitude of a 5-ton satellite about 100 miles in a week of operation. By allowing the motor to act as a generator the orbital energy of this same satellite can be converted into electrical energy, contributing sufficient drag to lower the satellite altitude by almost 15 miles per day.” (aps Release, 4/26/66) Cal Tech physicist H. Victor Neher described latitude survey of cosmic rays: "Once we satisfied ourselves that instruments sent by balloons up to altitudes of 140,000 feet, near the earth’s magnetic poles, gave answers directly comparable to those found by Mariners II and IV, it became less important to depend on spacecraft for our data. This was good news because we have a flexibility and control of balloon flights that are not possible with spacecraft.” (aps Release, 4/28/66)
ComSatCorp denied ITT World Communications, Inc.’s accusation of "unjustly and unreasonably” discriminating against ITT in quoting charges to Defense Communications Agency (dca) for 30 satellite circuits between Hawaii and Japan, the Philippines and Thailand: "The rate quoted to the dca for each of the... circuits is, in fact, higher than the rate quoted to the carriers, as it takes into account the additional service costs by Comsat to carry out a responsibility to provide end-to-end service to dca. . . . itt Worldcom may have been confused by advance knowledge as to the Corporation’s planned tariff for satellite channels to be furnished to authorized common carriers, in which the $48,000 charge to the carriers would be revised downward to $45,000 [and] erroneously assumed that this lower charge, which would apply only to authorized common carriers, had been quoted by Comsat to the dca.” (ComSatCorp Release)
Nationalist China would build $10-million ground communications station by early 1969 to participate in Intelsat’s planned worldwide satellite communications system, Reuters reported. (Reuters, NYT, 12/25/66, 40)
nimbus ii meteorological satellite was reported "working beautifully” by gsfc. Among the thousands of photographs transmitted were those of the Gemini IX recovery area. The 912-lb. spacecraft had been launched May 15. (upi, NYT, 5/17/66, 77)
Plan for 500-mph, 80-passenger Vtol air-bus service, developed by mit’s Flight Transportation Laboratory to ease transportation congestion on the East Coast in the 1970’s, was announced By the Commerce Dept. (dpi, NYT, 10/18/66, 76) During week of October 17: House Committee on Government Operations, in report based on August hearings by Subcommittee on Military Operations, urged a ten- to twenty-fold expansion of DOD’s initial comsat system by increasing number and improving performance of both satellites and ground terminals. "Neither the Communications Satellite Corporation nor the other commercial carriers need fear they will lose the Defense Department as a good customer” as a result of this expansion, the report said. (Av. Wk., 10/24/66, 29)
NASA’s Blossom Point, Md., tracking station, prototype station for Project Vanguard, was closed "because of technical progress in space communications.” Blossom Point Station, which had tracked every unmanned earth-orbiting NASA satellite since explorer i was launched Jan. 31, 1958, would become part of stadan Network Test and Training Facility at gsfc. Facility, to be operational by Jan. 1, 1967, would test equipment, modes, and procedures and train personnel for stadan stations, (nasa Release 66-117)
U.K.’s Associated Electrical Industries, Ltd., General Electric Co., Ltd., and Plessey Co., Ltd., had joined forces to sell ground terminals at $4 million each to countries that wanted to pick up and relay telephone, telegraph, and television signals from communications satellites, reported Clyde H. Farnsworth in the New York Times. The British companies believed there would be market for about 30 terminals in the next two to three years and about 70 to 80 in the next ten years, and said that at least seven nations were already interested in purchasing terminals. (Farnsworth, NYT, 4/1/66, 57)
U.S. Committee on Extension to the Standard Atmosphere (coesa) announced plans to publish new volume, U.S. Standard Atmosphere Supplements, 1966, which would tabulate and detail properties of earth’s atmosphere at all altitudes up to 600 mi.—information necessary to investigate atmosphere’s effect on aerospace vehicle operation and design. Sponsored by NASA, essa, and usaf Cambridge Research Lab., publication would be based on data gathered through tracking of artificial earth satellites and instrumented rockets and satellites, (nasa Release 66-72)
usn "Southern Cross” program, attempt to convert fleet communications to secure, long-range over-the-horizon communications using techniques such as satellite relay or troposcatter, was undergoing reevaluation because of competitive pressure for funds for Vietnam war, Aviation Week reported. "Southern Cross” was sponsored by usn Bureau of Ships and administered by Naval Electronics Laboratory. (.Av. Wk„ 1/10/66, 36)
Reported that the European Space Research Organization (esro), which met in Paris Nov. 24-26, had agreed that the TD-2 satellite, scheduled for launch in 1969 by Douglas Thor-Delta booster purchased from NASA, would carry nine solar-ionospheric experiments: (1) topside counter to measure radio waves; (2) solar Lyman-alpha radiation experiment; (3) a far ultraviolet spectroheliograph experiment; (4) x-ray crystal spectrometer; (5) solar particle flux experiments; measurements of (6) low energy electron fluxes; (7) energy and particle distribution of charged ionospheric particles; (8) oxygen and nitrogen light emissions; and (9) neutral ionospheric constituents. The 880-lb. satellite would he launched' into near-polar orbit with 620-mi. apogee and 218-mi. perigee, esro planned to launch TD-1 stellar astronomy satellite in 1968. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 33)
usaf would make electronic portraits of satellite shapes to develop catalog of radar images of possible space vehicle shapes, AFSC announced. Measurements on some 24 satellite models would be taken by afsc Electronic Systems Div. at Holloman afb in 2,000 hrs. of tests extending through December, (afsc Release 156.66)
Radio Corp. of America was being awarded a $4,450,000 usaf definitive contract to supersede previously awarded letter contract for production of communication and electronic components- for unspecified space satellites. Contract would be managed by asfc’s Space Systems Div. (dod Release 652-66)
NASA turned essa ii (Environmental Survey Satellite) over to essa for operation in accordance with June 30, 1964, agreement between NASA and Dept, of Commerce. NASA had supervised design and construction of the satellite, conducted launch operations (Feb. 28), and tracked spacecraft after orbit was achieved; Dept, of Commerce had handled mangement and funding, (nasa Release 66-62)
International conference on outer space to mark 10th anniversary of first artificial satellite (1967) was proposed by U.S.S.R. Academician A. A. Blagonravov to working group of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. European site was suggested for conference, which "would provide information for peoples in all countries and training for the developing countries.” (Rossi, CSM, 1/26/66)
Series of small balloons was launched from Christchurch, New Zealand, in joint U.S.-New Zealand pilot project to examine feasibility of Global Horizontal Sounding Technique (Ghost)—plan for using satellite to locate and read out information from large number of balloons floating around earth at constant altitudes. Balloons, circling hemisphere at 20,000-ft., 40,000-ft., and 80,000-ft. altitudes, would be tracked by six stations equipped with high-frequency receivers, stop watches, and sun tables. Program would determine whether small superpressure balloons could fly for extended periods; test temperature, humidity, pressure, and radiation sensors which might be used in operational Ghost system; learn whether balloons would cluster in certain areas; and acquire data on planetary circulation in Southern Hemisphere at various altitudes. Called Southern Hemisphere balloon experiment, project was sponsored by essa and nsf and had the endorsement of U.N. World Meteorological Organization. Data would be analyzed by National Center for Atmospheric Research and Information and shared with all participants and interested nations, (essa Release 66-17)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos cxi unmanned satellite with scientific equipment to continue space investigations, Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 226 km. (140 mi.); perigee, 191 km. (119 mi.); period, 88.6 min.; inclination, 51°. (Tass, 3/1/66)
Satellite to be launched by U.S.S.R. in near future would carry French instrumentation, French Minister of Research Alain Peyrefitte announced in Caen. France and U.S.S.R. had signed an agreement for joint scientific cooperation June 30. (Reuters, NYT, 11/13/66, 45)
ComSatCorp had negotiated $441,412 contract—largest ever negotiated by ComSatCorp with a foreign country—with Nippon Electric Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, for multiplex subsystem equipment for earth stations at Oahu, Hawaii, and Brewster Flat, Wash., which would be completed by 1967. System would modulate signals received from communications carriers for transmission over satellite links, demodulate signals received from satellite for relay to land distribution systems, and provide continuous monitoring for quality of all signals being passed through the system. (ComSatCorp Release)
RCA received $2,500,000 fixed-price usn contract for fabrication, testing, and delivery of six navigation satellites, (dod Release 933-66)
NASA had selected Fairchild Hiller, General Electric Co., and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for negotiation of contracts totaling $450,000 for parallel six-month feasibility studies of missions for five possible second-generation Applications Technology Satellites (Ats). Spacecraft would contribute information useful for orbiting data-relay satellites, deep-space tracking, navigation satellites, data collection, galactic probes, and communication with aircraft, other satellites, ships and ground vehicles, and broadcast satellites. (NASA Release 66-45)
Luna x was continuing in circumlunar orbit with 1,017-km. (632mi.) apolune, 350-km. (217-mi.) perilune, 2-hr. 58-min. period, and 71° inclination, Tass reported. Eighteen radio communications had been held with the satellite "during which a large volume of scientific data had been received.” Scientific equipment onboard included: (1) recorder of meteoric particles for investigating meteor showers along earth-moon route, for seeking dust cloud around the moon, and for registering the micrometeorites in circumlunar space; (2) gamma-spectrometer for studying the gamma-radiation of the lunar surface; (3) magnetometer for refining the value for the strength of the moon’s magnetic field; (4) equipment for studying solar plasma in circumlunar space; (5) equipment for recording the infrared radiation of the lunar surface; and (6) instrumentation for studying the radiation conditions in the moon’s environs. Variations in the satellite’s orbital parameters would be used to investigate the moon’s gravitational field. (Tass, Pravda, 4/6/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
gsfc awarded Hughes Aircraft Co. a $4.275-million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for reconfiguration of three gravity-gradient Applications Technology Satellites scheduled for launch in 1967 and 1968. (nasa Release 66-299)
Photos and temperature data gathered by satellites could be used to study ice movements on Canada’s lakes and rivers, G. P. Williams, Canadian National Research Council, suggested to Canadian Press. Williams said predictions of the formation and breakup of ice would be valuable to forestry workers who used the waters to float logs, and aviators who landed on northern lakes. (Can. Press, NYT, 11/13/66, 46)
NASA’s ats i satellite took first U.S. high-quality photos of the earth from synchronous orbit altitudes. Photos showed changing cloud-cover pattern over 40 per cent of the earth’s surface, (nasa Proj. Off.)
U.S.S.R. had constructed two stations in the United Arab Republic and Mali to photograph artificial earth satellites, Tass reported. Stations had been equipped by U.S.S.R. and were being operated by Soviet, U.A.R., and Mali specialists. (Reuters, NYT, 4/16/66, 13)
dod was successfully using syncom ii comsat 12 hrs. daily and syncom iii comsat 22 hrs. daily for military communications across the Pacific, Technology Week reported, dod had assumed control of both satellites —launched by NASA July 26, 1963, and Aug. 19, 1964, respectively— July 8, 1965. (Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 9)
Eighth anniversary of launching of vanguard i, second U.S. earth satellite. (nasa Historian)
Versatility of ats 1 satellite, launched by nasa from etr Dec. 6, was demonstrated in program at GSFC. In first test, satellite relayed color TV show from Goldstone, Calif., to gsfc via Rosman, N.C., ground station. In second test, voice signals transmitted from gsfc to Goldstone and beamed by dish antenna to satellite were successfully relayed to three aircraft in flight, demonstrating publicly for the first time that 50,000-mi. earth-to-space circuit could be used with existing airline radio equipment in vhf range. Concurrent with these tests, satellite transmitted high-quality photos of weather over eastern Asia, Pacific Ocean, and western U.S. It had begun relaying photos Dec. 9. nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the press ats I was "a major step forward” toward practical satellites and would have "an impact on everyone in the world.” (Clark, NYT, 12/14/66, 38; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/14/66, A4; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 12/14/66, A12)
Fourth earth-orbiting object [see Sept. 30] not identified "with any launching or country of origin” was reported by GSFC in Satellite Situation Report. Object apparently decayed Dec. 30. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/66) During December: nrc’s Space Science Board was studying possible harmful effects to astronomy and other sciences of proposed NASA project to orbit large reflecting mirror that could illuminate land masses at night, NAS announced. NASA’s support for the study was expressed by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell in a letter to Dr. Harry H. Hess, Chairman of nas Space Science Board: "I am gratified that the committee has promptly undertaken work on this task and am looking forward to their review for guidance with regard to the possible adverse effects of such a project.” (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 12/66, 7)
msfc had selected Boeing Co. and Westinghouse Electric Corp. for parallel feasibility studies of reflector satellite to provide illumination over land masses at night, Technology Week reported. Studies, which would be worth about $120,000 each for 90-day effort, would be made for nasa and dod. (msfc pao; Tech. Wk., 7/25/66, 16)
NASA was negotiating with RCA for $13-million cost-plus-award-fee renewal of previous contract to operate and maintain three data acquisition facilities. Renewal called for engineering and operations services for NASA’s unmanned Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), operation of weather satellite control centers at GSFC, and operation and maintenance of tracking stations at Rosman, N. C., and Fairbanks, Alaska, (nasa Release 66-202)
Prerecorded pictures of dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, transmitted from Soviet satellite cosmos CX launched Feb. 22, were shown on Moscow television. Announcement described the dogs as subjects of biological studies and said such studies "will precede every new and important step of man in space.” Tass said "the condition of the space dogs is quite excellent.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/27/66, uss-t Trans.; Pravda, 2/21/66, 6, uss-t Trans.)
Ford Foundation President McGeorge Bundy announced $ 10-million grant to show potential of educational television through a series of national programs. Series would be carried by Nation’s 125 noncommercial educational TV stations joined by coaxial cable and microwave relay for the demonstration. In a brief to be filed with fcc, Bundy defended Foundation’s Aug. 1 request for formation of nonprofit nationwide satellite system that would carry extensive schedule of educational programs financed by transmission of commercial programs. {NYT,, 12/12/66, 1, 95; Wash. Post, 12/12/66, Al, A4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/12/66, A3)
U.S.S.R.’s launch of two satellites was observed by leaders of eight Communist nations visiting U.S.S.R. for summit talks on Vietnam and Communist China. COSMOS cxxx, for continued space research, entered earth orbit with 340-km. (211-mi.) apogee; 211-km. (131-mi.) perigee; 89.9-min. period; and 65° inclination. Equipment was functioning normally. Fourth MOLNIYA i comsat, for "further testing of . . . long range twoway television and telephonic-telegraphic radio communication,” had orbital parameters of apogee, 39,700 km. (24,658 mi.); perigee, 485 km. (301 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 53 min.; and inclination, 64.9°. Equipment, including broadcasting system, orientation system, orbital correction devices, and power supply, was functioning normally. (Tass, 10/20/66)
Eighth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Despite predictions of a lifespan that would not exceed five years, satellite continued to orbit the earth every 103.9 min. Other orbital parameters, as of Jan. 15, were: apogee, 956.9 mi. (15,406 km.); perigee, 211.9 mi. (341 km.), (msfc Release 66-26)
ComSatCorp awarded a $60,000 study contract to France’s Centre National d’Etudes des Telecommunications for engineering analysis of a system of phased communications satellites operating in 12-hr. 30°-inclined orbits. It would include analysis of a 12-satellite or 15-satellite system, amount of coverage, orbit stability, launch conditions, types of communications, and other factors required to maintain a given quality of service over a five-year period. Work would be performed within 180 days. (ComSatCorp Release)
Inter-American Development Bank awarded Page Communications, Inc., $250,000 contract to "determine the most economic locations for ground stations in South America which would be linked to the satellite system, and the means of connection with local telecommunications systems.” Study would be carried out with ComSatCorp cooperation. (idb Release; Wash. Post, 4/16/66, C6)
Four sounding rockets—an Aerobee 150A, two Nike-Tomahawks, and a Nike-Apache—were launched by nasa from Wallops Station at predetermined intervals between 2:13 p.m. edt and 3:11 p.m. edt in conjunction with passage of explorer xxxii satellite. Objective of series was to correlate measurements of properties, characteristics, and conditions of upper atmosphere obtained by rocket-borne experiments with similar measurements made by EXPLORER xxxii, second U.S. Atmosphere Explorer, launched May 25. Project was conducted by gsfc under overall direction of ossa. (Wallops Release 66-45; NASA Rpt. srl)
cosmos cxv scientific satellite was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. "to continue space research,” Tass reported. Satellite was said to have an apogee of 294 km. (183 mi.); perigee of 190 km. (118 mi.); period, 89.3 min.; and inclination, 65°. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 4/20/66)
In a press conference, nimbus ii project officials at GSFC said the meteorological satellite was "exceeding all expectations” with the amount and quality of data it was returning to earth. Launched into nearly circular orbit May 15, satellite could "produce in 12 hrs. as much refined weather data as took six months to get out of earlier satellites.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/20/66, A24)
First nuclear power generator in space marked fifth anniversary. Developed by aec to supplement solar power on usn’s 175-lb. experimental navigational satellite transit iv-a, 5-lb. Snap-3 generator had traveled 724,000,000 mi. (over 25,000 times around earth). transit iv-a, launched June 29, 1961, from Cape Canaveral, became oldest operating U.S. satellite in May 1964. (aec Release J-159)
Two meteorologists from U.S. National Environmental Satellite Center were in Geneva to discuss with their Soviet counterparts a cooperative approach on gathering weather information by satellite, including information exchange about meteorological satellite design and operation, Aviation Week reported. Full review of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement was scheduled for May. (Av. Wk., 3/14/66, 25)
France was planning to build rockets bigger than the missiles now being developed for her nuclear strike force, reported an article in Air et Cosmos. One purpose was to enable France to orbit a European comsat without the help of an American-built launch vehicle. A second goal would be to provide France with advanced, solid-fuel boosters that could carry one-ton thermonuclear warheads over intercontinental distances or orbit military surveillance satellites. (Air et Cosmos, 1/21/66)
Human voice was successfully relayed via DOD’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (Idcsp) from terminal in Nhatrang, South Vietnam, to Camp Roberts, Calif. U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam would probably use military system to talk to President Johnson in times of crisis. (Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, M7)
Third molniya i communications satellite, launched into elliptical orbit by U.S.S.R. April 25, transmitted television broadcast from Vladivostok. Transmission of televised May Day celebration from Moscow to Vladivostok via satellite had been scheduled for May 1. All equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 4/28/66, 4, uss-t Trans.)
Western Union International, Inc., announced receipt of dod order for 10 Pacific satellite communications channels, permitting company to file with FCC for rate reductions on all its cable and satellite service in the Pacific area. Order and rate reductions were dependent on Fee’s approving Western Union’s previously announced request to lease and operate up to 65 satellite channels in the Pacific area, (djns, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/66, A13) E.	Anderson at Institute of Navigation meeting at U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, Kings Point, N.Y. Ships could be equipped for $2,000 to automatically obtain position fixes anywhere in the world, Anderson estimated. He believed operational system could be designed and built within two years. (NYT, 10/17/66, 60)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. signed agreement with Junkers of Munich, Germany, to "provide technical consultation, perform design work . . . and provide components” for esro’s Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite (Heos)—first to be designed and developed in Germany—to investigate charged particles in space and the effects of magnetic fields on them. Overall contract for satellite, which would be launched by nasa into elliptical orbit in late 1968, was $5.5 million, with Lockheed’s services valued at $500,000. (Lockheed Release)
U.S.S.R. had orbited an atomic clock of the ammonia type in COSMOS xcvn, launched Nov. 26,1965, a brief article in Pravda disclosed. Soviet Academician N. G. Basov, explaining possible uses of an ammonia frequency standard in a satellite, said it "permits carrying on communications with space devices, control over them, and transmission of telemetric information for very great distances. In addition, there is in this case a considerable increase in the operating precision of program timer devices and systems for determining the trajectory of the satellite’s movement.” (Av. Wk., 11/21/66, 36)
cosmos cxvi scientific satellite was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. "to continue outer space research,” Tass announced. Satellite was said to have an apogee of 478 km. (297 mi.); perigee of 294 km. (183 mi.); period, 92 min.; and inclination, 48° 25 min. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/28/66, 1, uss-t Trans.)
NASA tracking station at East Grand Forks, Minn., ceased operation after five years of space tracking. Advances in tracking technology and orbit determination had made site no longer essential for support of scientific satellites; some equipment would be sent to other stations, (nasa Release 66-117)
Validity of satellite measurements of micrometeoroid fluxes in which piezoelectric microphones had been used as detectors was challenged in Science by Carl Nilsson, Australian scientist working at Gsfc. Although these measurements had given rise to theory that earth was surrounded by dust cloud, analysis of 100 hrs. of data from NASA’s ogo II satellite revealed: (1) there had been no detectable signals from sensors that could have been caused by micrometeoroid impact; and (2) the microphone systems had been emitting noise. Nilsson concluded that in past satellite measurements, microphone noises had not been caused by micrometeoroid impact but by reaction of microphone crystals to temperature changes. (Nilsson, Science, 10/9/66, 1242-6)
tiros vii meteorological satellite had operated successfully in orbit three years, traveled more than 445,000,000 mi., and had taken 123,000 pictures of cloud formations, storms, hurricanes, and typhoons with two wide-angle vidicon TV cameras. Orbited from AMR (now etr) June 19, 1963, it tracked major hurricanes and provided information aiding Ranger, Mariner, and Gemini missions. (AP, Balt. Sun, 6/19/66
New "self-healing” solar cell believed at least 50 times more radiation resistant than conventional power supply cells had been developed by rca for gsfc. Unlike previous cells which were made of silicon and protected by transparent shields of quartz or sapphire, new cells contained small lithium additive which sealed gaps produced by bombardment of high-energy radioactive particles and reduced weight of shielding by up to 90%. gsfc physicist Milton Schach described the new cell as a "major accomplishment” and predicted its use would permit flights of over 1,000 days through center of Van Allen radiation belts. Applications were also foreseen for communications satellites, high-altitude military reconnaissance spacecraft, and missions to Jupiter, surrounded by high-energy electron radiation belt. (Wilford, NYT, 8/7/66, 40)
ComSatCorp confirmed it was developing a plan which would have all commercial users of a domestic satellite communications system— telephone and telegraph companies as well as commercial television networks—underwrite educational TV. Funds would come from a portion of anticipated savings to communications users after a domestic satellite system was established. Details of plan would be submitted to Carnegie Commission on Educational Television—a private group making study on needs of educational TV. Carnegie study—to be released in late 1966 or early 1967—was expected to be relied on when Congress considered renewal of Educational Facilities Act—due to expire in 1967-—which concerned educational TV. (WSJ, 8/30/66, 10; AP, Wash. Post, 8/30/66, D8)
nasa had extended operational lifetimes of its three Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites 12 additional months because of their successful operation. Satellites would continue to provide meteoroid data, but researchers would concentrate on studying durability of spacecraft systems and components, pegasus I was launched Feb. 16, 1965; pegasus ii, May 27, 1965; and pegasus ill, July 30, 1965. All had been scheduled to operate 18 mos. (msfc Release 66-264)
First program to provide pilots with current satellite photos adapted for their use in flight planning began at Kennedy International Airport under essa direction. Photos transmitted by essa ii and ill and nimbus ii were composited by computer into a single picture showing cloud patterns over eastern North America and the North Atlantic and analyzed by meteorologists, (essa Release)
Ufo was sighted by hundreds of people in Ohio and Pennsylvania, including two deputy sheriffs who followed it for 85 mi. usaf later attributed sightings to combination of a satellite and the planet Venus, (upi, NYT, 4/18/66, 4; Wash. Post, 4/18/66, A7; upi, NYT, 4/24/66, 95; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/23/66, A2)
ComSatCorp, on behalf of Intelsat—the international telecommunications satellite consortium—issued requests for proposals (rfp’s) for 210-lb. synchronous satellite capable of providing "airplane-to-ground-to-airplane” communications with two-way channels. Satellite would supplement high-density North Atlantic communications and "permit orderly expansion of the aeronautical service on a global basis.” (ComSatCorp Release)
At dedication of Sherman Fairchild Technology Center, Germantown, Md., plans to use Nimbus B meteorological satellite—scheduled for launch late in 1966—in elephant-tracking experiment were revealed in speech prepared for delivery by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and read in his absence by msfc pao Director, Bart J. Slattery, Jr. Satellite would home in on 25-lb. portable transponder strapped to back of an elephant. Experiment would test use of satellites to monitor wildlife, learn more about animal migration, and develop means of protecting species threatened with extinction. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/18/66, A14; Wash. Post, 10/18/66; Balt. Sun, 10/18/66)
Control of essa in meteorological satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 3 from wtr, was turned over to essa. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Columbia Univ. oceanographic research ship Vema was fixing position off the coast of Iceland by means of three usn Transit navigational satellites. This marked first civilian use of space navigation systems for oceanographic research. Primary function of satellites, launched in July 1964, was to help guide usn ships and Polaris submarines. (Wilford, NYT, 9/26/66, 41)
Proposal to produce first worldwide live telecast in June 1967 was outlined at Geneva meeting of European Broadcasting Union. ABC, CBS, and nbc news executives expressed interest in proposal but would not commit themselves until details of program, under supervision of British Broadcasting Corp., were resolved. Live television transmission around the world would be possible after ComSatCorp’s planned launching of two communications satellites in fall 1966—one over the Atlantic, the other over the Pacific. (Adams, NYT, 9/7/66)
Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div., speaking at the Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, summarized the history and development of electricity in space exploration and predicted it would play an increasingly important role in the future of the space program: "It is important to remember that the program of space exploration is still young and there is still a vast sea and many space objectives to explore and to learn about. The highest power levels used in space so far have been only a few kilowatts.. . .” Orbital research laboratories, lunar bases, broadcast satellites, and interplanetary spacecraft, he said, would require increasing levels of electric power. (Text)
In reply to March 2 invitation by fcc to submit comments on whether or not private entities should be allowed to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use, 18 organizations filed responses. Ford Foundation proposed that consideration be given to formation of a nonprofit nationwide television system—operating under Broadcasters Nonprofit Satellite Service (bns)—which would carry an extensive schedule of educational programs financed by transmission of commercial TV programs. Foundation contended fcc had power to authorize such a satellite system and that the act creating ComSatCorp had anticipated additional systems to meet unique national needs. ComSatCorp filed brief saying there was no legal basis for authorizing private organizations to establish special-purpose communications satellite systems for domestic use and that it would be in the public interest to assign ComSatCorp a monopoly on all such systems. Opinion was accompanied by full technical proposal for multi-use, high-capacity, four-satellite system for domestic distribution of TV, voice, and data signals that would be operational by 1970 at estimated cost of between $110 and $126 million. at&t argued it would be against "expressed national policy” to authorize satellite systems outside the framework of commercial communications carriers and urged fcc "to conclude in this finding that there can be no authorization of private satellite systems.” Carnegie Commission on Educational Television said it was encouraging a study of a comsat system that would be specifically designed for noncommercial television. While conceding that national satellites might be advantageous in some cases, Carnegie Commission warned that such a system presented problems of "educational monopoly and centralized control of instructional and other material.” fcc was requested to take no definitive action until Carnegie’s forthcoming report on educational television was published in late 1966 or early i967. Briefs of broadcasting industry cited urgency for domestic satellite service to cut costs of distributing television and radio programs. This cost reduction for the three networks—cbs, abc, and nbc—was estimated at approximately $50 million a year, nbc said a determination as to how this satellite service should be obtained could not be made in the abstract but "would depend on ... a comparison of the respective merits of specific proposals.” National Assn, of Manufacturers told fcc that manufacturing community should have full freedom of choice either to lease channels from ComSatCorp directly or establish private systems. (CR, 8/2/66, 17131-3; Gould, NYT, 8/2/66, 1, 18; Av. Wk„ 8/8/66, 27-8)
Skin from three Soviet researchers had been orbited in special sterilized bottles onboard lambda satellite Aug. 19, 1960, and successfully grafted back three days later to test effects of space travel, Trud reported. Experiment had convinced Soviet scientists that human organisms would not be dangerously affected by cosmic rays. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/15/66, El) First of three spacecraft in NASA’s Biosatellite program, 936.5-lb. biosatellite I carried 13 biological experiments to study physiological effects of weightlessness at three different levels: (1) growth and form of entire plants and animals; (2) structure and growth of cells and tissues; and (3) basic biochemistry of the cell. Mission also studied effects of radiation on organisms in weightless environment. Biosatellite program was managed by arc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-312; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, A3; AP, NYT, 12/18/66, 86; upi, NYT, 12/19/66, 66)
Tass reported that detailed chart of earth’s magnetic field which would enable cosmonauts to determine radiation conditions in earth’s environs had been compiled by scientists using data from Cosmos satellites. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/25/66, A3)
President Johnson announced U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached agreement on space law treaty under consideration by U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space since May 7. Calling agreement "the most important arms control development since the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963,” the President said he would seek fast Senate approval so U.S. would be first nation to ratify it. Primary provisions: (1) moon and other celestial bodies should be free for exploration, use, and scientific research to all countries and international organizations exclusively for peaceful purposes; (2) no country should be permitted a claim of sovereignty or appropriation; (3) no country should be permitted to place weapons of mass destruction, establish military bases, or conduct military activities on moon and celestial bodies; (4) all outer space activities would be subject to international law and should be reported to U.N. Secretary General; (5) cooperative efforts should be made to avoid harmful contamination, conduct scientific research, and assist all astronauts in need of aid; and (6) all stations, installations, and space vehicles on moon and other celestial bodies should be open to other countries on reciprocity basis. Use of icbm’s, reconnaissance satellites, and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) were not affected. Treaty would be considered by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19. (Frankel, NYT, 12/9/66, 1,18C; Gwertzman, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/66, Al; Pres. Doc., 12/12/66, 1781-2; Roberts, Wash. Post, 12/9/66, Al, A8, A10; NYT, 12/20/66, 6)
Reliable sources said France would build her own "Saros” comsat system to avoid U.S. domination in the field, upi reported. Decision stemmed from realization that if France did not act soon, the Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde would have to be flight-controlled by U.S. satellite when it entered service within the next decade, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/6/66)
Small semi-pressure weather balloon designed to drift indefinitely entered its fourth orbit of the earth, establishing world’s record for flight duration, reported Walter Sullivan in the New York Times. Balloon was one of a series launched March 30 from Christchurch, New Zealand, as part of Southern Hemisphere experiment to examine feasibility of Global Horizontal Sounding Technique (Ghost). Ghost—plan to use satellites to locate and read out information from approximately 10,000 balloons floating around earth at constant altitudes—would express state of entire earth’s atmosphere in numbers which would then be processed by computer to achieve reliable forecasts for two weeks ahead. Participants in Ghost project were National Center of Atmospheric Research, essa, and New Zealand Weather Service. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/5/66, 16)
nimbus ii meteorological satellite, launched by nasa May 15, completed primary test objective of two months (800 orbits) continuous operation; all subsystems were operating according to plan. The 912-lb., lO-ft.-tall satellite had traveled more than 20 million mi., taken more than 150,000 pictures, and received more than 23,000 commands from ground controllers. nimbus ii was now being readied for extensive infrared photo coverage of hurricane breeding areas in Atlantic Ocean, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-187; Marshall Star, 7/27/66, 3)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CLXIV. Orbital parameters: apogee, 320 km (199 mi); perigee, 202 km (126 mi) ; period, 89.5 min; and inclination, 65.7°. Satellite reentered June 14. (AP, NYT, 6/9/67,3; gsfc SSR, 6/15/67)
Development of an advanced direct sensing system for the Nimbus-D Meteorological Satellite, scheduled for launching in 1970, was subject of NASA contract awarded to Radiation Inc., Melbourne, Fla. Interrogation Recording and Location System (irls) would involve development of a satellite-borne device and remote platform electronics to obtain measurements of atmospheric and other data from fixed and free floating sensory platforms, including balloons and buoys. Work would be performed under the direction of gsfc. (nasa Release 67—247)
The likelihood of aircraft collisions and ship collisions would be reduced considerably by an advanced navigation satellite, NASA’s Eugene Ehrlich, chief of NASA’s Navigation and Traffic Control program, explained. By providing accurate position fixes, a system of such satellites also could reduce the separation distances between aircraft; automatically steer ships across oceans; warn high-flying supersonic jets of radiation dangers; guide craft around bad weather; monitor airplane systems for possible trouble; and pinpoint ditched planes or ships in distress. “The navigation satellite of 1970-1980 will be an entirely different spacecraft from the presently operational navigation satellites of the United States Navy.” The Navy orbited its first Transit navigation satellite in 1960. Attention had focused on the Navy system recently when the U.S. announced that the previously classified network would be made available to America’s civilian ships. The Navy satellites orbit at 700 miles. NASA envisioned a network of evenly spaced synchronous satellites 22,300 miles above the earth. A ground craft could he in touch with as many as six of them simultaneously for extremely accurate positioning. Mr. Ehrlich said advanced satellites “will contain a position determination capability, communications service, weather relay service and scientific sensors.” He said the Maritime Administration and advanced thinkers in the shipping field had been looking to the day of the automated ship. “The satellite-derived position information would be fed directly into the ship’s computer to keep the ship on a preset path.” Mr. Ehrlich also had said that the reduction of the present widely spaced separation standards for aircraft was estimated to be capable of saving some $46.5 million annually for the North Atlantic region alone. (B Sun, 9/18/67)	_
Two- to 12-day delivery time for letters between U.S. and Vietnam could be appreciably shortened with Satellite Mail (S-Mail) system, National Environmental Satellite Center’s J. Gordon Vaeth suggested in letter to New York Times editor. S-Mail letters would be electronically scanned and converted to radio signals that would be sent by mid-Pacific comsat relay to Vietnam where they would be reconverted and reproduced on a recorder. (NYT, 3/5/67, E9)	•
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLVII into orbit with 296-km (184-mi) apogee, 202-km (126-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.3° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered May 20. (upi, NYT, 5/14/67; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Cosmos CL was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 373-km (232-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Mar. 30. (AP, NYT, 3/24/67; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
Large antennas on satellites, missiles, aircraft, and household rooftops might soon be replaced by a tiny two- or three-ounce microcircuit device called Subminiature Integrated Antenna (sia) being developed by usaf. Broad-banded sia would have several octaves of bandwidth to cover entire VHF and uhf range; allow 50-100 times as much inflow of electrical current for sharper TV pictures; replace larger antennas that sometimes revealed presence of combat troops to the enemy; and reduce weight of future air and space vehicles by 10-500 lbs. (afsc Release 40.67)
New York Times questioned Fee’s ability to investigate adequately the organization of a domestic comsat system. “The questions faced by the Federal Communications Commission and Congress ... go far beyond the obvious ones of whether Comsat’s present monopoly in the international satellite field should be extended to the new area or whether private corporations should be empowered to launch separate systems for television or press transmission. . . . “Perhaps the most worrisome aspect of the tangle ... is the incapacity of the F.c.c. to grapple with such problems in total terms. . . . [It] has neither the research staff nor the funds to discharge its planning responsibilities with anything approaching adequacy. The country must now look to it for decisions it is ill-equipped to give on the organization of a new satellite system and on the future of noncommercial TV.” {NYT, 1/8/67, 12E)
ITT had signed contract “involving several million dollars” with Indonesian Government to build Indonesia’s first satellite communications earth station near Djakarta. Project was subject to obtaining financing under investment guarantees requested from Agency for International Development (aid), itt predicted that station would be operational within 16 mos. after finances were arranged, (djns, W Star, 6/13/67, A21)
usaf had awarded letter contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to begin Program 612, a new reconnaissance satellite system, Aerospace Technology reported. It was estimated that program would cost $350 million. (Aero Tech, 8/28/67,3)
ComSatCorp Chairman James McCormack, welcoming President Johnson’s message to Congress on communications policy, offered full cooperation “in forwarding the President’s objective of bringing high quality, dependable satellite communications to users throughout the world.” He reaffirmed support of a “global system, and the continuation and expansion of [Intelsat] as the foundation on which to build a permanent structure for this system.” (ComSatCorp Release)
ComSatCorp awarded two four-month study contracts-—one to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. for $272,000 and one to Hughes Aircraft Co. for $299,484—for research on advanced high-capacity synchronous satellites. Lockheed had proposed an inertia-wheel stabilization concept and Hughes a spin-stabilized approach for stabilizing a spacecraft in synchronous orbit. ComSatCorp had advised fcc Jan. 19 of plans to award contracts. (ComSatCorp Release)
U.S. scientists, during the next decade, would gain enough experience with meteorological satellites, sensors, and surface station networks, to complete global network for gathering and forecasting weather data, Space/ Aeronautics reported. This would require a real marriage of “the potential of the meteorological satellite and the computer. . . .” (S/A, 10/67, 76)	_	.	<
Compania Telefonica Nacionale de Espana (ctne), Spanish national telephone company, had completed 86.7-million communications satellite ground station at Buitrago (45 mi from Madrid) and would increase its capacity from 36 to 156 channels by 1972. Station had remote-control 82-ft parabolic antenna with klystron amplifier and two 10-kw transmitters to operate in 6,000-megahertz (mhz) band. Station could handle TV relays and could track satellites. (Interavia, 11/21/67, 3)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXXXVIII into earth orbit with 293-km (182-mi) apogee; 193-km (119-mi) perigee; 89.2-min period; and 65° inclination. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Jan. 27. {SBD, 1/20/67, 98; gsfc SSR, 1/31/67)
Explorer XXXII (Atmosphere Explorer B) aeronomy satellite, launched
Nearly 100,000 mourners filed past the bier of Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov in Moscow. Premier Aleksey Kosygin and President Nikolay V. Podgomy briefly joined an honor guard of soldiers near the bier. (Anderson, NYT, 4/26/67, 3; upi, W Post, 4/26/67, A16) April 26: Italy’s San Marco II (San Marco B) scientific satellite was successfully launched from Mobile Launcher in the Indian Ocean off coast of Kenya, Africa. Four-stage NASA Scout launch vehicle boosted satellite
NASA turned on the last of 11 experiments onboard Explorer XXXIV satellite, launched from wtr May 24. Data from experiments, designed to measure solar and galactic rays, were being transmitted, and equipment continued to operate satisfactorily, (nasa Release 67-144)
Cosmos CLXVII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 286-km (178-mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite reentered June 25. (SBD, 6/20/ 67, 280; gsfc SSR, 6/30/67)
Advanced Defense Satellite Communications Project (adscp) currently being revised by dod was expected to reach capacity of 100-200 voice grade circuits, according to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Aviation Week reported. In letter to Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) McNamara said that capacity expansion was being made in accordance with recommendations by House Government Operations Committee’s Subcommittee on Military Operations. (Committee Off.; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 12)
In its fourth year of full operation ESRO was entering a more expensive and ambitious phase and consequently was encountering financial, political, and organizational difficulties, John Walsh reported in Science. esro was currently appraising its eight-year program and seeking ways to coordinate its activities with ELDO, European Conference on Communications Satellites (gets), and new European Space Conference. According to 1962 convention which became effective in 1964, esro was to have launched 300 sounding rockets and 10-12 satellites within eight years under $300-million budget. Although esro council was empowered to adjust budget authorization in response to major scientific and technical developments, it lacked unanimity necessary for change. As a result, Walsh noted, scheduled number of satellites—including $170-million Large Astronomical Satellite (las)—would probably not be launched. Expenditures for buildings and equipment for esro’s new four-station satellite tracking, telemetry, and telecommand network, and its five main research installations had been particularly heavy. European Space Technology Center (estec), for example, responsible for applied research and payload development, had a 456-man staff—nearly half of total esro staff—which was expected to reach 1,000 by the end of 1967.	In addition to financial problems caused by expansion, Walsh said, esro had to overcome a sensitivity to what national aerospace industries would get back in relation to national contributions, differences over selection of projects, and lack of unity and coordinated effort. Differences of opinion between larger countries such as U.K., Germany, and France, which contributed 23.13%, 24.31%, and 20.17%, respectively, to esro budget, and smaller countries such as Denmark, which contributed 2.15%, had to be resolved before a real sense of purpose could be acquired, Walsh said, “esro until now has been primarily an agency providing technical services and support for university scientists who prepare actual experiments. As experiments grow more complex, more work will be done in esro labs and by industry,” and new dimensions would be added to its tasks. (Walsh, Science, 10/13/67, 242-4)
NASA selected RCA to negotiate $38-million contract to maintain and operate portions of the Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (ST ad an) at Rosman, N.C., and Fairbanks, Alaska, stadan sites, and at gsfc control centers for individual spacecraft. Effective Oct. 1 for three-year period with NASA options for two one-year extensions, contract covered actual cost-plus-incentive award based on performance, (nasa Release 67—142)
U.S. and Australia were engaged in a joint program to build a highly technical installation in the Australian desert to intercept information transmitted by Soviet reconnaissance satellites, UPl reported. On Aug. 11, DOD statement said only that U.S. was “cooperating with the Australian government in a space defense research project.” U.S. officials admitted privately, however, that project was a “ferret” installation to detect radar, electromagnetic radiation, and other electronic impulses emanating from Soviet satellites, (upi, W Star, 8/12/67)
The possibility of using communications satellites to help expedite bordercrossing formalities on international flights was considered by Air Transport Assn.’s Facilitation Committee meeting in Ponce, Puerto Rico. It was suggested that computers, working with numerical codes and aided by comsats, could file necessary papers on an aircraft’s cargo and passengers from point of departure, thereby facilitating clearances on arrival in the U.S. (NYT, 3/15/67,78M)
nasa selected Bendix Field Engineering Co. for negotiations on 121million contract to provide maintenance and operations services at two U.S. and four foreign Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan) sites, and at nasa Communications Center and Network Test and Training Facility, both at GSFC. Effective Oct. 1 for three-year period with nasa options for two one-year extensions, contract covered actual cost-plus-incentive award based on performance. It completed maintenance and operations arrangements for stadan. (nasa Release 67-148)
Cosmos CLX111 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 593-km (368-mi) apogee, 255-km (158-mi) perigee, 93.1-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Instruments performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Oct. 11.	(upi, NYT, 6/6/67,3; gsfc SSR, 10/15/67)
Seven communications companies signed agreement for joint ownership of three existing ComSatCorp-owned earth stations and three new high-capacity stations for expanded international commercial satellite communications. The companies: ComSatCorp; at&t; Hawaiian Telephone Co., itt World Communications, Inc.; ITT Cable and Radio, Inc.-Puerto Rico; rca Communications, Inc.; and Western Union International, Inc. Agreement established a policy-making committee composed of company representatives, provided for sharing of operating costs and capital, and described ComSatCorp’s role as manager. It was filed with FCC in accordance with Dec. 7, 1966, order for joint ownership. (ComSatCorp Release)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXLVII into orbit with 317-km (197-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 21 (upi, NYT, 3/14/67,3; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
President Johnson transmitted his annual Report to the Congress on United States Aeronautics and Space Activities. He wrote in covering letter: “America’s space and aeronautics programs made brilliant progress in 1966. We developed our equipment and refined our knowledge to bring travel and exploration beyond earth’s atmosphere measurably closer. And we played a major part in preparing for the peaceful use of outer space. . . .” The President cited accomplishments of nasa’s Gemini, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor programs and noted that during 1966 U.S. had put into earth orbit or escape missions 100 spacecraft—“a record number of successful launches for the period. We launched weather satellites, communications satellites and orbiting observatories. . . . “These accomplishments—and the promise of more to come—are the fruits of the greatest concerted effort ever undertaken by any nation to advance human knowledge and activity. Space, so recently a mystery, now affects and benefits the lives of all Americans. . . In separate chapter, National Aeronautics and Space Council (nasc) said that although U.S. continued to lead space technology competition in number and variety of successful missions, “USSR maintains its lead in weight of payloads orbited. . . . Certainly the hiatus in Soviet manned space activity during 1966 is no basis for complacency on our part as their preparations for future flights appear to be ambitious and the resources being devoted to space competence and performance are absolutely and relatively impressive.” Dept, of State said it was pleased to be able to forward Surveyor I and Lunar Orbiter I photos to missions abroad for appraisal by foreign scientists. It also said foreign reaction to receiving cloud-cover photos from U.S. satellites in Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) system had been “encouraging.” (Text)
Milwaukee Journal editorial on space law treaty signed Jan. 27: “What’s left unsaid in the new space treaty may be as important to world peace as what the treaty says. The treaty . . . prohibits stationing nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction in space ... [but] -makes no reference to use of spacecraft for military reconnaissance. “Spy satellites already in orbit can detect activity on earth in unbelieving detail. Even more sophisticated satellites are 'being developed. . . . Ground inspection, a barrier to nuclear control agreements, is therefore less important and airplane reconnaissance, which has strained Soviet-American relations, is unnecessary__ “Reconnaissance satellites orbiting above may thus reduce the chance of war below.” (MI, 3/6/67,10)
ComSatCorp’s annual report to its shareholders summarized accomplishments of 1966: “Satellite service brought a new era of communications to the Pacific area. Live transpacific television and other traffic was transmitted by the first of the intelsat n series of satellites even though the satellite did not achieve synchronous orbit as intended. A second intelsat ii satellite was successfully emplaced in synchronous orbit and began regular, 24-hour commercial service over the Pacific, handling telephone, teletype, data, facsimile and television. . . .” Report also revealed that Intelsat’s Interim Committee had selected synchronous orbit configuration for basic global system, substantially reducing the number of satellites necessary for global coverage and the complexity of earth stations. Selection was made “after high-quality capability of synchronous satellites was established by the performance of Early Bird.” (Text)
France announced plans to launch her fourth satellite from Hammaguir Range Feb. 3 to test tracking device based on the use of laser beams. (upi, WJT, 1/23/67,10; upi, P EB, 1/23/67)
Editorial comment on domestic satellite system controversy [see April 1,3]. New York Times: “The Ford Foundation and Communications Satellite Corporation are at odds about how best to set up a domestic satellite system that would carry educational television. Neither side, it appears, has all the answers. Ford is right to question Comsat’s demand to run a domestic satellite system . . . [but] Ford’s own plan for creating a new educational network is also unsatisfactory. It wants to give the job on a trial basis to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which has enough problems with its present over-ambitious objectives and should not have its energies diverted or its resources increased for anything new. Ford’s suggestion that savings in communications charges made by the commercial networks should be used to finance educational TV has an inherent disadvantage in that the amount of savings would be inadequate to do a worthwhile job. . . . These differences in approach should not be allowed to hold up development of noncommercial network. The thing to do is to choose what is best from both plans.” {NYT, 4/6/67, 36) Washington Post: “The issue is more than just a squabble over Comsat’s request. The Ford Foundation has proposed that the Nation establish more than one domestic satellite system, with one system reserved exclusively for television, both commercial and public. Comsat maintains that one system can do the entire job of communications adequately and will save large sums of money. . . . Given the complexities of the problem, and the need that it be solved, hand-in-hand with the general question of how public television is to be financed, we think Ford’s alternative is advisable. . . . nasa has the capabilities to do the job and would be involved, anyway, in putting Comsat’s satellite into orbit. This solution would leave all avenues open, for nasa is highly unlikely to become the permanent operator and could recoup its expenditures by selling the equipment and stations to the eventual operator.” (W Post, 4/6/67)
Hughes Aircraft Co. had completed negotiations with the government of Brazil on a $3.8-million contract for construction of a comsat earth station at Itaborai, near Rio de Janeiro. Brazilian Telecommunications Co. (embratel) would spend an additional $1 million or more for site preparation and buildings. Station, which would initially handle TV and 120 two-way telephone conversations via Intelsat satellites over the Atlantic, would be completed within one year. (Hughes Release; Montgomery, NYT, 12/22/67,63)
Reduced television and telephone rates between U.S. and Europe became effective when Intelsat II-C comsat entered commercial service. New rates, which covered only the leasing of channels to authorized communications common carriers operating in the Atlantic, applied to both Early Bird I and Intelsat II-C. Monthly charge for one leased voice channel was reduced from $4,200 for 16-hr daily service to $3,800 for 24-hr service. Rates for one-way black-and-white television in the Atlantic area were $1,100 for first 10 min and $30 for each additional minute per half channel. New rates for color TV reduced existing 150% of black-and-white charge to 125% of black-and-white rate. All rates were based on providing voice-grade or TV half-channel service from a U.S. earth station to an appropriate satellite and did not cover charges for communication links from satellite to an overseas earth station. (Com-SatCorp Release)
Report that Communist China would launch a “space vessel” in 1967 appeared in Red Flag, newspaper of the Red Guard of the Peking Aeronautical Institute. U.S. experts had been crediting Communist China with capability to launch a satellite since her successful guided missile nuclear weapon test Oct. 27,1966. (NYT, 1/22/67, A4)
President Johnson submitted his FY 1968 Budget Request to Congress. Total space budget recommended was $7,242 billion. Of this sum, nasa would receive $5,050 billion; dod, $1,998 billion; AEC, $151.6 million; essa, $34.8 million; U.S. Geological Survey, $4.8 million; Agricultural Research Service, $.4 million; and nsf, $2.8 million. NASA FY 1968 budget would keep Project Apollo on schedule and provide major hardware funding for several new programs: (1) $454.7 million for Apollo Applications (aa) ; (2) $71.5 million for Voyager; (3)	$68.9 million for Mariner to provide for Mariner/Mars 1971 program; (4) $2 million for five Sunblazer missions to study solar corona; (5)	$35.5 million for Applications Technology Satellite (ats) to provide new configuration with large directable antenna; and (6) $2.3 million for Voice Broadcast Satellite. Funding for aeronautics research almost doubled from $35.9 million in FY 1967 to $66.8 million with most of increase attributable to increased study of X-15 and XB-70 aircraft, hypersonic ramjet, aircraft noise reduction, delta X-15 aircraft, and sst. Programs terminated or deferred by FY 1968 budget included Jupiter probe, Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter (no follow-on funds), large solid motor project, Atlas-Agena combination, and new launch vehicle development. $b0-$100 million were placed in President’s Contingency Fund pending decision on development of Nerva nuclear propulsion system. Major portions of dod’s space budget would be spent on: (1) Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol)—$430 million; (2) Titan III—C launch vehicle; and (3) military comsats. Most of essa’s funds would support increased activity on satellite sensors'and systems in support of World Weather Watch and improved techniques for weather forecasts, river and flood prediction, and other warning services. (Text, NYT, 1/25/67, 20-23; Tech Wk, 1/30/67, 14-33; Av Wk, 1/30/67, 23-38)
RCA announced it had received $38-million NASA contract [see June 2] to maintain and operate portions of the Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan). {WSJ, 1/11/61, 3)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at colloquium on “Urban Government in the Decade Ahead,” at Fels Institute of Local and State Government, Pennsylvania Univ., discussed urban American goals and the urban society: “What can one say about the use of new scientific approaches for governing such a complex [society] ?” Referring to earth-orbiting spacecraft achieving dynamic equilibrium in their mastery of space, he asked if the “ability of the human mind” could translate this concept of dynamic equilibrium into an entirely new way of thinking. Webb stated: “Here I believe we do have something to learn from the perspective the earth satellite gives us [and] if we continue to expose this kind of overview to the largest possible number of able minds, there can be little doubt that new knowledge, new capability, new perception of worthwhile and quite specific goals will emerge.” He added: “. . . I believe that what the space frontier opened up in 1957 is the kind of frontier on which pioneers can experiment and learn to use many facets of modern technology here on earth—here in America’s cities. In urban America, as elsewhere, men need the constant development of new concepts of reality and the inspiration that comes from a chance to better know this city and this universe in which we live.” (Text)
ComSatCorp announcement summarized commercial satellite communications in operation around the world: Early Bird I (intelsat i series) launched April 6, 1965, and Atlantic II (intelsat ii series) launched March 22, 1967, linking North America and Europe; and Lani Bird II (intelsat ii series) launched Jan. 11, 1967, linking U.S. and Hawaii, Japan, and Australia. Fabrication had been started in 1966 on advanced satellites in intelsat m series that would have five times the communications capability of Early Bird I. ComSatCorp reported that these latest satellites would be launched beginning in 1968 to expand communications system to global capability. As to ground facilities, 14 earth stations were now operating in countries with more than 40 planned for by the end of 1969. (ComSatCorp Release)
President Johnson signed Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 (P.L. 90-129) which would provide new funds for broadcast facilities to give “a wider and . . . stronger voice to educational radio and TV; launch major study of TV’s use in Nation’s classrooms and potential use throughout the world; and create Corporation of Public Broadcasting to assist stations and producers who airn for the best in broadcasting good music, . . . exciting plays, and . . . reports on the whole fascinating range of human activity.” He indicated that he had asked Dr. Milton Eisenhower, Johns Hopkins Univ., and Dr. James Killian, mit, to serve as members of Corporation’s board of directors. He explained that the Corporation would get partial support from Government but “it will be carefully guarded from . . . control.” The President said: “I believe the time has come to stake another claim in the name of all the people, stake a claim based upon the combined resources of communications. I believe the time has come to enlist the computer and the satellite, as well as television and radio and to enlist them in the cause of education. So I think we must consider new ways to build a great network for knowledge—not just a broadcast system, but one that employs every means of sending and of storing information that the individual can use.” {PD, 11/13/67,1530-2)
Soviet satellites were studying solar x-ray sources in an effort to protect cosmonauts from deadly radiation storms, according to Pravda. Cosmos CLXVI (launched July 17) and Electron II (launched Jan. 30, 1964) had gathered “extensive information” about x-ray sources and had discovered that “in principle, by recording an x-ray flare, it is possible to warn cosmonauts of die approach of radiation danger . . . [and] enable spaceship crews to' take necessary protective measures.” (upi, NYT, 10/3/67, 2)
Explorer XXVII and Vanguard II had been among the 30-40 artificial satellites to be photographed on a typical night by the three-ton light-gatherer camera at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Debre Zeit tracking station in Ethiopia. Robert Citron, station manager, described the operation as an “extremely accurate way of measuring distances with the use of geodetic satellites,” in a planned program extending into 1972. Debre Zeit, functioning as hub of 12 similar stations in India, Japan, Patagonia, Sj>ain, Brazil, and South Africa, measured earth’s size and shape, gravitational pull variations, and atmospheric density changes. Planned progress would include measuring shape of world “down to 33 feet,” according to Citron. He explained: “There is a widely accepted theory that the earth’s land masses are drifting. In particular, the African continent is said to be drifting away from the Asian land masses.” By using planned measuring methods with geodetic satellites, Citron hoped to explore the truth of the theory and measure the drift should the theory be true. (Reuters, NYT, 11/7/67, 36)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXXIII into orbit with 212-km (132-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 49° inclination. Equipment and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered same day. (upi, NYT, 10/20/67,40; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
Cosmos CLXXV I was launched into orbit with 1,581-km (982-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.9° inclination. Soviet Union had successfully launched its second unmanned satellite in three days, according to Tass. (NYT, 9/14/67; gsfc SSR, 9/15/67) to get the plane in the air before the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution on Nov. 7. A visiting British aviation delegation saw the incomplete Tu-144 prototype on Sept. 12 and was told by its builders that it would fly in the first quarter of next year at the earliest. Soviet Deputy Minister of Civil Aviation, Leonid Zheludev, said “we need to test it very well, and we cannot say when it will be put into operation on civilian passenger flights.” The British-French supersonic Concorde, similar in delta-wing shape and in projected performance to the Tu-144, was scheduled to make its first flight by February 28,1968, and go into passenger service in 1971. (AP, W Star, 9/13/67; AP, W Post, 9/16/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLIII into orbit with 291-km (181-mi) apogee; 202-km (126-mi) perigee; 89.3-min period; and 64.6° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Apr. 12. {Tech Wk, 4/10/67; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
U.S. public and communications users would be deprived of “early attainable benefits” if ComSatCorp’s proposed pilot program for domestic satellite services were delayed, ComSatCorp stated. “In the end, a pilot-scale demonstration is essential, and nothing is gained by postponing for over a year the planning and building of the demonstration model,” James McCormack, ComSatCorp’s chairman said. Comments had been filed before the fcc in the pending domestic satellite case, in reply to the Ford Foundation, which had asked fcc on Sept. 18 to withhold approval of ComSatCorp’s pilot program. ComSatCorp argued that valuable experience could be gained by implementation of the pilot program, that this would supplement, not hinder, the work of the Task Force appointed recently by President Johnson to develop national telecommunications policy. Mr. McCormack had said the pilot program would provide vital experience for voice, broadcast, data, and the press in the economical utilization of high-capacity satellite and earth station facilities. (ComSatCorp Release 67-47)
Second phase of nato’s proposed comsat project (NATo/Satcom) [see July 9] was being delayed by dispute over which countries would develop satellite systems, Aviation Week reported. Several member countries reportedly opposed use of U.S.-supplied, Philco-Ford Co. Skynet satellites because it would eliminate participation by European avionics industry and give U.S. dominant role. Satcom officials were considering alternate plans in the event that agreement on original Phase II proposal could not be reached: (1) delaying satellite development until Phase III to allow sufficient time to reach agreement on the work-sharing formula; or (2) dropping satellite development from Phase II and constructing a ground station network compatible with dod’s idcsp satellites which were being used temporarily during initial . test phase. (Av Wk, 8/7/67,28)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXVIII into orbit with 310-km (193-mi) apogee, 137-km (85-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 50° inclination. Satellite, announced as part of a program of space research, reentered on same day it was launched, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67)
Cosmos CXLIII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 302km (188-mi) apogee, 204-km (127-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65° inclination. All equipment was functioning normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 7. (Tech Wk, 3/6/67, 15; gsfc SSR, 3/15/67)
First contract for purchase from NASA of launch services for a foreign satellite was signed by nasa and esro in accordance with Dec. 30, 1966, Memorandum of Understanding on reimbursable launchings. Under contract, esro would purchase a Delta launch vehicle from NASA to launch its Heos-A interplanetary physics satellite from etr in late 1968. The
AT&T’s letter respondipg to Fee inquiry on need for future communication facilities in Atlantic basin area urged construction of $70.4-million underwater communication cable to southern Europe by 1970’s end. It said completion of cable would accommodate rapid growth in transatlantic calls and provide balance between satellite and cable links [see Oct. 4]. ComSatCorp and international telegraph carriers also had received Oct. 4 fcc inquiry, (upi, NYT, 10/31/67,65)
GSFC engineers had successfully used an electric “screwdriver” to restore power to Explorer XXXIII satellite, in orbit 252,900 mi from earth, saving the spacecraft from an almost certain power blackout. Emergency repair—believed to be the most distant satellite “fix” ever accomplished—was conducted via Rosman, N.C., tracking station. Engineers turned off the spacecraft transmitter so that an increased power surge through the other electronic systems eliminated the suspected short circuit, (nasa Release 67-5)
Japanese defense specialists had expected the first Red Chinese test of an intercontinental missile by the end of this year, reported Washington Star. Before they would test a full-scale missile, Chinese would test-fire the first stage of missile. This could come at any time. However, Prof. Tetsushi Okamoto of Tokyo Institute of Technology believed that Peking regime would first launch a satellite, probably on Oct. 1. Fear of China’s progress toward a system that could deliver a nuclear bomb lay behind Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s Sept. 18 announcement that U.S. would begin production of a limited antiballistic missile system designed to guard against a Chinese attack. China’s icbm was expected to be fired from a site at Shwangchengtse, north of Chiuchuan in Lan-chow, central China. (Axelbank, W Star, 9/20/67)
Cosmos CLXXX was launched into orbit with 350-km (218-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 72.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 4. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 9/28/67, 3; gsfc SSR, 10/15/67)
First color photos of the full earth (full disc) had been taken by DOD satellite Dodge, launched July 1 and designed to use 10 extendable booms for stabilizing satellite by earth’s gravitational force. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, under contract to Navy’s Air Systems Command, used a gravity gradient stabilization method and nearsynchronous orbit to point Dodge always in right direction and to keep it within line of sight of northeastern U.S. 5 days out of every 12. Slow-scan TV systems aboard Dodge obtained TV images which were transmitted to earth station; color images were obtained by successive exposure of vidicon tube through blue, green, and red filters. The two TV cameras also observed fluctuations of satellite from vertical and studied solar pressure effect on satellite’s booms, (dod Fact Sheet)
U.S.S.R.’s intensified study of near-earth environment indicated their scientists planned long-duration manned orbital flights, reported Aviation Week. Two investigations were cited: Cosmos CLXVI, launched June 16, in near-earth radiation study for protection of future cosmonauts in orbit during high sunspot activity; and “vertical cosmic probe,” reaching altitude of 2,734 mi on study of upper atmospheric layers, ionosphere, and near-earth space. The “vertical cosmic probe,” launched Oct. 12, provided Soviets with information on electron and positive ion concentrations, general intensity of cosmic rays, and radiation doses through various types of protection during flight within radiation belts. Cosmos CLXVI satellite provided solar flare data for continuous three months. Similar to these Soviet studies were those conducted using NASA’s Oso IV (launched Oct. 18), which would monitor sun so scientists could better determine how phenomena such as radio “blackout” and weather on earth were affected by solar activity. (Av Wk, 10/23/67, 27-8; NASA Release 67-273)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXVI into orbit with 578-km (359-mi) apogee; 283-km (175-mi) perigee; 92.9-min period; and 48.4° inclination. Instruments performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Oct. 25. (upi, W News, 6/16/67; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
nasa’s Mariner IV (launched Nov. 28, 1964) and Mariner V (launched June 14) satellites drew into a unique “solar system lineup” which would enable Jpl scientists to obtain their first three-point measurements of solar plasma and space magnetism. Orbiting about 70 million mi apart on a direct line from the sun, with earth approximately in the middle, satellites were expected to remain in about the same position relative to each other until Oct. 10. Positions would enable JPL to compare the densities and velocities of solar rays simultaneously from three points in space—two satellites and earth, (jpl Release; Wilford, NYT, 8/13/67,54)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CLXXXI into orbit with 863-km (536-mi) apogee, 668-km (415-mi) perigee, 101.1-min period, and 99.16° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 18. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C comsat successfully relayed test signals over the Atlantic between ground stations at Andover, Me., and the Canary and Ascension Islands. Satellite was scheduled to enter commercial service April 6. (AP, NYT, 3/29/67, 30)
Recent experiments by usaf scientists had proved that satellites could communicate directly—unaided by relay stations—from opposite sides of earth, AFSC announced. Experiment, in which HF and VHF signals were transmitted between two satellites launched Nov. 3, 1966, confirmed theory that ionosphere resembled a “whispering gallery” in which sound waves traveled along a curved area with only minor volume loss, (afsc Release 116.67)
Fred Friendly, Columbia University professor and consultant to Ford Foundation, delivering Granada Lecture in London, warned that communications satellites’ promise of international “common market” of high-quality TV was threatened by commercial and government avarice. In U.S., he said, TV “can make so much'money doing its worst, it cannot afford to do its best.” Consequence had been that early promise of quality programs had been lost while educational TV, which could fill breach, had been “under-funded, undernourished and under-observed.” But even in nations where TV was nationalized, tendency would be for governments to seek profits from it to offset other communications deficits, he said. Thus, he argued, “a promising world village, linked by satellites,” could be turned into “an electronic slum,” because ambitious corporations and separate governments insisted on going their own ways, concerned more with earnings, national appetites, and images than with what their satellite systems carried. What was required, he suggested, was “an electronic Magna Charta” guaranteeing rights of public to quality TV. (Friendly, W Post, 10/25/67, D14)
Launch of esro’s scientific satellite Esro II from wtr was postponed from
At nasa request, nas would conduct Space Applications Summer Study at Woods Hole, Mass., during summer 1967 and 1968 to determine how orbiting satellites could best be used for practical benefits on earth. Participants would review present U.S. programs and plans for peaceful applications of earth satellites; consider and evaluate probable future uses of satellites in a variety of areas; and provide advice on nature and scope of r&d programs necessary to achieve the possibilities. The 1967 session would “provide first judgment on . . . most immediately useful applications of satellites.” The 1968 session would reach final recommendations on future satellite uses. Lehigh Univ. President W. Deming Lewis was named chairman of the Central Review Committee, which would oversee the study. Work would be conducted within nrc’s Engineering Div. with Laser Inc., vice-president Eugene T. Booth serving as study’s executive director. (nas-NRC Release)
Cosmos CXLI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 345-km (214-mi) apogee; 210-km (130-mi) perigee; 89.8-min period; and 72.9° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Feb. 16. (upi, NYT, 2/9/67; gsfc SSR, 2/28/67)
50-lb. radio backpack that could fix a soldier’s position precisely by signals from a satellite had been developed by Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory under sponsorship of usn Air Systems Command. Backpack would represent first dry land application of usn navigation satellites to military problems. In most cases, packs would be used in pairs: a forward fire controller would receive satellite signal and relay it to another soldier equipped with a backpack at an artillery base who also would have read satellite signal. Two readings would be transmitted to computer which would instantly tell each man his precise position. Navy sources predicted mass production models of backpack, working with existing satellites, could Be in combat use in Vietnam soon. (Clark, AIT, 3/22/67,16)
Examples of air, sea, and space technology “working together as partners for the better understanding of our total environment” were cited by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, in a speech to the 2nd International Buoy Technology Symposium, Marine Technology Society, Washington, D.C. The Interrogation, Recording and Location System (irls) , developed by Goddard Space Flight Center, would demonstrate the use of a satellite to locate and determine the position of sensors, receive data from the sensor, record that data on the spacecraft, and later relay the data to ground stations. Possible terrestrial sensors are meteorological stations or buoys, oceanographic buoys, gauges for measuring the strains in the earth’s crust, drifting balloons, ice islands, or any of a wide variety of data platforms located on the surface of the earth or in its atmosphere. Seamans said, “It is quite easy to conceive how such a system could begin to solve many of the problems hindering world-wide fixed or free buoy systems for the study of currents and ocean-depth profile data.” He also noted that “photographs and images returned by such satellites as Nimbus, Tiros, and Gemini are being analyzed to assess their oceanographic value.” (Text)
Informed sources said U.S.S.R. had launched Cosmos CLXX (July 31) and Cosmos CLXXI (Aug. 8) to test new parachute system designed to avoid the malfunction blamed for the death of Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. U.S.S.R. attributed the April 24 crash-landing of Soyuz I to a tangled parachute that failed to decrease spacecraft’s speed during reentry. Both satellites had gone into orbit but had reentered the same day as launched. (AP, B Sun, 8/10/67; AP, C Sun-Times, 8/11/67)
The New York Times commented on the task force appointed by President Johnson to formulate a national communications policy [see Aug. 19]: “The . . . task force . . . has an unprecedented opportunity to break internal governmental deadlocks that stand in the way of a domestic satellite system and other needed forward steps in communications. It can do much to advance public television and to give all TV, both commercial and noncommercial, a firmer root in public service. Perhaps most important of all, it can point a path for the interconnection of international satellites so that all countries can be encouraged to see and speak to one another across the heavens. ...	' “The major challenge is to clear channels through which revolutionary new developments in communications can be used with maximum effectiveness for total human service and enlightenment. The last thing that should happen is for Congress to postpone action on President Johnson’s proposal for a Corporation of Public Broadcasting. Such a planning body should be in existence to move speedily on any sound recommendations the task force makes.” {NYT, 8/23/61,40M)
ComSatCorp would issue rfp’s in 1968 to build a 10,000-channel satellite— Intelsat IV, Electronics reported. Procurement of four or more of the satellites would have to be approved by INTELSAT, but “chances of a go-ahead look good.” ComSatCorp’s plan was based on design studies recently completed by Hughes Aircraft Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for a high-capacity, multipurpose satellite [see March 23], (Electronics, 8/21/67)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR on Scout launch vehicle. (Pres Rep 1967)
Photo of the earth in the near full phase transmitted by Lunar Orbiter V [see Aug. 5-27] was a “fraud, a fake, a piece of trickery or deceit,” Samuel Shenton, Secretary of the International Flat Earth Research Society, told newsmen in London. “Look at the photograph the satellite supposedly took. Notice those lines across the bottom of the picture. They show it’s a composite, a mock-up.” Asked why U.S. should seek to perpetrate such a deception, Shenton replied: “It’s all part of the great global earth conspiracy, and it’s a shame.” Members of the International Flat Earth Research Society believed that the earth is not only flat, but static in space. They also maintained that the theory of gravity was advanced only to support the belief that the earth spins. (AP, B Sun, 8/18/67)
U.S. bombers were being guided to targets in North Vietnam by daily meteorological photos received from Essa and Nimbus satellites, usaf announced. Detailed photos, monitored by USAf’s weather stations in Saigon and Ugon, Thailand, permitted usaf to divert aircraft to areas that were unexpectedly free from clouds. Since equipment for reception was relatively inexpensive, usaf officials speculated that North Vietnamese might also be receiving the photos and using them for defense planning. (AP, NYT, 4/14/67, 3)
Full size dynamic model of Canadian Defence Research Board’s ISIS—A— third ionosphere satellite for Canada—had successfully completed series of vibration tests at gsfc. Joint Canadian/U.S. program of International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies would include isis-b and isis-c during the 1960s as solar activity would pass through its intensity, causing a variety of changes in ionosphere and outer space. Launch of ISIS—A was planned for early 1968 [see Mar. 23], Like its predecessors (Alouettes I and II), ISIS—A would be spheroid and have 11,000 solar cells on its outer surface to power internal batteries. (S/F, 6/67, 197-8)
NASA had completed post-launch evaluation of Essa V meteorological satellite and adjudged the mission a success. Launched by NASA from WTR April 20, satellite had been turned over to essa for operation May 8. (nasa Proj Off)
Cosmos CXLV1 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 310-km (193-mi) apogee, 190-km (118-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.5° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Mar. 18. (Tech Wk, 3/20/67,13; gsfc SSR, 3/31/67)
NATO had begun to modernize its communications network by using comsats, Clyde H. Farnsworth reported in the New York Times. Initial $900,000 test phase of project had been inaugurated by Supreme Allied ■Commander in Europe Gen. Lyman L. Lemnitzer in a transmission from his headquarters in Casteau, Belgium, to Naples, Italy, via one of dod’s 15 Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (idcsp) satellites. U.S., which had proposed the NATO project, was permitting NATO to use the idcsp satellites temporarily. Following approval of the second phase of the project, $45 million—of which U.S. would pay 25%—would be spent to link 12 alliance countries via two 100-lb comsats owned by NATO and launched by usaf into synchronous orbits over the Atlantic. Two ground stations would be in U.S. and one in each NATO country except France (who had not been invited to participate in the project), Luxembourg, and Iceland. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/9/67, 17)
NASA’s Ats III, launched Nov. 5, now in 22,300-mi-altitude synchronous orbit, transmitted to NASA’s Rosman, N.C., ground station a color photograph of earth which officials described as excellent in quality. The photograph, processed at GSFC, showed entire earth’s disk and details of features as small as two or three miles in size. Ats III, third of a series of five satellites managed by OSSA, carried communication, meteorology, navigation, and spacecraft technology experiments. From its location over the equator at 47° west longitude, the spacecraft had a view of North and South America, part of Africa and Europe, and the southern part of Greenland icecap. Spacecraft’s multicolor spin-scan cloud camera obtained color contrast as well as brightness contrast, according to chief experimenter Wisconsin Univ.’s Dr. Verner E. Suomi. He gave this analysis of Ats Ill’s meteorological operations: “From a time series of pictures such as these the United States has, in effect, given South America a means to track their weather far beyond what they are able to do by conventional means. In one single photograph, the equatorial cloud-free band which was seen from Ats I [launched Dec. 6,1966] pictures in the Pacific is also evident in the Atlantic. These pictures are ideal for continuing studies from the heat budget and convective systems. The additional meteorological information in a color photograph is more subtle, but it is there. Low clouds tend to be bluer than high clouds. This has been possible even though adjustments to color balance on the ground are still underway. There are suggestions that the muddy outflow from the Amazon River in Brazil can be seen. We have not yet been able to determine whether or not the Gulf Stream water will be visible. Also, we do not have an example of the colors in the Terminator Zone (sunrise and sunset) to determine if cloud heights can be accurately positioned.” (nasa Release 67-286)
Variety of ion engines could be used in satellite stationkeeping and attitude control, and solar-powered ion engines for primary propulsion would be feasible for Voyager-class missions of early 1970s, Space/Aeronautics reported. Nuclear-powered ion propulsion was still about a decade off. (S/A, 6/67, 92)
President Johnson, in a message to Congress on communications policy, announced that he was appointing a 15-man task force headed by Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Eugene V. Rostow to formulate “a national communications policy.” Among questions the group would examine were: (1) how soon would a domestic satellite system be economically feasible? (2) should a domestic system be general purpose or specialized? and (3) should there be more than one system? Task force’s report was due in one year. The President also: (1) reaffirmed U.S. commitments made in 1962 and 1964 in support of the development of a global system of comsats “to make modern communications available to all nations”; (2) pledged U.S. support to the continuation of the intelsat consortium, saying, “We seek no domination of satellite communications to the exclusion of any other nation—or group of nations”; (3) stated that U.S. “should take no action in the establishment of a domestic [comsat] system which is incompatible with our support for a global system”; and (4) urged U.S.S.R. and the nations of Eastern Europe to join intelsat. “Here is a rare opportunity to join in an activity to bring benefits to all nations and loss to none.” He suggested there might be an eventual linkage between Soviet Molniya system and intelsat system. The President concluded: “Historians may write that the human race survived or faltered because of how well it mastered the technology of this age. “Communications satellites now permit man’s greatest gifts—sight, expression, human thoughts and ideas—to travel unfettered to any portion of our globe. The opportunity is within our grasp. We must be prepared to act.” {PD, 8/21/67, 1146-54; WSJ, 8/15/67)
Soviet northern cosmodrome, whose existence was first publicly announced at British Interplanetary Society’s November 1966 meeting following radio-tracking activities at Kettering Grammar School [see Dec. 12, 1966], had maintained steady rate of satellite launches since beginning with Cosmos satellite in March 1966. New launch site, about 100 mi south of Archangel and between towns of Yarnema and Tarasova, still had not been acknowledged by Soviet authorities. (Perry, S/F, 8/67, 274)
U.S.S.R . successfully launched two Cosmos satellites: Cosmos CLIX entered orbit with 60,600-km (37,655-mi) apogee, 380-km (236-mi) perigee, 19-hr 33-min period, and 51° inclination; Cosmos CLX entered orbit with 205-km (127-mi) apogee, 142-km (88-mi) perigee, and 49.6° inclination. Equipment on both satellites functioned normally. Cosmos CLX reentered May 18. (upi, W Star, 5/18/67, C18; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Weather photos taken by NASA’s Ats I satellite in near-synchronous orbit over the Pacific would be relayed to World Meteorological Organization (wmo) conference in Geneva April 3-28 to demonstrate new meteorological capabilities. Transmitted by satellite to Mojave, Calif., photos were traveling by land line to National Environmental Satellite Center in Suitand, Md., where they were being recorded for later transmission by ESSA surface facilities to Geneva, (nasa Release 67-77)
Cosmos CLXI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 343-km (213-mi) apogee, 205-km (127-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered May 30. (AP, W Post, 5/23/67, A9; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
Patent for a method of determining whether life exists on other planets had been granted to aeronautical engineer Albin M. Nowitzky, Stacy V. Jones reported in the New York Times. Unlike previous proposals involving distant observations, Nowitzky’s concept called for an automated spacecraft landing on a planet’s surface to make tests free from earthly contamination and influence. A soil sample would be taken, mixed with distilled water, and sterilized. Part of the resulting “nutrient” would be transferred to a test chamber, exposed to the planet’s atmosphere, and sealed, while the remaining part would be used as a “control.” Sensors in the test chamber would register any metabolic reaction, and these data would be telemetered to earth or to an orbiting satellite. (Jones, NYT, 1/1/61, 34)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites by Atlas-Agena D boosters from wtr. One satellite reentered on May 27; other reentered May 30. (upi, W Post, 5/23/67, A9; Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 5/31/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXX into orbit with 208-km (129-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, and 50° inclination. All equipment functioned normally, but satellite reentered later in the day. (SBD, 8/10/67, 202)
Ninth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, Explorer I. In defiance of the original predicted lifespan that should have ended six years ago, the satellite was circling the earth 14 times daily and had completed 43,000 orbits, (msfc Release 67-17)
usaf announced it was sending teletype messages between two aircraft flying 10,000 mi apart via a satellite in 20,000-mi-altitude earth orbit. Scheduled over six-month period, communications tests were being conducted over Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, North and South America, the polar regions, and Europe, (afsc Release 144.67)
Cosmos CLXXIX was launched into orbit with 157-km (98-mi) apogee, 141-km (88-mi) perigee, 87.3-min period, and 49° inclination. The satellite was announced as part of a program of space research; like CLXXVIII, it reentered on the same day it was orbited, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67; Pravda, 9/23/67)
Feb. 15 launch of third satellite in ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II series was postponed by NASA until mid-March to study recent failure in a Scout launch vehicle’s FW-4S motor, intelsat-ii comsats were launched by Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta boosters which used motors similar to FW-4S. (nasaRelease 67-24)
nasa’s Nimbus II meteorological satellite successfully completed one year of operation and was still transmitting useful data. Spacecraft had taken more than one million weather photos since its launch from WTR May 15, 1966. (AP, B Sun, 5/15/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXII into orbit with 280-km (174mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered June 9. (AP, W Star, 6/1/67,1; gsfc SSR, 6/15/67)
Wilbur L. Pritchard, Group Director, Communications Satellite Systems, Aerospace Corp., was appointed director of ComSatCorp’s new laboratories, scheduled for completion in Montgomery County, Md., by 1969. (ComSatCorp Release 67-35)
Luna- XII, first Soviet satellite to successfully transmit photos to earth from lunar orbit, had completed its mission and broken radio contact with ground stations, Tass announced. Satellite had been launched Oct. 22,1966. {W Post, 1/22/67, A23; upi, NYT, 1/23/67, 7)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXII into orbit with 301-km (187mi) apogee, 202-km (125-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Aug. 17. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67, 13; gsfc SSR, 8/31/67)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched two Cosmos satellites with two boosters: Cosmos CLXXXV entered orbit with 888-km (552-mi) apogee, 522-km (324-mi) perigee, 98.7-min period, and 64.1° inclination. Cosmos CLXXXV I, launched into orbit with 235-km (146-mi) apogee, 209-km (130-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.7° inclination, later docked with Cosmos CLXXXVIII. Both spacecraft performed satisfactorily. (W Post, 10/29/67, A16; SBD, 10/30/67, 320; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
ERC awarded MIT a three-year, $7.9-million contract for R&D of highperformance gyroscopes and accelerometers “to guide and control the vehicles planned for the complex aeronautical and space missions of the 1970s and 1980s.” It was anticipated that instruments would make possible systems which would navigate advanced supersonic aircraft to intercept runway landing beams without present runway aids; provide highly precise pointing references for satellites; and guide interplanetary vehicles on missions lasting one year or more, (nasa Release 67—155) 324-801 0—69-----13
NASA’s Ats II mission had been adjudged a failure “based upon review of the [spacecraft’s] assessed performance ... in its unplanned elliptical orbit,” NASA announced. Satellite, launched from etr April 5 on mission to evaluate gravity-gradient system for spacecraft stabilization, had remained in transfer orbit, tumbling uncontrollably, after Agena engines failed to ignite for second bum. All experiments were functioning, but possibility of obtaining useful data was poor, (nasa Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CXCIII. Orbital parameters: apogee, 354 km (220 mi); perigee, 203 km (127 mi); period, 89.9 min; inclination, 65.7°. Satellite reentered Dec. 3. (AP, NYT, 11/26/67, 46; gsfc SSR, 12/15/67)
In spite of unleased capacity in two commercial communications satellites now in orbit, optimism prevailed, and ComSatCorp’s entry into “global marketplace has led carriers to slash transoceanic rates,” Space/Aeronautics reported. As technical manager of intelsat, ComSatCorp had been establishing operational position in “aeronautical and domestic communications market.” (S/A, 1/67, 80)
In the year 2000, space satellites would be identifying soil, assessing crop yield, and determining the extent of disease, drought, or insects, Secretary of Agriculture Orville L. Freeman predicted at National Assn, of Science Teachers’ convention in Detroit. “While the farmers of tomorrow study reports in their air-conditioned offices, relieved at last of the physical drudgery and occupational anxiety so traditionally theirs . . . these shining space satellites, equipped with the most sophisticated remote sensing instruments will be supplying the information needed to make key decisions. “Through information gathered by the satellites, the Government will be able to make accurate predictions to guide marketing and distribution of farm products to avoid waste and local shortages and surpluses.” (Text; AP, NYT, 3/21/67,34)
Contract to develop esro’s TD-1 and TD-2, largest satellites to be designed in Europe, had been awarded to MESH consortium. European members of mesh-—Engins Matra of France, E.R.N.O. of West Germany, S.A.A.B. of Sweden, Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Limited of Great Britain—would get £8-million contract to develop the two satellites; Engins Matra would be prime contractor. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Limited and Engins Matra had jointly designed, developed, and manufactured Esro II satellite. TD-1 and TD—2 would be launched in 1970 and 1971 and would perform astrophysics missions. (S/F, 6/67, 198)
U.S.S.R. launched the meteorological satellite Cosmos CLVI into orbit with 640-km (398-mi) apogee, 586-km (364-mi) perigee, 96.9min period, and 81.19° inclination. Initial plane of orbit was shifted relative to plane of meteorological satellite Cosmos CXLIV (launched Feb. 28) by 95°. These two satellites would form experimental system called “Meteor.” Mutual positions of orbits for satellites had been chosen to permit meteorological observations at intervals of about six hours; system would obtain data on half of the earth’s surface during 24-hr period, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/67; Ten Years of Space Research in the U.S.S.R., uss-t Trans, vol. 5, no. 5, 1967)
NASA turned over Essa V meteorological satellite to ESSA for operation in accordance with NASA—Dept, of Commerce agreement. Essa V was launched from wtr by NASA April 20. (NASA Release 67-114)
Navy contract award had been made to Radio Corporation of America in letter contract for $2.0 million, for six navigation satellites. The Special Projects Office, usn would be contracting activity, (dod Release . 846-67) Performance of the spacecraft was satisfactory except for some difficulty with completely reliable response to command transmission from the ground stations and out-of-spec accelerations during the first few orbits. The spacecraft’s temperature, attitude control, and atmospheric pressure readings were normal, and few additional anomalies were experienced. Mid-air recovery of NASA’s Biosatellite II experiment capsule, by aircraft at 3:15 pm edt Sept. 9, within 15 mi of predicted impact location of 7°15'N and 162°1'W, marked a new first. Biosatellite /, which had remained in orbit for two months after the retrorocket failed, landed in the ocean near Australia following reentry Feb. 15, but was not recovered. The most important single question for Biosatellite II was whether the changes produced in organisms by radiation are slowed or hastened under weightless conditions. Biosatellite scientists had noted that early recovery had resulted in less risk to the experiments than if recovery had been delayed beyond the planned three days. Despite the delayed launch and early recovery, scientists reported only a small decrease in the expected data return from the experiments. Indications were that all programmed events in orbit, such as fixation of frog eggs, fixation and 324-801 0—60-----18	263 Before launch. 4 hours and 40 minutes of weightlessness. 12 hours and 29 minutes of weightlessness. '.4& 4*4&i<5.17 hours and 40 minutes of weightlessness. feeding of amoeba, fixation of wheat seeds, and pepper plant camera shutter opening, had worked as planned. Successful recovery of plant and animal life carried on a 45-hr journey through space by Biosatellite II was expected to provide important clues to how life forms would develop in a weightless environment or how radiation might affect future generations. Biosatellite II was under management of arc and under direction of ossa. The Delta launch vehicle was managed by gsfc. Communications and tracking were handled by NASA’s Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network, operated by gsfc. BiosateUite II was huilt by the General Electric Reentry Systems Dept. The Delta launch vehicle was built by Douglas Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-239; Av Wk, 9/18/67; AP, W Post, 9/11/67; Myler, upi, W Post, 9/15/67, 9/18/67; B Sun, 9/8/67; Yuenger, C Trib, 9/15/67)
erc awarded $99,151 to TRW Systems, Inc., and $99,370 to RCA for research on a satellite system to provide more efficient navigation and air traffic control for aircraft and ships in North Atlantic area in 1975. Both companies would conduct eight-month studies to determine best technical approach, identifying related problems and requirements. (frc Release 67-47)
Early Bird I communications satellite passed its test as a device for expediting clearance of passengers and cargo through airports when jet aircraft would be put in service in 1970. Moments after an airline flight took off from Frankfurt, Germany, for Dulles International Airport, data on passengers and cargo were sent via satellite to Government officials at Dulles so they could process the data in advance of the plane’s arrival. Officials in Frankfurt relayed facsimiles of the cargo manifest, health certificates, and Customs declaration forms of the 120 passengers. (NYT, 9/7/67)
Tiros VII, oldest U.S. meteorological satellite in operation, completed its fourth year in orbit. Designed with a three- to six-month operational lifetime, satellite had traveled 594,000,000 mi, completed 21,600 earth orbits, and taken over 124,500 photos of 50,000,000,000 sq mi of earth and its cloud cover, nasa said Tiros VII, which had tracked the major hurricanes of 1963, 1964, and 1965, was now commanded to transmit photos only occasionally. (AP, NYT, 6/18/67)
All-weather landing capability would be a requirement for sst operations because long-range sst used fuel too quickly to permit prolonged holding in airport traffic patterns, Dr. Richard M. Head, erc, told nasa Hq. press briefing on aeronautics research. He predicted that landings under zero visibility could be practical within a decade. Dr. Head also noted that, because of sun’s influence on the ionosphere, ssts with vhf radios might be subject to communications blackouts during the 1,200	mi of a transatlantic flight when they were too far from land for line-of-sight vhf reception. Use of satellites to relay communications might be a possible solution to the problem, he suggested. (Schmeck, NYT, 6/22/67, 6)
National Aeronautics and Space Council was accumulating data on various approaches to earth resources satellites with the goal of forcing competing agencies to agree on a single coordinated program for FY 1969, Aerospace Technology reported. A decision was expected by mid-September. The Depts. of Interior and Agriculture favored an operational program, but NASA believed current technology justified only an R&D approach at this time. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67,3)
U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc countries—including Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia—had agreed to conduct “a program of joint launchings of sputniks and rockets,” Evert Clark reported in the New York Times. Yugoslavia had declined admission to the group, choosing instead to join intelsat. U.S.S.R. reportedly had constructed or would construct tracking stations in Cuba, U.A.R., Mali, and “some other countries of Asia and Africa.” Since U.S.S.R.’s land mass stretched over % of earth’s circumference, U.S.S.R. had less need for tracking stations in other countries than U.S., and assigned little or no responsibility to nation where station was located. NASA, however, had bilateral agreements with more than 70 nations covering joint activities from student exchanges to satellite launches. (Clark, NYT, 12/14/67,26C)
Cosmos CLXXXVII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 210-km (131-mi) apogee, 145-km (90-mi) perigee, 87.8 min period, and 50° inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily and reentered same day. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
Cosmos CLXXXII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Orbital parameters: apogee, 355 km (221 mi); perigee, 210 km (131 mi); period, 89.9 min; and inclination, 65°. Satellite reentered Oct. 24. (NYT, 10/17/67,12; gsfc SSR, 10/31/67)
nasa approved Phase II of a Dec. 14, 1966, contract and awarded Goodyear Aerospace Corp. $650,000 to design, fabricate, and test a full-scale model of a 30-ft-dia parabolic antenna. Antenna, planned as part of experimental package on proposed second-generation Applications Technology Satellites (ATS F and G), would be used for advanced communications research, (gsfc Release G—32-67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXVIII into orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 199-km (124-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered July 12. (SBD, 7/6/67,12; gsfc SSR, 7/15/67)
Cosmos CXLVIII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Orbital parameters: apogee, 436 km (271 mi); perigee, 275 km (171 mi); period, 91.3 min; and inclination, 71°. Equipment performed satisfactorily. Satellite reentered May 7. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/28/67; GSFC SSR, 5/15/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLII, its eighth Cosmos satellite during March, to achieve record month of space launchings. Orbital parameters: apogee, 512 km (318 mi); perigee, 283 km (176 mi); period, 92.2 min; inclination, 71°. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Aug. 5. (upi, W Post, 3/26J67, A3; GSFC SSR, 8/15/67)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXXXIX into earth orbit with 210-km (130-mi) apogee; 144-km (89-mi) perigee; 87.5-min period; and 50° inclination. Equipment functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered same day. (W Post, 1/26/67, El; gsfc SSR, 1/31/67)
ComSatCorp announced NASA would launch fourth satellite in the Intelsat ii series Sept. 20. Plans called for satellite to be launched from etr into synchronous orbit over the Pacific to increase communications capability and serve as a backup against interruption of satellite communications service. (ComSatCorp Release)
Cosmos CLXXV was launched into orbit with 386-km (240-mi) apogee, 210-km (130-mi) perigee, 92.0-min period, and 72.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 19. (W Post, 9/12/67; gsfc SSR, 9/30/67)
Cosmos CLXXIII was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 528km (328-mi) apogee, 280-km (174-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 71° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Dec. 17. (upi, NYT, 8/25/67, 5; gsfc SSR, 12/31/67)
NASA and Centre National d’fitudes Spatiales (cnes) were conducting series of laser tests with five orbiting satellites—three U.S. and two French— to make precise geodetic measurements, NASA reported. In experiments, a laser beam was fired at a satellite equipped with a reflector designed to return beam to the transmitting station. Time elapsed from transmission to reception was measure of the distance between station and satellite. If satellite’s position was known by independent means or if several stations fired lasers simultaneously, it was then possible to determine distance between observing ground stations. NASA said initial tests, which began in April from stations in U.S., Europe, and North Africa, had been so successful that it might soon be possible to prove or disprove the theory of continental drift by determining the movements of continents relative to one another, (nasa Release 67-197)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXL1X into orbit with 297-km (185mi) apogee, 248-km (154-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered April 7. {Tech Wk, 3/27/67,28; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
Cosmos CLIV was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 232-km (144-mi) apogee, 186-km (116-mi) perigee, 88.5-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Apr. 10. {Tech Wk, 4/10/67; gsfc SSR, 4/15/67)
Ford Foundation and AT&T submitted briefs to fcc on domestic comsat system. Ford Foundation brief sharply criticized ComSatCorp’s plan for a domestic comsat system and asked that ComSatCorp’s April 1 request for permission to develop an experimental system be denied. “To add to Comsat’s authority the exclusive francise for a domestic communications satellite system . . . would give the corporation a world monopoly. One entity would provide all communications satellite services. One company would be responsible for developing all satellite technology. One customer would procure all satellite equipment. A monopoly of this sort would be unprecedented. . . .” Ford suggested instead that the system be developed and initially operated by NASA so that technological knowledge could be gleaned without controversy over ultimate management or ownership. NASA could later be reimbursed by the entity finally chosen to operate the system. at&t supported ComSatCorp’s proposal, suggesting the system be linked to and integrated with present ground systems. Rejecting Ford Foundation’s proposal for a separate nonprofit satellite TV broadcast corporation whose income would support noncommercial TV, at&t said that such proposals reflected “a parochial disregard for their effects on other satellite systems and terrestrial (land) microwave systems. . . . Installation of such limited systems would . . . jeopardize the existing public communications systems, both domestic and overseas, and would severely inhibit their necessary continued growth.” (Text; Gould, NYT, 4/3/67, 1; W Star, 4/4/67)
Earth resource evaluation satellites could give “. . . greatest immediate return of all space expenditures,” Space/Aeronautics reported. Applications were listed: spotting indications of petroleum and mineral deposits; providing land use maps for urban renewal, agricultural and industrial development; monitoring underground streams; checking crop and forest vigor; and monitoring pollution dynamics. (S/A, 1/67, 85)
Chairman James McCormack of ComSatCorp, speaking at annual meeting of National Assn, of Broadcasters, in Chicago, made these predictions: “With new satellites, having flexibility to permit working with several earth stations simultaneously and having increased transmission capabilities, and with improved earth stations, we are coming on better days. For a year or so, we will continue to be handicapped by a lack of ground facilities to enable the United States to work efficiently and simultaneously with more than one satellite in either the Atlantic or the Pacific [and] we will continue for a while to be embarrassed by lack of system capacity there, primarily in the earth stations, to handle occasional TV transmissions without buying back other circuits then under annual or monthly lease.” He continued: “. . . in a very few years, you will have the potential of continuous, live, world-wide TV transmission at well under one percent of your total costs.” He went on to explain: “Given the geographic coverage of the satellite, capable of being used directly from a number of points' simultaneously, and the rapid growth of all kinds of requirements for service, a single world-wide communications organization was deemed essential from the beginning. The same set of considerations would seem to indicate at least a broadly based international forum for broadcasting, an important and rather unique use of those communications.” Turning to potential world-wide benefits, he said: “The establishment of a world-wide broadcast capability, in being and operating continuously, will enable the almost casual accomplishment of some of the greatest purposes of the United States and many other nations seeking better understanding as one basis for a reasonable peaceful world. I refer in particular of course to cultural exchanges, information and education.” (Text)
ComSatCorp’s plans to launch a satellite by 1970 for relaying vhf communications from transoceanic airliners might be delayed by high costs, Electronics reported. “As far as the faa is concerned, the only issue is cost. The agency is still reeling from a Comsat proposal earlier this year pricing such communications services at $5 million per channel per year; the FAA told Comsat it was not interested at that price. To make matters worse, one faa official says current estimates from hardware makers are even higher.” (Electronics, 8/7/67)
Australia might agree to operate first joint tracking station with U.S.S.R. in Western Australia if U.S. approved, Newsweek speculated. U.S. currently operated three stations in Australia, and two more were under construction; U.S.S.R. had to maintain contact with its satellites via picket ships in the Pacific. (Newsweek, 3/6/67,18)
gsfc selected Radiation, Inc., for negotiations on a $l-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to develop Versatile Information Processor (vip) , an advanced telemetry system for the Nimbus D meteorological satellite. System would process, format, and store in the spacecraft scientific data obtained from experiments and monitor temperatures, pressures, power supply, and control system, (nasa Release 67-34)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXLII into orbit with 1,362-km (846-mi) apogee, 214-km (113-mi) perigee, 100.3-min period, and 48.4° inclination. All equipment functioned normally. Satellite reentered Jul. 6. (Tech Wk, 2/20/67,13; gsfc SSR, 7/15/67)
Soviet launch rate for recoverable Cosmos reconnaissance satellites had leveled after six-year increase, Aviation Week reported. Number launched as of mid-July 1967 was same as number launched during same period in 1966, and annual 1967 total was expected to be similar to annual 1966 total of 21. “The Russians now are launching recoverable reconnaissance satellites on the average of one every 16-17 days, each of which remains in orbit for approximately eight days. When the program began in 1962, the launch rate averaged one every 73 days and the following year the pace accelerated to an average of one every 46 days. In 1964 the figure was every 28 days, in 1965 the frequency had increased to an average of one every 19 days and last year it began to taper to one every 17 days.. . .” (Av Wk, 7/24/67, 26)
Cosmos CLXXVII was launched into orbit with 267-km (166-mi) apogee, 201-km (125-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite, announced as part of a program of space research, reentered Sept. 24. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/67; Krasnaya Zvezda, 9/19/67, 1)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXL into orbit with 241-km (150-mi) apogee, 170-km (106-mi) perigee, 88.48-min period, and 51.7° inclination. All equipment functioned satisfactorily. Satellite reentered Feb. 9. {Tech Wk, 2/13/67,10; gsfc SSR, 2/15/67)
nasa turned Essa IV meteorological satellite over to essa for operation in accordance with NASA—Dept, of Commerce agreement. Essa IV was launched by NASA Jan. 26 from wtr. (nasa Release 67-10)
First experimental tactical communications by satellite among USN, usaf, and USA units had been successful, dod announced. Messages had been exchanged among airborne aircraft, a submarine, a ship, and fixed and mobile terminals via Lincoln Experimental Satellite (Les V), one of six satellites launched by usaf July 1. (dod Release 661-67; AP, NYT, 7/21/67,6)	#
A 180-man crew working a 10-hr day six days a week had completed 14week construction job of 15-building installation in the Australian desert, which would be used to intercept information transmitted by Soviet reconnaissance satellites [see Aug. 12]. (AP, NYT, 8/29/67, 24)
Dr. Herbert Friedman, Superintendent of Naval Research Laboratory’s Atmospheric and Astrophysics Div., announced at news conference in Washington, D.C. Rocket experiment, he said: (1) provided first evidence that x rays were produced as far away as the “rim” of the universe; (2) detected quasars, previously detectable only by their radio waves or by visible light seen through high-power telescopes; (3) lent support to theory that universe is saturated with background radiation from explosion of universe 10 billion yrs ago; and (4) detected three new x-ray sources, apparently outside our galaxy and not traceable to any known object. These findings, Dr. Friedman said, indicated that x-ray astronomy had “come of age” as a tool to explore the universe. To explore x-ray sources further, he suggested installing x-ray detection equipment on proposed satellites such as NASA’s orbital workshop and launching larger equipment for longer periods of time to map the whole sky for x-ray sources. (Text; Reistrup, W Post, 7/7/67)
Press briefing on Esro II satellite and NASA International Cooperative Programs was held at NASA Hq. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, discussed the areas of cooperation between NASA and ESRO, emphasizing the “unprecedented data exchange agreement. ... I don’t think there is anything quite as sophisticated or as extensive in the international field. Under this agreement... ESRO assumes responsibility to collect all of the European technical report literature relevant to space activities, indexes and abstracts it, reduces it to a standard microfiche or microcard format which is compatible with our own system, and provides that material to us. We incorporate it in a single combined publication every two weeks, listing all of the U.S. and European literature in the field so that it is available to both sides. . ..” Brian M. Walker, ESRO Project Coordinator for Esro II, announced that next ESRO satellite—Esro I—would be launched in late 1967 to study the ionosphere. Esro II was scheduled for launch from WTR May 29. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. launched the meteorological satellite Cosmos CXLIV into orbit with 635-km (395-mi) apogee, 585-km (364-mi) perigee, 96.9min period, and 81.20° inclination. All equipment was functioning normally. (Tech Wk, 3/6/67, 15; Ten Years of Space Research in the U.S.S.R., uss—T Trans, vol. 5, No. 5,1967)
usaf launched two satellites: EGRS—9 and Aurora /. Thor-Burner II boosters were used in wtr launchings. EGRS-9, a Secor satellite, would provide an aid to geodetic survey of the earth sphere. Aurora I would study charged particles that precipitate in the upper atmosphere. (Pres Rep 1967)
Harold W. Yates, former chief engineer of Barnes Engineering Co.’s Field Research and Systems Dept., became Director of the National Environmental Satellite Center’s Satellite Experiment Laboratory, (essa Release 67-17)
OGO “handlers” were hoping that Ogo IV (launched July 28) might be economical enough with its gas supply to permit it to continue for one year at the peak of its investigative capabilities. Achievement of one-year performance would enable satellite to gather data on earth, its upper atmosphere, and its near-space environment during period of peak solar activity, which occurs every 11 yrs. Ogo IV’s gas system, used to supply thrust to series of small attitude-stabilized jets, had been improved by installation of gas bottle filled with krypton instead of argon. This increased gas pressure from 3,000 psi to 4,000 psi and doubled available impulse from 900 to 1,800 pound-seconds, nasa reported that if present gas expenditure rate were maintained they were assured the minimum 50 days of three-axis stabilized operation that would permit mission success, (nasa Release 67-210)
ComSatCorp, on behalf of intelsat, issued RFP for aeronautical communications satellites for two-way simplex voice communication between transoceanic aircraft and fixed earth stations. Spacecraft were to be active repeater vhf comsats with minimum five-year life for emplacement in synchronous equatorial orbit. (ComSatCorp Release 68-38)
Melbourne, Fla., engineer Duane Brown had applied for patent on Survey Satellite (sursat), system of four low-cost satellites which would enable surveyors to plot boundaries, route highways, make maps, and monitor earth’s crust to accuracies of a few inches. System included regional center for processing survey data and portable receiving and recording units for field use and could be operational by mid-1970’s, Brown said, (tjpi, W Star, 7/7/68, A7)
GSFC team headed by Peter Minott was studying amount of energy absorbed by atmosphere through experiments with laser beam directed at Explorer XXXVI. Reflectors on satellite returned beam to its starting point on earth while laser detector on satellite radioed back data on the strength of its light as it passed through atmospheric conditions. NASA laser expert Dr. Henry Plotkin said, “Some day we figure that with a laser we can build a space-to-earth communications link that won’t fade the way radio waves do.” Laser experiments also were being conducted with Explorer XXII, XXVII, and XXIX, and two French satellites. (Kehoe, W Post, 8/8/68, FI)
Third anniversary of launch of 85-lb (Early Bird), world’s first commercial comsat, owned by intelsat and managed by ComSatCorp. Originally designed as experimental-operational satellite with 18-mo life expectancy, comsat launched by NASA into 22,300-mi-altitude synchronous orbit over Atlantic, was still providing service between North America and Europe with 100% reliability. Intelsat I had received and transmitted more than 200 hr of TV and thousands of telephone calls, data and record messages, and other general communications without satellite service outage. TV use of Intelsat I increased from 31 programs consuming 31 hr leased time in 1965 to 160 programs and 125 hr in 1967. Highlights of TV broadcasts included live coverage of Atlantic splashdowns of Gemini spacecraft, sports events, public affairs, and news programs. (ComSatCorp Release 68—16)
Ats IV mission (launched Aug. 10 and reentered Oct. 17) was adjudged a failure by nasa. Satellite had remained in elliptical parking orbit instead of entering planned synchronous orbit when Centaur engines failed to reignite for second burn. Resulting highly elliptical orbit precluded meaningful return of gravity gradient data. Day-night camera operated, but attitude dynamics precluded reception other than smeared unintelligible pictures. Electrical operation of ion engines, microwave multiple access, and microwave wide band was verified. Boom camera returned good photos, including some of earth. (NASA Proj Off)
India could be first developing country to orbit her own artificial satellite, according to recommendations of five-man mission of UNESCO. Satellite would be first of “distribution” communications design, more powerful than current point-to-point satellites such as Early Bird I and requiring less complex ground facilities. Operating under long-term plan to end in 1981, India would build 56 ground stations which would bring TV to 25% of population. Network of 160 stations could reach 80% of India’s population. Mission recommended India produce 50,000 home TV receivers by 1970—1971 and enter into bilateral agreement with major space power to purchase satellite and launching services. (NYT, 1/28/68)
Univ. of Wisconsin meteorologist Verner E. Suomi said weather satellite research could reduce critical hours needed to identify tornado-producing cloud systems and warn public of threat. Photos from Ats III had shown it was possible to observe rapid expansion at top of tornado-producing clouds, while radar and ground observation tended to show only their “stems.” With adequate facilities, Suomi saw possibility of satellite tornado forecasts presented directly to the public via television. (upi, W Post, 9/26/68, K3)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLIII from Plesetsk Cosmodrome into orbit with 337-km (209.4-mi) apogee, 216-km (134.2-mi) perigee, 90-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Equipment functioned normally and satellite reentered Nov. 18. (SBD, 11/14/68, 53; GSFC SSR, 11/15/68; 11/30/68)
NASA announced probable spring 1969 launch of Nimbus B2 to replace Nimbus B experimental weather satellite intentionally destroyed after launch May 18. Primary meteorological objective would be to obtain data from advanced sensors to demonstrate infrared sounding techniques for determination of temperature profiles. Replacement mission would cost 1/3 of $61.9-million cost of Nimbus B and would eliminate critical 21-mo gap in U.S. meteorology satellite program. Nimbus I, launched Aug. 28, 1964, operated 26 days. Nimbus II, launched May 15, 1966, was still transmitting, but with inoperable tape recorders. (nasa Release 68—114)
NASA announced Mexican cities Gomez Palacios and Tor-reon had been saved from flooding in wake of Hurricane Naomi when Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) station at Mexico City relayed data from Essa VI satellite indicating weather was clearing. Mexican authorities thus were saved from opening dangerously filled dam- which would have inundated the cities, (nasa Release 68—203; .upi, NYT, 12/1/68, 77)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCX into orbit with 374km (232.4-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 90.2-min period, and 81.3° inclination. Satellite reentered April 11. {SBD, 4/4/68, 197; gsfc SSR, 4/15/68)
NASA was negotiating with General Electric Co. for data management system costing in excess of $750,000 for 15 mo. It would be used to monitor data from Barbados Oceanographic Meteorological Experiment (bomex) , in which nasa would assist essa during 1969. Data from satellites, five to seven ships, many buoys, and from high in atmosphere to bottom of ocean would be processed by system, (nasa Release 68-251)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXLIII into orbit with 297-km (184.6-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 71.3° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 4. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/68; 10/15/68)
NASA awarded $13,748,200 contract to General Electric Co.’s Missile and Space Div. for integration and test of 1,400-lb Nimbus D meteorological satellite. Nimbus D, fourth in series, would be launched in 1970 carrying 10 experiments to improve long-range weather forecasting and further study of earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Release 68—46)
NASA awarded $36,271,376 three-year cost-plus-award-fee contract to RCA Service Co. for maintenance and operation of Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan) facilities at GSFc; Rosman, N.C.; and Fairbanks, Alaska. Contract carried two one-year extension options. (nasa Release 68—110)
Cosmos CCXXXIX was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 262-km (162.8-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 13. (gsfc SSR, 9/15/68)	_	_
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCXVII into orbit with 182-km (113.1-mi) apogee, 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee, 87.6-min period, and 62.2° inclination. Satellite reentered April 26. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/68)
Cosmos CCLIV was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk Cosmodrome. Satellite entered orbit with 332-km (206.3-mi) apogee, 210-km (130.5-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.4° inclination and reentered Nov. 29. (upi, NYT, 11/22/68, 22; gsfc SSR, 11/30/68; SBD, 12/2/68,129)
NASA said spacecraft and parts of Agena 2nd stage of Nimbus B weather satellite launched unsuccessfully May 18, including two SNAP—19 nuclear power generators, had been found Sept. 30 by crew of research submarine four miles south of San Miguel Island off California coast. Pictures taken by submarine indicated three- by six-inch graphic cores of generators were intact; surrounding magnesium-thorium alloy casings were almost completely decayed since they dissolved in sea water almost immediately. Each core contained three pounds of plutonium. AEC had spent $200,000 searching for missing nuclear sources. Nimbus B had been destroyed shortly after launch when it veered off course. (nasa Release 68—171; Lannan, W Star, 10/4/68, A16)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCXVI. Orbital parameters: apogee, 265 km (164.7 mi) ; perigee, 195 km (121.2 mi) ; period, 89.1 min; and inclination, 51.8°. Satellite reentered April 28. (Anderson, NYT, 4/21/68, 28; W Star, 4/21/68, A5; gsfc SSR, 4/30/68)
gsfc used ruby laser to track Explorer XXXVI (Geos II) satellite during daylight, a significant milestone in development of laser satellite-tracking system. (Cambridge Research Lab PAO; NASA Release 68-219)
Cosmos CCLXI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with initial apogee of 670 km (416 mi), perigee of 207 km (128.5 mi), 93-min period, and 710 inclination. Satellite carried scientific equipment for studies of upper layers of earth’s atmosphere and nature of Northern Lights, with participation of research institutions and observatories of Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Poland, Romania, U.S.S.R., and Czechoslovakia. Satellite reentered Feb. 12, 1969. (SF, 5/69, 165; gsfc SSR, 12/31/68; 2/15/69)
Highly sophisticated “multispectral analysis” under development at Space and Re-entry Systems Div. of Philco-Ford Corp. was enabling scientists to extract additional information from photos taken by satellites. Assigning color ratings to gradations of gray in pictures and filtering out color levels as many as 18 times, to create series of transparencies in vivid hues, allowed details previously undetectable in gray to be distinguished. Technique could be applied to all black and white photos, enabling scientists to map ocean bottom, prospect for precious metal, and explore composition of sun without leaving darkroom, (upi, NYT, 9/29/68, 28)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCXX11 into orbit with 520-km (323.1-mi) apogee, 281-km (174.6-mi) perigee, 91.3-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 11. (AP, NYT, 6/2/68; gsfc SSR, 5/31/68; 10/15/68)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCXI. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,545 km (960 mi) ; perigee, 199 km (123.6 mi); period, 102.1 min; and inclination, 81°. Satellite reentered Nov. 10. (SBD, 4/10/68, 266; gsfc SSR, 4/15/68; 11/15/68)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences issued Tenth Anniversary, 1958—1968 to meet requests for information concerning its historical background, activities, jurisdiction and procedures, legislative record, membership, and staff assistance. Report contained National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, as amended, related legislation—including NASA’s funding history—and Communications Satellite Act of 1962. (Text)
tj.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXLVI into orbit with 317-km (197-mi) apogee, 145-km (90.1-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 65.3° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 12. {I nteravia Air Letter, 10/8/68,11; gsfc SSR, 10/15/68)
Defense Communications Agency had declared operational eight satellites added to Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) by successful June 13 launch from etr, final launch of Initial Defense Communications Satellite (idscp) Project. Total of 24 satellites were in normal • use, orbiting eastward in 21,000-mi-altitude synchronous orbit. They would remain in use until 1971. (dod Release 668—68)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXXlll from Plesetsk Cosmodrome into orbit with 979-km (608.3-mi) apogee, 221-km (137.3-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 72.9° inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily and reentered June 9. (upi, P EB, 6/3/68; SBD, 6/4/68, 168; GSFC SSR, 6/15/68, 7/15/68)
ComSatCorp reported $1.8-million net income (18 cents per share) for first quarter of 1968—$569,000 (6 cents per share) more than for first quarter of 1967—and operating revenues of record $6.9 million. As of March 31, ComSatCorp was leasing, full-time, equivalent of 754 half circuits, 453 more than on March 31, 1967. Of number leased in 1968, 421 were through two Atlantic satellites and 333 were through two Pacific satellites. One year ago only two satellites were in service, one over Atlantic and one over Pacific. (ComSatCorp Release 68—19)
Soviet scientists reported that automatic docking of Cosmos CCXII and CCXIII April 15 had occurred only 47 min after pursuit vessel was launched. Cosmos CCXII (launched April 14) was orbiting earth at 225.3-km (140-mi) altitude and 17,500 mph when Cosmos CCXIII entered orbit three miles from it. According to Tass, satellites repeatedly changed their orbits, reoriented, maneuvered in space, and conducted various scientific experiments during four days in orbit. Soviet scientists had reportedly developed three launch systems for spacecraft intended for automatic docking in orbit: (1) simultaneous side-by-side launch with docking maneuvers beginning immediately after spacecraft separated from launch vehicles; (2) separate launches from same or different sites with second spacecraft launched as close as possible to first spacecraft in orbit as it passed over launch site [method used for April 15 docking] ; and (3) separate launches of spacecraft into same plane, but with distances between them great enough to require several orbital corrections and maneuvers to close gap. (Anderson, NYT, 4/22/68, 9; SBD, 4/23/68,296-7)
U.S.S.R.’s Proton IV, largest unmanned scientific satellite to date, was launched into orbit with 472-km (293.3-mi) apogee, 248-km (154.1-mi) perigee, 91.7-min period, and 51.5° inclination. Satellite weighed 17 metric tons (37,478 lb), including 12.5-metric ton (27,557.5-lb) scientific payload to continue studies of cosmic rays. Equipment was functioning normally. (AP, W Star, 11/17/68, A18; Kamm, NYT, 11/17/68, 1; SBD, 11/19/68, 72-3; gsfc SSR, 11/30/68)
Cosmos CLXXXIV, launched Oct. 24, 1967, was identified by U.S.S.R. as operational meteorological satellite which also surveyed Arctic shipping conditions. Satellite had completed its first 1,000 orbits. Information obtained from mission would be shared with U.S. Cosmos CLXXXIV was fourth known Soviet meteorological satellite, (upi, W Post, 1/4/68, A14; SBD, 1/4/68,13)
ComSatCorp in fourth annual report announced 1967 net income of $4.6 million. Highlights in 1967 included successful launch of three satellites (in four attempts) into synchronous orbit to extend full-time service to Pacific and expand capability in Atlantic, beginning of construction on three U.S, ground stations, completion of new ground stations by Italy and Spain, and increase in INTELSAT membership to 61 with addition of Uganda in January. (Text; ComSatCorp Release 68—11) *	Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., in statement before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, described dod activities in space and aeronautics. “Military launches,” he stated, “were intended to implement in part the functions of navigation, communication, nuclear detection, space defense, and meteorology, or to furnish scientific and/or development support.” NASA’s work, he said, had contributed “heavily” to science and technology base for DOD effort. In MOL activities “considerable progress” had been made; feasibility of the MOL system was affirmed, technical risks were assessed in some detail, and full scale development was initiated.” He described coordinated dod—NASA range and network efforts and other cooperative programs in which DOD made its resources available to nasa on reimbursable basis. (Testimony; Aero Tech, 4/8/68, 10-11)
Fee ruled that rates charged TV networks for overseas service via satellite were not excessive and that companies providing service—AT&T, rca Communications, Inc., itt World Communications, Inc., and Western Union International—-were no longer required to place payments for services in deferred credit fund. (AP, NYT, 7/7/68, 10)
In Moscow, U.S.S.R. and France agreed to place French instruments on board Soviet lunar orbiter satellite at undetermined future date, in third joint Soviet-French space project, Evert Clark reported in New York Times. Projects, most significant cooperative effort U.S.S.R. had undertaken with any country, included launch of French satellite on interplanetary physics mission in 1972 and use of Soviet Molniya comsats to exchange experimental color TV broadcasts. (NYT, 1/18,/68, 52)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCXXX from Kapustin Yar. Orbital parameters: apogee, 544 km (338 mi); perigee, 283 km (175.8 mi); period, 92.8 min; and inclination, 48.4° Satellite reentered Nov. 2. (dpi, NYT, 7/6/68; SBD, 7/10/68, 26; gsfc SSR, 7/15/68; 11/15/68)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCIV entered orbit with 843-km (524-mi) apogee, 271-km (168-mi) perigee, 95.7-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Cosmos CCV entered orbit with 292-km (181-mi) apogee, 197-km (122-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 65.6° inclination. Cosmos CCV reentered March 13. Cosmos CCIV reentered March 2, 1969. (AP, NYT, 3/7/68, 10; gsfc SSR, 3/15/68; 3/15/69; SBD, 4/1/68,174)
usaf’s Lincoln Experimental Satellite (Les V) (launched July 1, 1967), first all solid-state UHF band comsat, had been used in first network of tactical terminals to include a comsat, first air-to-air link via satellite relay, and first communications link from high latitudes via satellite as part of USAF program to improve communications between aircraft. Les V was testing uhf teletype system which relayed 60-wpm messages over ground distances of up to 8,000 mi. Satellite’s 20,000-mi-altitude orbit allowed line of sight stretching nearly halfway around the world. USAF proposed using system for communications between low-altitude attack aircraft and rear area controllers, for USAF worldwide logistic control and status reporting system, and for strike and reconnaissance reporting. (afsc Release 23.68)
aec scientists had produced man-made atoms of transuranium elements —artificial elements of californium, einsteinium, and fermium that were heavier than uranium, heaviest of the 92 elements that occurred naturally. Man-made atoms had numerous potential uses in medicine and space, such as providing power for satellites and for electrical heart stimulator. (Spivak, WSJ, 1/9/68,1)
Ninth Molniya I comsat, Molniya 1—9, was launched by U.S.S.R. to “ensure the operation of the long-range system of . . . communication” and TV transmission to far northern and far eastern U.S.S.R., according to Tass. Orbital parameters: apogee, 39,806 km (24, 734,2 mi); perigee, 396 km (246.1 mi) ; period, 11 hr 9 min; and inclination, 65°. Equipment, including instruments for transmission, command, and satellite operation, was functioning normally. (AP, NYT, 7/9/68, 6; SBD, 7/10/68, 26; gsfc SSR, 7/15/68)
Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee had successfully installed and tested Pakistan’s first satellite tracking station at Dacca, East Pakistan. Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) station capable of receiving cloud-cover photographs via U.S. Nimbus and ESSA satellites would enable meteorologists to forecast cyclones, which frequently struck Pakistan. (AP, NYT, 1/29/68; AP, NYT, 2/20/68, 61)
U.S. was negotiating with India on use of one visual and two voice channels on NASA ats satellite to be launched by 1971 into fixed position 22,400 mi above Indian Ocean. In her pilot comsat project, India would broadcast several hours of educational TV weekly to seven areas with total 50 million population. Remaining channels would be used to broadcast NASA scientific data. India hoped eventually to transmit educational TV from comsat to community receivers in her 560,000 villages. (nasa Proj Off; NYTNS, LA Her-Exam, 8/19/68)
Four foreign firms who handled all Argentine overseas telephone calls and telecommunications, with multimillion-dollar investment, had been notified by lower echelons of Argentine government that its national carrier ENTEL would be exclusive international carrier and would reserve all communications satellite channels for itself, Washington Evening Star reported. Argentina was to link up with ComSatCorp and INTELSAT on completion of earth station at Balcarce in June 1969. Firms—U.S.-based itt World Communications, Inc.; Transradio, which had RCA hookup; Western Telegraph of U.K.; and Italcable of Italy—would propose mixed government-carrier company to own and operate Argentine earth station. (O’Leary, W Star, 11/25/68, A15)
Cosmos CCXXIX was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with 328-km (203.8-mi) apogee, 222-km (137.9-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 72.9° inclination. Satellite reentered July 4. (SBD, 6/27/68, 286; gsfc SSR, 6/30/68, 7/15/68)
ComSatCorp announced it had placed in full-time commercial operation two new earth station facilities at Jamesburg, Calif., and Paumalu, Hawaii, to handle U.S.-Pacific area communications via Intelsat—II F—4 (Intelsat II—D) satellite. (ComSatCorp Release 68—66)
NASA, NAS, and NRC would be “taking a long close look” at applied satellites capable of producing concrete benefits to mankind, James J. Haggerty, Jr., wrote in Journal of the Armed Forces. Study, recommended in nas report released Feb. 8, would focus on economic aspects. Among new areas of application proposed were: forestry-agriculture satellite to survey and identify vegetation resources through standard and infrared photography; oceanographic satellite to predict fish locations, isolate plankton areas, and improve ship routing and weather detection through use of sensors; hydrological satellite to aid in management of water resources and to facilitate weather forecasting; and geological satellite to extend process of using airborne sensors to detect minerals, oil, and gas. Group also would study economic benefits of advances in existing applied spacecraft, such as “advanced weathersat” to interrogate high-altitude weather balloons and broadcast satellite to promote “extremely broad program of education and culture.” NAS report had set dollar values on benefits: savings of $8 billion annually in agriculture and construction alone from two-week weather forecasting; $5 million in management of municipal water supplies; and “hundreds of millions” in potential saving to shipping, fishing, and coastal engineering industries, but satellites would have to be developed at “considerable investment.” (Haggerty, J/AF, 5/18/68, 9, 19)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCV111. Orbital parameters: apogee, 278 km (173 mi) ; perigee, 202 km (126 mi); period, 89.2 min; and inclination, 64.9°. Satellite reentered April 2. (upi, NYT, 3/22/68, 5; SBD, 3/22/68, 125; gsfc SSR, 3/31/68; 4/15/68)
NASA would negotiate $900,000, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with Chrysler Corp.’s Space Div. to study needs and configuration alternatives for an intermediate payload launch vehicle in post-1973 space operations. Payloads under consideration included long-duration manned operations in low earth orbit, unmanned satellites in synchronous orbit, logistic support for manned lunar exploration, and unmanned planetary and deep space probes. Contract would be managed by omsf. (nasa Release 68—67; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/13/68)
In “remote sensing” experiment by NASA and U.S. Geological Survey, pilots and scientists began two-week air-ground sweep of Southern California in search of solutions to environmental problems. Area had been selected because of variety of geographic features. Aircraft would test sensors for later use in satellite surveys of land, water, mineral, human, and energy resources. (Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 5/20/68)
Cosmos CCXXV was launched from Kapustin Yar by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 519-km (322.3-mi) apogee, 248-km (154.1-mi) perigee, 92.1-	min period, and 48.4° inclination. Instruments functioned normally and satellite reentered Nov. 2. (SBD, 6/13/68, 215; gsfc SSR, 6/15/68; 11/15/68)	_
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLIX from Kapustin Yar into orbit with 1,331-km (827-mi) apogee, 213-km (132.4-mi) perigee, 100.3-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Satellite reentered May 5, 1969. (GSFC SSR, 12/15/68, 210; SBD, 12/17/68, 210; 3/15/69)
At Glassboro (N.J.) State College commencement, President Johnson discussed developments in U.S.-Soviet relations during past year: completion of space law and space rescue treaties, new consular treaty, bilateral air agreement, and negotiations on agreement to avoid costly ABM race. He proposed International Council on Human Environment, accelerated efforts to develop global satellite communications system, conducting of Arctic and Antarctic exploration, and study of possible productive uses of rain-rich tropical forest. (PD, 6/10/68, 903; NYT, 6/5/68, IF)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from etr into orbit with 24,769-mi (39,866.8-km) apogee, 19,685-mi (31,556-km) perigee 1,436.0-min period, and 9.9° inclination, usaf’s first unannounced etr launching in five years (usaf usually launched from wtr) ; satellite carried payload described by usaf as “experimental.” AP story in Washington Post said payload’s primary purpose reportedly was to test improved sensing devices and other equipment designed to locate missile and other military installations and provide warning of rocket attacks from unfriendly nations. AP sources had indicated launch was from etr so satellite could achieve high-altitude orbit where it could “dwell for a longer period over a desired area of the globe.” (AP, W Post, 8/7/68, A14; SBD, 8/7/68, 156; gsfc SSR, 8/15/68; Pres Rpt 68)
Photographic evidence from U.S. satellites had indicated U.S.S.R. construction of Moscow antimissile defense had been slowed down, if not halted. U.S. intelligence officials had been satisfied from photographs that Tallinn defense across northeast approaches to U.S.S.R. was against U.S. bombers, not missiles. (W Post, 8/11/68, 1)
New York Times reported interview in which General Electric Co. engineers described arms (Application of Remote Manipulators in Space), concept being pursued under $68,000 NASA contract to study feasibility of orbiting robots to refuel, resupply, and repair crippled spacecraft on signals from earth. They could be in operation by mid-1970s and, if successful, could extend useful lifetimes of communications and weather satellites and, possibly, could inspect or disable hostile spacecraft. One plan was to launch 600-lb robot attached to 1,000-lb tender or “home base” satellite. With repair kit orbited on distress signal from regular satellite, robot would rendezvous and repair disabled satellite directed by a ground controller by radio signals transmitted via the tender. After each repair robot would return to tender. Engineers estimated robot could remain in orbit four to five years and would have paid for itself after 12 repairs. (Wilford, NYT, 8/13/68, 4)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXIV into orbit with 370-km (229.9mi) apogee, 199-km (123.6-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 81.3° inclination. Satellite reentered April 26. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/68)
NASA launched meteorological satellite Essa VII for Environmental Science Services Administration. Satellite relayed photo of tropical storm Shirley Aug. 19. in sun-synchronous orbit with local equator crossing time between 2:35 pm and 2:55 pm so that daily Advanced Vidicon Camera System {Avcs) pictures of entire globe could be obtained regularly and dependably. Satellite achieved nearly polar, sun-synchronous, circular orbit with 918-mi (1,477.9-km) apogee, 895-mi (1,440-km) perigee, 114.9-min period, and 101.7° inclination. Drift of only 0.002° per day out of sun-synchronous orbit meant it would take perhaps 15 yr to change equator crossing time by 1 hr and added considerably to expected useful lifetime. An advanced version of cartwheel configuration, 325-lb cylindrical Essa VII carried two avcs cameras for global weather coverage. Photos would be stored onboard satellite on magnetic tape until readout by essa’s Command and Data Acquisition (cda) stations at Fairbanks, Alaska, and Wallops Island, Va. During first 42 orbits, spacecraft underwent orientation maneuver to place it in wheel mode and spin rate was adjusted. By Aug. 23 all spacecraft systems bad been successfully programmed and excellent pictures had been read out directly, as well as sequences stored for remote readout. ESSA financed and managed TOS system and would operate spacecraft after NASA completed checkout later in month. GSFC was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. Essa I was launched Feb. 3, 1966; Essa II, Feb. 28, 1966; Essa III, Oct. 2, 1966; Essa IV, Jan. 26, 1967; Essa V, April 20, 1967; and Essa VI, Nov. 10, 1967. Essa VII was 17th Tiros satellite launched successfully since Tiros I, first weather satellite, April 1, 1960. All from Tiros III on had equaled or exceeded designed operation lifetimes. Millionth weather satellite photo had been received May 27, 1968. (nasa Proj Off; essa Release ES 68-48)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCXLI into orbit with 326-km (202.6-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 24. (C Trib, 9/17/68; gsfc SSR,9/30/68)
Explorer XXXVIII (rae—a), launched from WTR July'4, was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite had completed 30 days of successful three-axis gravity-gradient-stabilized operation in orbit as of Aug. 22. Experiment instrumentation and all spacecraft support systems were operational and functioning satisfactorily. Recording of variations in galactic emission, low-frequency solar bursts, and radio signals from earth had been acquired. Some evidence had been found of enhanced noise bands at medium frequencies within magnetosphere, and strong noise enhancement had been observed in vicinity of South Atlantic anomaly, (nasa Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXXVII from Baikonur into near-circular orbit with 271-km (168.4-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily and reentered June 26. (SBD, 6/19/68, 244; gsfc SSR, 6/30/68)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCL entered orbit with 845-km (525.1-mi) apogee, 735-km (467.8-mi) perigee, 100.6-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos CCLI entered orbit with 226-km (140.4-mi) apogee, 170 km (105.6-mi) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 64.7° inclination and reentered Nov. 18. Both satellites functioned normally. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/68; 11/30/68; SBD, 11/4/68, 12)
Fifth anniversary of ComSatCorp was noted by Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Commerce, on floor of Senate: “Intelsat has grown from its original membership of 11 nations to a total of 61, including 40 which qualify as among the less developed countries. . . . The commercial utilization of space for communications purposes—a dream for the future when the Congress passed the Satellite Act—is today a reality.” (nasa LAR VII/7; CR, 1/31/68, S676)
Canadian scientist I. A. Stewart, Operations Manager of Churchill Research Range, said at first International Aerospace Exposition in Montreal he believed range, operated jointly by U.S. and Canada, could be converted for $1 million to accommodate satellite launching pad. Canada could thus rise to ranks of space-age power, he said. Of more than 200 on staff, only one was from U.S. (Can Press, NYT, 12/1/68,13)
NASA published Constructing Inexpensive Automatic PictureTransmission Ground Stations (nasa SP—5079), providing instructions for building from surplus parts $500 ground station that could receive local cloud-cover pictures anywhere in the world from U.S. meteorological satellites. Booklet was available from Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical Information. (NASA Release 58—77)
President Johnson, in letter transmitting to Congress Fifth Annual Report on Communications Satellite Act of 1962, said: “[Report] reflects . . . steady progress toward the ultimate goal of providing mankind with new capabilities for worldwide communication. In the brief span of five years, satellite technology has grown dynamically. The possibilities envisioned in 1962 have been greatly exceeded.” Communications, he said, must provide “ ‘network for knowledge’ so that all peoples can share the scientific, educational, and cultural advances of this planet. . . . “Failure to reach these goals can only contribute to apathy, ignorance, poverty and despair in a very large part of the world. Success in our telecommunications policies can be a critical link in our search for the understanding and tolerance from which peace springs. Communication by satellite is a tool—one of the most promising which mankind has had thus far—to attain this end.” (Text; AP, W Star, 4/3/68, A7; PD, 4/8/68, 637)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXLIV into orbit with 158-km (98.2-mi) apogee, 140-km (87-mi) perigee, 87.4-min period, and 49.6° inclination. Satellite reentered same day. U.S. press later reported U.S. observers said launch appeared to have been 13th test of Soviet fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) . Orbit followed pattern of previous tests identified as FOBS by U.S.—very low earth orbit with satellite reentering before completing first revolution of earth, (gsfc SSR, 10/15/68; upi, NYT, 10/9/68, 12; W Post, 10/8/68, A10)
Cosmos CCLVIII was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 302-km (187.6-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.5min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 18. (upi, W Star, 12/10/68, A6; AP, NYT, 12/11/68, 6; gsfc SSR, 12/15/68; 12/31/68)
Second anniversary of Essa II, first spacecraft in Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system and first to carry Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) equipment for cloud-cover photos. Satellite was still operating satisfactorily, (gsfc Historian)
First public demonstration of satellite communications between merchant ship and shore was given before Propeller Club of Port of Baltimore, Md. Civic officials conversed via NASA’s Ats II with captain of vessel off Valparaiso, Chile, coast. Conversation was transmitted over telephone lines to gsfc and relayed to Rosman, N.C., to satellite, and to ship. (NYT, 6/26/68,86)
U.S. reconnaissance satellite, orbiting at altitudes of several hundred miles, had discovered that U.S.S. Pueblo was no longer moored in North Korean port of Wonsan. Vessel had occupied that berth since her capture by North Koreans Jan. 23. State Dept, confirmed absence of vessel but would not discuss source of information. (Goulden, P Inq, 5/10/68, 2)
AFCRL geodesists hit Explorer XX11 satellite with multipulse ruby laser beam in daylight for second time. First success in using satellite as target for reflection in daylight was on Dec. 19, 1967, by afcrl. Explorer XXII, launched by NASA Oct. 9, 1964, carried special reflectors for laser beams. Experiment was designed to improve measurements of distance between widely separated points on earth’s surface and improve knowledge of earth’s size and shape, (oar Research Review, 5/68, 13; Instruments and Spacecraft, NASA SP—3028)
In gsfc tests using Omega Position Location Equipment (ople), track of specially equipped automobile had been located repeatedly within 1,000 ft of its actual route on Baltimore-Washington Parkway by Ats III, in 22,300-mi-altitude orbit. Satellite had also tracked and located boat in Chesapeake Bay, NASA calibration aircraft, and Coast and Geodetic Survey ship, Discoverer, in Caribbean. Meteorologists believed ople system, designed primarily as meteorological experiment for tracking balloons and floating buoys, might produce new data on wind circulation in atmosphere and its effect on weather. (NASA Release 68-111; AP, B Sun, 6/27/68)
Page Communications Engineers, Inc., and government of South Vietnam were negotiating agreement to permit Page to finance and construct $7-million earth station in Vungtau. Station, which would be used with ComSatCorp satellite to be launched in November, would have 60-channel capacity initially and would be able to expand to 120. South Vietnamese government would receive 20% of gross revenues— expected to total $4-5 million annually—for first five years and 50% for second five years, after which operation would be turned over to a South Vietnamese corporation. (Page pio; Wilson, W Post, 4/19/68)
Soyuz II was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 229-km (142.3 mi) apogee, 191-km (118.7-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite later was used in rendezvous maneuvers with manned Soyuz III [See Oct. 26—30] and reentered Oct. 28. (Lannan, W Star, 10/27/68, Al; SBD, 10/28/68, 279; gsfc SSR, 10/31/68)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCI into orbit with 327-km (203-mi) apogee, 202-km (126-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily and reentered Feb. 14. (SBD, 2/7/68, 210; gsfc SSR, 2/15/68)
RFPs for two series of advanced comsats, Intelsats 111^2 and IV, and for design and feasibility study of rotary joint for use in Intelsat 111^2 sat" ellites had been issued by ComSatCorp. Two 725-lb Intelsat HIsatellites planned for mid-1969 launch would use directive antenna system to increase radiated power directed toward eastern North America and Western Europe and would have 1,900 two-way voice circuits. Rotary joint would transmit four RF signal channels across interface between spinning spacecraft and mechanically despun antenna. Four 2,430-lb Intelsat IV satellites planned for launch beginning in mid-1970 would be larger, more sophisticated comsats with more than 5,000 voice circuits and greater operational flexibility and versatility. Both satellite models would have onboard apogee motors and both would be launched into synchronous circular equatorial orbits. (ComSatCorp Release 68-4)
Cosmos CCXLV was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 481-km (298.9-mi) apogee, 272-km (169-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 15, 1969. (gsfc SSR, 10/15/68; 1/31/69)
Dedication ceremonies were held for ComSatCorp’s new high-capacity earth station for satellite communications at Etam, W. Va. Station would serve as major U.S. East Coast facility for sending and receiving all forms of communications via satellite between U.S. mainland, Puerto Rico and Caribbean, Europe, Latin America, and other Atlantic points. It was designed to work with INTELSAT satellites stationed in synchronous orbits 22,300 mi over Atlantic. (ComSatCorp Release; AP, B Sun, 9/28/68, A3)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLVII into orbit with 438-km (272.2-mi) apogee, 269-km (167.2-mi) perigee, 91.6-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered March 5, 1969. (AP, B Sun, 12/4/68; Reuters, C Trib, 12/4/68; gsfc SSR, 12/15/68; 3/15/69)
Explorer XXXIX (Air Density Explorer C) and Explorer XL (Injun V), launched as dual payload Aug. 8, were adjudged successful by nasa. Explorer XXXIX balloon had been ejected and fully inflated. Explorer XL had despun, extended booms, and turned on experiments satisfactorily. Malfunction in spacecraft’s power subsystem had caused loss of one-third of power generated by solar panels, reducing quantity but not affecting quality of data. Satellite would enter full sunlight Sept. 18, 1969, permitting originally planned data-acquisition rate, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA announced decision to terminate work on two Biosatellites scheduled for 21-day missions beginning in 1971. Contract with General Electric Co. Reentry Systems Div. would be revised to retain only work on two 30-day primate-experiment Biosatellites scheduled to begin in 1969. Funding for later missions had been reduced and efficient planning made more difficult. Possibilities for experiments with greater flexibility in early 1970s had been indicated by success of smaller satellites and by studies. (NASA Release 68—215)
NASA’s Explorer XXXVI (Geos II) satellite, launched Jan. 11, had completed initial checkout tests and was ready for operational use. Supporting ground systems were expected to be ready to operate with satellite in late February. All six geodetic systems had responded to ground commands. Satellite had been stabilized by gravity gradient boom so that it faced earth constantly with ±5° stability. (NASA Release 68—16)
gsfc technicians had moved NASA’s Ats 111 satellite to new position over Pacific off Ecuador’s coast to aid in U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey (c&gs) mapping project. After movement from position on Equator at 95° west longitude to location at 85° west longitude, satellite could provide precise timing signals to c&gs team on South Atlantic islands of South Georgia and Tristan de Cunha. Ats III, carrying communications, meteorological, and navigational experiments, had been launched Nov 5, 1967, into synchronous equatorial orbit at 22,300mi altitude, (nasa Release 68—30)
Tass announced issuance of three stamps commemorating Soviet space achievements: March 18, 1965, space walk by Aleksey A. Leonov; Oct. 30, 1967, automatic docking of two Cosmos satellites; and Oct. 18, 1967, softlanding of Venus 4 on Venus. (W Post, 4/15/68, C20)
Cosmos CCXLII was launched by U.S.S.R. Orbital parameters: apogee, 404 km (251 mi); perigee, 269 km (167.2 mi); period, 91.2 min; and inclination, 70.9°. Satellite reentered Nov. 13. (upi, NYT, 9/21/68,14; gsfc SSR, 9/30/68; 11/15/68)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXIX—10th Cosmos in April and 9th spacecraft in 12 days—into orbit with 1,747-km (1,085.5-mi) apogee, 225-km (139.8-mi) perigee, 104.7-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Soviet scientist Prof. Georgi Pokrovsky in Nedelya, Sunday supplement to Izvestia, predicted that interlinked satellites might some day form artificial Saturn rings around earth. NASA Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said U.S.S.R.’s launch activity April 14—26 made most active 12 days in space history of any nation and “a great acceleration” of Soviet space effort. “For some time we’ve had indications that they’re putting in an increasing rate of men and resources.” James J. Haggerty, Jr., wrote in Journal of the Armed Forces that U.S.S.R. satellite launches in 1968 might for the first time since 1957 exceed U.S. spacecraft orbited. Launches in Cosmos series, which included a variety of spacecraft, had continued to accelerate, he noted, with 34 Cosmos launches in 1966 and 59 in 1967. Satellite reentered Mareh 2, 1969. (Cohn, W Post, 4/27/68, A15; upi, NYT, 4/27/68, 15; J/AF, 4/27/68, 9; gsfc SSR, 4/30/68; 3/15/69)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCXXXVI entered orbit with 627-km (389.6-mi) apogee, 590-km (366.6-mi) perigee, 96.8-min period, and 56° inclination. Cosmos CCXXXVII entered orbit with 323-km (200.7-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.6-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 65.4° inclination and reentered Sept. 4. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/68; 9/15/68)
Tenth anniversary of second U.S. satellite, Vanguard I, 3*4,-lb, 6%-in-dia spacecraft that had proved earth was slightly pear shaped and examined composition of upper atmosphere. Satellite had stopped
World’s first passive satellite, Echo I, launched by NASA Aug. 12, 1960, reentered earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated over southeastern Pacific. Launched as passive communications and air-density research satellite, Echo I also served geodesists determining accurate continental and intercontinental distances, (upi, W Post, 5/24/68; W News, 5/24/68, 3; Newsweek, 5/27/68; SBD, 5/28/68,138)
Arrival of Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn of Thailand at White House marked first transpacific satellite telecast of visiting head-of-state to his home country. Telecast also inaugurated television from U.S. to Sri Racha earth station in Southeast Asia. (ComSatCorp Release 68-24)
ComSatCorp filed application for authority to construct earth station for satellite communications in Alaska, 90 mi north of Anchorage near Talkeetna Village. (ComSatCorp Release 68-68)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXV into orbit with 403-km (250.4mi) apogee, 255-km (158.4-mi) perigee, 91.1-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Satellite reentered June 30. (SBD, 4/22/68, 292; gsfc SSR, 4/30/68; 7/15/68)	_
Cosmos CCXXXVII I was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 210-km (130.5-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 1. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/68; 9/15/68)
U.K. Minister of Technology Anthony W. Benn announced that U.K. would withdraw from European Conference on Satellite Communications and would make no new commitments to eldo, though it would increase its contribution to esro by up to 6%. U.K. officials reportedly said decision not to participate in proposed project for experimental European TV relay satellite was made in effort to avoid unrealistic projects and concentrate on nonspace aircraft and computer industries. (Shuster, NYT, 4/17/68, 79; Mott, W Post, 4/17/68, All)
NASA doubled resolution capability of Explorer XXXVIII to map radio sources in space by extending each of satellite’s four antennas to 600 ft by ground command. Antennas, which could be extended to 750-ft maximum, had been initially deployed to 455 ft each July 22. Satellite, launched July 4, had monitored solar radio emissions, variety of emissions across Milky Way, radio emissions apparently related to earth’s magnetosphere, and possible emission from earth’s radiation belt, (nasa Release 68—162; AP, W Star, 9/25/68, A5)
C—130 troop and supply carrier, used as pick-up aircraft for satellites dropping special reconnaissance photos into sea, had developed serious wing cracks which would cost usaf $11 million to repair, Bob Horton reported in Washington Evening Star. USAF had been reinforcing wings but would have to build entire new wing on 400 C—130 models B through E to ensure long service. Model C—130A was not affected. (W Star, 11/25/68, A3)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCXXVIII. Orbital parameters: apogee, 241 km (149.8 mi) ; perigee, 203 km (126 mi); period, 88.9 min; and inclination, 51.6°. Satellite reentered July 3. (SBD, 6/24/68, 260; gsfc SSR, 6/30/68, 7/15/68)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.), Chairman of Senate Nuclear Safeguards Committee, in Senate review of implementation of limited nuclear test-ban treaty safeguards reported possibility of black-out of communications, radar, and missile systems by electromagnetic pulse (emp) emitted by nuclear explosion. If absorbed in electronic equipment, this surge of electricity could blow fuses or disrupt electronic components. Scientists had warned of insufficient data on emp and its possible effects on intercontinental and other missile systems. U.S. would spend third more on underground nuclear testing in 1968 than in 1967. Five-year-old treaty, Sen. Jackson said, was being observed. U.S. satellites kept watch from space “to the earth’s surface” to guard against violation. (Text; AP, W Star, 9/25/68, A6; Finney, NYT, 9/26/68)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CCVII into orbit with 342-km (213-mi) apogee, 210-km (130-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.6° inclination. Satellite reentered March 24. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/19/68,1; SBD, 3/19/68, 100; gsfc SSR, 3/31/68)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXL into orbit with 283-km (175.8-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 21. (gsfc SSR, 9/15/68, 9/30/68)
First satellite telephone link between U.S. and Australia began with opening of earth station at Moree, Australia. (W Star, 5/26/68)
Payoff from space investment (in satellite applications in extended weather forecasting, reduced cost, and extended range for telecommunications) was discussed in Space/Aeronautics. Government policy on future satellite applications would depend on four “key study efforts”: (1) study by Presidential Task Force on Communications Policy on status of INTELSAT and its role in global and foreign domestic comsat systems; (2) study by NAS on potential of applications satellites and “an effective cost/benefit strategy”; (3) recommendation by President’s Commission and Council on Marine Sciences for consolidation of Federal efforts in marine engineering and oceanography, and creation of policy framework hospitable to applications satellites; and (4) European organization of firms’ formulation of arguments advocating four regional systems rather than one global network. (S/A, 1/68, 80)
Cosmos CCXXXIII was launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 1,505-km (935.2-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.6mi) perigee, 101.9-min period, and 81.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 7,1969. (SBD, 7/22/68, 32; gsfc SSR, 7/31/68; 2/15/69)
Astronautics & Aeronautics published letter from J. Gordon Vaeth of essa’s National Environmental Satellite Center: With emphasis of space technology on applications and practical benefits, it was “curious that . . . little is apparently being said or done about using communications satellites to ‘carry’ the mail over intercontinental distances.” Facsimile techniques were available for scanning and electronic transmission of letter mail by geostationary spacecraft. “In-depth professional consideration of this satellite application is overdue” [A&A, 9/68, 17—20)
nasa selected Fairchild-Hiller Corp., General Electric Co., and Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for competitive negotiations for $5-million fixed-price contract to develop designs for basic spacecraft configuration of F and G models of Applications Technology Satellite. Firms would provide complete specifications and versions of critical spacecraft systems. (nasa Release 68—95)
Strong arguments in favor of Europe’s making comsats “focal point” of space activity were presented in Spaceflight by spacewriter Arthur C. Clarke, former chairman of British Interplanetary Society. “Reliable domestic radio services are not available over most of the world. Long distance services are of poor quality . . . [and] by 1970, there will be 130 million vhf sets in the world, many of which could pick up direct radio broadcasts from satellites.” U.K., he said, “certainly cannot do everything in space. But what we should not tolerate is the apparently invincible ignorance of those who think that nothing in space is worth doing. . . . Our space achievements will be our greatest legacy to the future. Indeed they will create that future. They will make it possible to have a future.” (Clarke, SF, 3/68, 78-84)
nasa’s Ats IV applications technology satellite reentered earth’s atmosphere over South Atlantic southwest of St. Helena island. Spacecraft, launched Aug. 10, had remained in parking orbit, tumbling uncontrollably, when Centaur engines failed to reignite for second burn, (nasa Release 68—188)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos CCLXXVI entered orbit with 371-km (230.5-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 81.3° inclination and reentered April 11. Cosmos CCLXXVII entered orbit with 466-km (289.6-mi) apogee, 267-km (165.9-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 70.9° inclination and reentered July 6. (gsfc SSR, 4/15/69; 7/15/69; AP, C Trib, 4/5/69; sbd Space Log Supplement, 4/15/69)
nasa notified Institute Geofisico del Peru that $2-million NASA tracking station near Lima, Peru, would be closed because of shifting program requirements and economic reasons. Station, to be phased out by November, had participated in more than 75 satellite missions since 1957. (nasa Release 69—117)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXCV into orbit with 473-km (293.9-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 71.0° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 1 (gsfc SSR, 8/31/69; 12/15/69)
NASA’s Echo 11 comsat, launched Jan. 25, 1964, reentered atmosphere at 60.3° north latitude and 148.1° east longitude, north of Siberian Sea of Okhotsk after orbiting earth more than 28,000 times. Launched as passive comsat and air-density research satellite, 532-lb, 135-ft-dia, laminated mylar plastic and aluminum balloon had been used as reflector for bouncing radio transmissions between ground points and for geodetic studies. (NASA Release 69—90)
Development of laser tracking techniques permitting accurate 24-hour tracking of orbiting spacecraft was announced by NASA. New technique—particularly important in geodetic studies, which required precise angle and distance measurements between satellite and ground stations—offered greater measuring accuracy than RF methods, required only lightweight reflectors on satellite, and was less affected by transmission-impeding environmental disturbances. First operational daylight tracking with laser had been accomplished by gsfc team Oct. 21, 1968. (nasa Release 69—18; A&A 68)
Cosmos CCCV was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baikonur. Satellite entered orbit with 340-km (211.3-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 51.4° inclination and reentered Oct. 24. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69; SBD, 10/27/69, 254)
NASA’s Explorer XXXVIII (launched July 4, 1968), orbiting at 3,640-mi altitude, had discovered earth, like Jupiter, sporadically emitted low-frequency radio signals, Radio Astronomy Explorer project scientist Dr. Robert G. Stone told 1969 spring meeting of U.S. National Committee of International Union of Radio Science in Washington, D.C. “In the radio frequency range below 10 megahertz, the Earth looks very much like Jupiter. This suggests that the same processes that account for the Jovian radio noise may also be active in the Earth’s magnetosphere.” Signals from both planets appeared sharply beamed or directed in narrow cone, were quite intense and increased in intensity rapidly when observed toward lower frequencies, and were impulsive, occurring in rapid but sporadic bursts. Explorer XXXVlll also had revealed sun was more active source of radio outbursts in lower frequencies than expected, providing unique means of studying sun’s outer atmosphere to 36-million-mi distance of Mercury orbit. “Such information,” Stone said, “could shed further light on mystery of Sun’s part in cause of low frequency radio storms on the Earth.” Explorer XXXVIIFs four 750-ft-long antennas had provided most comprehensive and detailed measurements of cosmic radio noise at low frequencies yet available. Information was providing first low-frequency maps of radio emissions in Milky Way galaxy, showing that most radio emissions originated in plane or disc of Milky Way. Satellite had remained stable since orbit despite repeated movement and had continued to operate successfully. (NASA Release 69—57; AP, B Sun, 4/22/69, A6; O’Toole, W Post, 4/22/69, Al)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on U.S.-India agreement to provide first direct TV broadcasts from satellite to small receiving stations [see Sept. 18]: “All parties involved in this unusual enterprise seem confident it will succeed. If they are proved right, the whole idea can be broadened to enrich . . . every land on every continent where there is need to spread knowledge and forge unifying links between cities and isolated hamlets in the hinterland.” (W Star, 10/17/69, Al2)
Eleventh anniversary of Explorer 1, first U.S. satellite. Since its launch Jan. 31, 1958, the 30.8-lb stovepipe-shaped satellite had completed nearly 60,000 revolutions around earth and on Dec. 31, 1968, was in orbit with 632-mi (10,170.8-km) apogee, 199.9-mi (321.7-km) perigee, and 98.1-min period, (msfc Release 69-26)
Sen. George Murphy (R-Calif.) introduced S. 2204, bill to establish National Oceanic Agency. It was referred to Senate Commerce Committee. {CR, 5/20/69, S5403) mi (35,644.2-km) apogee, 21,887.2-mi (35,216.5-km) perigee, and 5° inclination. Intelsat-Ill F—4 was third snccessful launch in Intelsat III series. Intelsat-III F—3 had been launched Feb. 5, and Intelsat-III F—2, Dec. 18, 1968. Intelsat-III F—1 had been destroyed minutes after launch Sept. 18, 1968. New satellite was scheduled to begin commercial service June 1, handling up to 1,200 voice circuits or four TV channels. (NASA Proj Off; ComSatCorp Release 69—27)
Eleventh anniversary of launch of Vanguard I, 3^4-lb, 6%-in-dia U.S. IGY satellite which proved earth was slightly pear-shaped and examined composition of upper atmosphere. Satellite had stopped transmitting in May 1964, but was expected to remain in orbit at least 200 yrs longer. (EH; ksc Release 63—68)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXCVI from Baikonur into orbit with 299-km (185.8-mi) apogee, 227-km (141.1-mi) perigee, 89.6min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 6. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/69; 9/15/69; SBD, 9/3/69, 9; UN Public Registry)
Tenth anniversary of Vanguard II, fifth U.S.-IGY satellite, launched by NASA to produce cloud-cover images using two photocells. Wobbling had prevented interpretation of data. Satellite was still in orbit. (A&A 1915-60; gsfc SSR, 2/28/69)
Dept, of Commerce announced it had successfully tracked free-drifting buoy in deep ocean with satellite telemetry in test off east Florida coast. Navigational data were relayed via satellite to gsfc for processing. Experiment proved ocean currents could be traced accurately and atmospheric and oceanographic data could be obtained from sensors on drifting buoy and transmitted with navigational information from remote regions of world, (nasa Release 69—41)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCX into orbit with 332-km (206.3-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 23. (gsfc SSR, 11/15/69; 11/30/69)
Cosmos CCLXXXI was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with 301-km (187.0-mi) apogee, 188-km (116.8-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered May 21. (gsfc SSR, 5/15/69; 5/31/69; SBD, 5/14/69, 61)
ComSatCorp submitted Report to the President and the Congress for the Calendar Year 1968. Highlights included completion of three new ground stations in U.S. and seven in foreign countries, successful launch and operation of Intelsat-III F-2 (Dec. 18, 1968), increase in intelsat membership to 63 nations, award of $72-million contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for four Intelsat IV satellites, and phasing out of regular service of Intelsat I (Early Bird) after 42 mos of commercial service with 100% reliability. In 1968 ComSatCorp realized net income of $6,841,000 (68 cents per share), 47% increase over $4,638,000 ( 46 cents per share) earned in 1967. Revenues for 1968 totaled $30,495,000; they were $18,464,000 in 1967. Utilization of comsat system continued to increase, with ComSatCorp leasing 941 full-time circuits at end of 1968, up from 717 at end of 1967 and 73 at end of 1966. Demand for TV coverage of world news events increased, with 666 hrs of TV transmitted via satellite during 1968—nearly three times as many hours as in 1967. (Text; Annual Rpt to Shareholders)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCIX from Plesetsk into orbit with 353-km (219.3-mi) apogee, 191-km (118.1-mi) perigee, 89.9min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 20. (gsfc SSR, 11/15/69; 11/30/69; SBD, 11/14/69, 59)
Ats V Applications Technology Satellite, launched Aug. 12, was adjudged unsuccessful by NASA. Primary objective—deployment and exercise of gravity-gradient stabilization system—had not been achieved because spacecraft failed to despin properly. Secondary objectives, except for operation of ion engine, were being achieved, (nasa Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXXV into orbit with 761-km (472.9-mi) apogee, 275-km (170.9-mi) perigee, 95.1-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 7, 1970. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69; 2/7/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCC into orbit with 189-km (117.4-mi) apogee, 183-km (113.7-mi) perigee, 88.2-min period, and 51.5° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 27. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/69; SBD, 9/25/69, 106)
Cosmos CCLXX was launched from Plesetsk by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 330-km (205.01-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered March 14. (gsfc SSR, 3/15/69; SBD, 3/7/69, 30; upi, W Star, 3/6/69)
Electrical fire damaged gsfc offices, laboratories, and equipment including 150-lb Small Scientific Satellite scheduled for 1970 launch in Explorer series. Damage to satellite and laboratory facility was estimated at $400,000. There were no injuries. Origin of fire was being investigated. (W Star, 12/10/69, Bl; gsfc Historian)
NASA issued Relay Program. Final Report (NASA SP—151), prepared by GSFC. It was sequel to Relay I Final Report (nasa SP—76) and summarized operations of Relay II satellite (launched Jan. 21, 1964), including communications and other experiments. It compared Relay I (launched Dec. 13, 1962) and II performances and documented aspects of Relay I operations and experiment results not covered in Relay I report. Relay I transmitted last useful data Feb. 10, 1965; Relay II operated normally for last time Nov. 20, 1966. (Text)
At State Dept, meeting of more than 60 Intelsat member nations, U.S. delegation chairman Leonard H. Marks said, “I can think of no more important step we can take towards reducing world tensions than that of broadening communications links between power nations representing different political systems”—as U.S.S.R. and 13 other observer nations listened. In written memorandum, France had questioned whether strong centralized system desired by U.S. could or should be established and urged that any new agreement leave participating countries free to join other satellite systems. (Samuelson, W Post, 2/5/69, D5)
Cosmos CCLXXX was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 251km (156-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 88.1-min period, and 51.0° inclination. Satellite reentered May 6. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/69; 5/15/69; SBD, 4/25/69, 261)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor I satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 686-km (426.3-mi) apogee, 632-km (392.7-mi) perigee, 97.9-min period, and 81.1° inclination. Tass said satellite carried solar batteries and would obtain information about weather prospects, (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69; AP, NYT, 3/28/69, 5; Interavia, 11/69, 1751)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXX1V into orbit with 300-km (186.4-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.3-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered April 1. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69; 4/15/69)
NAS published NRC Div. of Engineering’s Useful Applications of Earth-Oriented Satellites, Report of the Central Review Committee of NRC Summer Study on Space Applications, prepared for NASA. Study concluded that space applications program was “too small by a factor of two or three.” Benefits from program were expected to be large, “certainly larger than the costs of achieving them.” However, “an extensive, coherent, and selective program” would be required to achieve benefits. Committee recommended that NASA give greater emphasis to earth-satellite programs with promise of beneficial applications, commit additional funds to expanded R&D and prototype operations for certain applications, and commit $200 million to $300 million yearly to space applications program. Manned space programs should be justified in their own right, not in terms of space applications; near-term benefits for mankind would be achieved “more effectively and economically with automated devices and vehicles.” Noting that in meteorology and communications “satellites have already entered solidly into the area of economic usefulness,” report recommended that NASA grant high priority to development of multichannel distribution system for public and private network TV; multichannel system for educational broadcasts in developing countries and for special interest groups such as physicians, lawyers, and educators; and North Atlantic satellite navigation system for traffic control of transoceanic aircraft and ships. Satellite earth-sensing was dependent on R&D in sensor signatures—form of information provided by instruments. Report recommended immediate pilot program for providing information in familiar and immediately usable form, exploration into use of side-looking radar, and start of 10- to 12-yr development plan for more sophisticated sensors. (Text; NRC Release)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXCVIII from Baikonur into orbit with 162-km (100.7-mi) apogee, 127-km (78.9-mi) perigee, 87.3-min period, and 49.6° inclination. Satellite reentered same day. (gsfc SSR, 9/15/69; SBD;9/19/69, 81)
usaf announced award of $718,009 increment to $1,177,125 costplusincentive contract with Avco Corp. for design, fabrication, test, and support through orbital infancy of satellite for investigation of fundamental processes of magnetic storms, (dod Release 554—69)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXXXV into orbit with 493-km (306.3-mi) apogee, 266-km (165.3-mi) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 71.0° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 7. (gsfc SSR, 6/15/69; 10/15/69; AP, NYT, 6/4/69, 5)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCVIII into orbit with 408-km (253.5-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 91.2-min period, and 71.0° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 5, 1970. (gsfc SSR, 11/15/69; 1/15/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXXXIX from Plesetsk into orbit with 324-km (201.3-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.2-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered July 15. (gsfc SSR, 7/15/69; SBD, 7/15/69, 5)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXXXIII into orbit with 1,501-km (932.7-mi) apogee, 196-km (121.8-mi) perigee, 102.0-min period, and 81.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 10. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/69; 12/15/69; NYT, 5/28/69, 16)
Cosmos CCCIII was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with 457-km (284.0-mi) apogee, 268-km (166.5-mi) perigee, 91.7-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 23, 1970. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69; 1/31/70; SBD, 10/21/69, 233)
NASA announced it would close transportable tracking station near Toowoomba, Queensland, Australia, following August launch of ATS—E and relocate it later for use in advance versions of ATS series scheduled for late 1972 launch. Emplaced in 1966, $6-million station included 40-ft parabolic antenna and trailers containing electronic gear to maintain communications and receive telemetry from ATS satellites. (NASA Release 69—77)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXXXVII from Baikonur into orbit with 254-km (157.8-mi) apogee, 186-km (115.6-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered July 2. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/69; 7/15/69; SBD, 6/25/69, 244; W Star, 6/24/69, Al)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor II weather satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 676-km (420.1-mi) apogee, 619-km (384.6-mi) perigee, 97.6-min period, and 81.2° inclination. Powered by solar cells, satellite was designed to trace cloud cover, detect presence of snow on dark and daylight sides of earth, and record radiated and reflected heat from atmosphere, (gsfc SSR, 10/15/69; SBD, 10/7/69, 166; Av Wk, 10/20/69, 191)
Discovery of x-ray “star” between constellations Centaurus and Lupus from data relayed during July by two Vela nuclear detection satellites launched May 23 had been announced by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory astronomers, New York Times reported. Dr. J. P. Conner, Dr. W. D. Evans, and R. D. Helian said object had twice the intensity of most brilliant x-ray sources previously known-—in constellation Scor-pius—and had not yet been identified in wavelengths observable by human eye. No obvious source of x-ray emissions had been identified, such as stars, stellar explosions, or pulsars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/14/69,
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXXXII from Plesetsk into orbit with 321-km (199.5-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered May 28. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/69; sbd, 5/22/69, 98)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCLXVII1, launched from Kapustin Yar, entered orbit with 2,161-km (1,342.8-mi) apogee, 211-km (131.1-mi) perigee, 109.1-min period, and 48.4° inclination and reentered May 9, 1970. Cosmos CCLXIX, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 542-km (336.8-mi) apogee, 525-km (326.2-mi) perigee, 95.2-min period, and 74° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 3/15/69; 5/31/70; SBD, 3/7/69, 30)
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space had recommended new hj.N. initiatives to promote access to applications of space technology By small and nonspace powers, Richard S. Kahn said in Newsweek. Recommendations included appointment of U.N. official to serve as contact point for member states; panel meetings for promoting collaboration; U.N. assistance for survey missions, panel meetings, and fellowships; investigation of use of earth resource satellites; and dissemination of information on opportunities for education and training in space-related fields. Points of debate between large and small powers were on whether new technical assistance was required or whether existing machinery was sufficient. NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin, as U.S. Representative on subcommittee, had observed that the “only two applications of space technology substantially available today are in . . . meteorology and communications, in both of which U.N. agencies are active.” (Newsweek, 5/26/69, 57—61)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCI from Baikonur into orbit with 279-km (173.4-mi) apogee, 192-km (119.3-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 2. (csfc SSR, 9/30/69; 10/15/69; SBD, 9/25/69, 106)
Satellite system which combined navigational and air traffic control and collision prevention had been proposed to faa and DOD by trw Inc. Systems Group, Washington Evening Star reported. Proposal called for four satellites, one in permanent orbit with others revolving around it at lower altitudes. Aircraft would radio distinct signal to satellites and its position relative to two or more satellites would be determined by ground computers that could figure latitude and longitude of aircraft within 50 ft. System, based on delicate measurement of time for aircraft signals to reach satellite, would cost estimated $100 million, could be in operation by mid-1970s, and was also being proposed to aviation industry. (Lannan, W Star, 9/27/69, All)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXXI from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters: apogee, 310 km (192.6 mi); perigee, 187 km (116.2 mi); period, 89.7 min; and inclination, 65.4°. Satellite reentered March 23. (gsfc SSR, 3/15/69; 3/31/69; SBD, 3/18/69, 78)
Cosmos CCLXXXV1 was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters: apogee, 322 km (200.1 mi) ; perigee, 197 km (122.4 mi); period, 89.7 min; and inclination, 65.4°. Satellite reentered June 23. (gsfc SSR, 6/15/69; 6/30/69; SBD, 6/17/69, 205; Reuters, W Post, 6/16/69, A16)
nasa selected TRW Inc. and General Electric Co. for contract negotiations to conduct competitive studies for Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) program. Studies would determine how designs of existing spacecraft could be adapted with minimum modifications to erts requirements and to evaluate orbital and ground-based processing requirements. Final negotiations were expected to lead to two $500,000, firm-fixed-price contracts. First erts flights would be launched in early 1972 to evaluate sensors for monitoring earth resources and to assess scope and requirements of eventual Earth Resources Satellite (ers) program, (nasa Release 69—142)
AFRCL conducted program to measure polar cap absorption (pca) event and to determine effects on earth’s upper atmosphere. Thirty-six sounding rockets—Nike-Iroquois, Black Brant, Nike-Javelin, Sidewinder-Areas, and Areas—were launched from Churchill Research Range to 37.3- to 124.3-mi (60- to 200-km) altitudes to measure energies and densities of charged particles, atmospheric temperatures and composition, and geomagnetic fluctuations. Background data had been provided from eight sounding rockets launched before program and support was provided by measurements from Vela, Pioneer, ATS, Explorer, OV, and ESRO satellites; from instruments on board KC—135 aircraft; and from ground-based instruments. (SBD, 11/19/69, 80) November 3: NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Peter C. Hoag (usaf), reached 66,000-ft altitude and mach 1.4 after air-launch from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of powered flight, 28th in series, was to obtain stability and control data at various angles of attack and stability augmentation settings, (nasa Proj Off)
Cosmos CCLXXVIII was launched from Baikonur by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 318-km (197.6-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered April 17. (gsfc SSR, 4/15/69; 4/30/69; SBD, 4/10/69, 190)
Data were relayed by two Vela nuclear detection satellites launched May 23 that led to discovery of x-ray star between constellations Centaurus and Lupus [see Aug. 14]. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/14/69, 7)
NASA announced it had invited commercial and educational broadcast organizations interested in experimental use of Applications Technology Satellites (ats) to send representatives to June 13 briefing at NASA Hq. to learn possibilities for working with ats. ATS I (launched Dec. 6, 1966) and ATS III (launched Nov. 5, 1967) were in orbit but had largely filled basic technical assignments. Their facilities could be made available for additional experiments. Third ats, scheduled for August launch, might be available for additional experimental use on completion of technical missions assigned, (nasa Release 69—74)
Temperature measurements from satellite soundings had proved so valuable they were being used to prepare basic maps of Northern Hemisphere weather, essa announced. Soundings, made by 91-lb satellite infrared spectrometer (sirs) on board NASA’s Nimbus III (launched April 14), had provided unprecedented coverage of conditions over oceans and other areas where few upper-air measurements were made. Use of sirs data had proved so successful that special computer-to-computer link had been installed between gsfc and National Meteorological Center in Suitland, Md., to permit regular use of data in analyses of weather conditions over eastern Atlantic and most of Pacific from surface to 53,000—ft altitude. Improved version of sirs was being readied for flight on next Nimbus launch in spring 1970. (essa Release ES 69—67)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCCVI, launched from Baikonur, entered orbit with 307-km (190.8-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 64.9° inclination and reentered Nov. 5. Cosmos CCCVII entered orbit with 2,157-km (1,340.3-mi) apogee, 213-km (132.4-mi) perigee, 109.1-min period, and 48.4° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69; 11/15/69; SBD, 10/27/69, 255)
NASA’s Pegasus III meteoroid detection satellite, launched July 30, 1965, reentered earth atmosphere at 2;04 am cdt over Indian Ocean at 3.4°N. latitude and 56.7°E. longitude. Pegasus III was last in series of three Pegasus satellites with 96-ft-long detector panels launched to determine frequency of meteoroids in near-earth environment. All three had been turned off in 1968 after operating for more than double design lifetime. Few hours before reentry, controllers commanded Pegasus III beacon to begin operating again and beacon functioned satisfactorily until satellite was destroyed by reentry heat, (msfc Release 69-170; gsfc SSR, 8/15/69)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXlfJ from Plesetsk into orbit with 247-km (153.5-mi) apogee, 197-km (122.4>-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 15. (csfc SSR, 12/15/69; SBD, 12/4/69, 148)
NASA announced selection of Aerojet-General Corp. to receive $5-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for development of advanced optical communications experiment—first laser communications system to be used on satellite. Lasers provided extremely wideband communications function and would be able to transmit hundreds of TV channels around the world, greatly increasing microwave capability. Experiment would be placed on board ATS—F, scheduled for launch in 1972, and could be expanded to include spacecraft-to-spacecraft communications between ATS—F and ATS—G, to be launched in 1974. (nasa Release 69—153)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics in testimony on NASA FY 1970 budget request: “We are moving toward a number of important milestones in the Space Applications Program, the most important of which is the Earth resources survey area, where we are requesting funds for the design and construction of a research satellite, Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts). We think the ERTS Program will be a very valuable addition to mankind’s tools for handling the natural and cultural resources of the world.” FY 1970 ossa program required $559 million in new obligational authority. Although increased over FY 1969, program was well below FY 1963 through 1967. Increases were in planetary and space applications program, with planetary increases primarily due to costs in FY 1970 of program authorized in FY 1969. In addition, NASA was proposing Planetary Explorer program and dual planet mission to Venus and Mercury for 1973. Space applications increase was for experimental erts satellite and prototype of operational Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms). (Testimony)
Merger of U.S. and U.S.S.R. satellite systems into worldwide comsat link for all nations was proposed in report of Sept. 21—25 international conference at Talloires, France, released by sponsors Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and Twentieth Century Fund. In Communicating by Satellite: An International Discussion, task force appointed to consider new rules and regulations for international satellite communications said: “Obstacles undoubtedly exist to achieving the goal of an integrated, global system, but technical compatibility between the two major satellite communications systems—Intelsat and Intersputnik (through the Soviet Orbita)—is not difficult to obtain. Their orbital systems are complementary; their frequency plans can be coordinated; a single ground station can operate in either system, and their transmitting and receiving equipment can be adapted for operation in both systems.” All nations should have access to global, integrated comsat system with “willingness and ability to accept certain technical and administrative requirements” only relevant consideration. No political conditions should be applied to membership. Voting rules should “take account of the special contributions” of countries like U.S. and U.S.S.R. “while recognizing the interests of virtually all nations in the basic rules of operation of the system.” No nation should be allowed to broadcast sound and TV into territory of other nations without their consent. (Text; AP, W Star, 11/17/69, A12)
CBS Enterprises Inc. announced first agreement for regular satellite transmission of news stories had been reached with cbs Newsfilm subscribers in Australia and Japan. It would eventually lead to daily, instantaneous, intercontinental transmission of TV news by satellite, company said, (cbs Enterprises Release, 7/8/69)
Cosmos CCLXVI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 336-km (208.8-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 72° inclination. Satellite reentered March 5. (gsfc SSR, 2/28/69; 3/15/69; AP, W Post, 2/26/69)
NASA announced it had issued 12 RFPs for definition and design of Earth Resources Technology Satellite system including study of ground data-processing system. Responses were due June 18. First of two planned spacecraft, erts—a was scheduled for late 1971 or early 1972 launch as r&d satellite to test new technology to verify effectiveness of- earth resources survey from space. ERTS—A sensors would obtain image data in regions of near and infrared spectrum. Satellite, weighing 1,000 lbs, would also carry experimental data-collection system for measurements of remote, unattended sites. It would be placed in sun-synchronous, near-polar orbit at 500-mi altitude to view entire earth in 100-mi-wide increments in less than three weeks for at least one year, (nasa Release, 69-73)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXV into orbit with 457-km (284-mi) apogee, 272-km (169-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 71° inclination. Satellite reentered May 1. (gsfc SSR, 2/15/69; 5/15/69)
Canadian Isis I International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched Jan. 30) was adjudged successful by NASA. Nine of ten experiments were operational; ion mass spectrometer had been turned off after one week of operation, when it developed high-voltage problems, and since had been used only for short periods to collect engineering data. Low-frequency receiver experiment had been providing indirect ion data, thus compensating partially for IMS loss. Onboard tape recorder was providing excellent topside ionograms of Antarctic area and other previously inaccessible areas. (NASA Proj Off)
INTELSAT conference ended March 21 had made it clear “that Intelsat, in its brief 5-year history, has been an extraordinary success,” wrote Robert J. Samuelson in Science. Its transoceanic satellites, transmitting telephone signals primarily, had tended to depress cost of communications by multiplying available channels and pressuring carriers to lower rates. Satellites had given “third world” nations in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, previously dependent upon “confused mixture of radio and cable channels,” chance to join advanced world’s communications system. Attendance of U.S.S.R. as conference observer was “sure sign” of INTELSAT success. Soviet decision to join Intelsat might hinge on organization’s decision about its future. Issue was Intelsat’s formal structure and problem was “determining how large a role the United States should play.” U.S. domination stemmed from its economic and technological power. U.S. firm, ComSatCorp, was made manager of Intelsat under 1964 agreement, to oversee satellite design, contract with NASA for launchings, and supervise operation in space. Month-long meeting had not resulted in accord on even draft agreement. Europeans wanted to replace ComSatCorp management with international secretariat to subcontract technical tasks to ComSatCorp and other organizations as they demonstrated genuine competence. U.S. approach was, Why “tamper with a successful formula?” Fundamental issue lay deeper. “Technological superiority . . . creates its own foreign policy problems. America’s Intelsat partners are pushing for a Space Age which—if not truly international—is at least more multinational.” (Science, 4/4/69, 56—7)
Cosmos CCLXX111 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 335-km (208.2-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.6-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered March 30. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69)
ComSatCorp announced it had applied to fcc for permission to reduce rates for TV transmissions through Atlantic satellites by about 40% and to eliminate extra charge for color TV through these satellites. Reductions were possible because of availability of Intelsat 111 F—2 (launched Dec. 19, 1968) over Atlantic. (ComSatCorp Release)
msfc announced award of $1,311,702 contract to LTV Aerospace Corp. for construction of temperature control devices for Apollo Telescope Mount, or manned solar observatory. msfc also had issued bid requests on 5 control relay packages, 4 horizon sensor scanner systems, 11 solar sensors (4 for attitude control system and 7 for solar panel control system), and 5 computer component control packages for guidance, control, and power systems for Saturn I Workshop, scheduled to be flown in 1971—72 in Apollo Applications Program, (msfc Releases 69—6, 69—8) Soyuz V, carrying Cosmonauts Yevegeny Khrunov, Boris Volynov, and Aleksey Yeliseyev, was launched Jan. 15 into orbit with 212-km (131.7-mi) apogee, 196-km (121.8-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Tass said spacecraft would conduct joint experiments with Soyuz IV. Spacecraft established radio contact, coordinated scientific programs, transmitted TV pictures to earth, photographed earth’s surface, and conducted midcourse maneuvers. On Jan, 16 the two spacecraft automatically approached to within 110 yds of each other and Soyuz IV was then steered manually until it docked with Soyuz V. Tass announcement said: “After the docking there was a mutual mechanical coupling of the ships, they were rigidly tightened up and their electrical circuits were connected. Thus, the world’s first experimental cosmic station with four compartments for the crew was assembled and began functioning as an artificial earth satellite.” Moscow TV viewers watched as Soyuz V crew members Khrunov and Yeliseyev put on special spacesuits with new regenerative life-support systems and went out into space through service compartment hatch. Cosmonauts remained in space for one hour, conducting observations and experiments, and then entered service compartment of other spacecraft, Soyuz IV, to join Shatalov, After 4 lirs 35 min of docked flight in low, nearly circular orbit, spacecraft were uncoupled and continued their flights separately. Soyuz IV, with three-man crew, landed Jan. 17 and Soyuz V, Jan. 18, (upi, W Star, 1/14—19/69; Shub, W Post, 1/15—19/69; Winters, B Sun, 1/15—18/69; Moscow News, 1/25—2/1/69, 3; 2/1—8/69, Supplement; gsfc SSR, 1/15/69; 1/31/69)
U.S.S.R. launched two unmanned satellites. Cosmos CCXC, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 323-km (200.7-mi) apogee, 192-km (119.3-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.4° inclination and reentered July 30. Molniya 1—12 comsat, launched from Baikonur, entered orbit with 39,526-km (24,560.3-mi) apogee, 496-km (308.2mi) perigee, 711.0-min period, and 64.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 7/31/69; SBD, 7/28/69, 62; NYT, 7/23/69, 26)
Canister containing S-16 barium cloud experiment was successfully ejected from esro’s Heos I satellite (launched by nasa Dec. 5, 1968) at 43,495.9-mi (70,000-km) altitude. Cloud, 1,864.1 mi (3,000 km) long and visible to the naked eye, had lasted 20 min and yielded information on magnetic fields in space, (nasa Proj Off)
Associated Press said NATO nations U.K., West Germany, Canada, Italy, Belgium, Holland, and Norway had agreed to participate in tactical satellite communications experiments with U.S. France was interested but would not participate; system was for use of closely integrated forces and she had withdrawn her troops from integrated NATO commands. Satellite for exclusive use of alliance was scheduled for launch by end of year. (W Star, 5/7/69, A9)
NASA announced Australis Oscar-A, 39-lb spacecraft designed and constructed by amateur radio operators at Melbourne Univ. in Australia, had been accepted for launch Jan. 9, 1970, as secondary payload on Tiros-M. Radio Amateur Satellite Corp., group of U.S. amateurs, was preparing satellite for launch, testing and qualifying it to comply with NASA requirements. Australis Oscar-A would transmit low-power signals on two amateur bands—29.45 mhz in 10-meter band and 144.05 mhz in 2-meter band—that would be used by radio amateurs throughout world for training in satellite tracking and for radio propagation experiments. Australis Oscar-A would be fifth satellite launched under Project Oscar and first accepted by NASA as secondary payload. Four previous satellites had been launched by group of U.S. radio operators on Pacific Coast in conjunction with dod spacecraft. (NASA Release 69-157)
nas published Physics of the Earth in Space: The Role of Ground-Based Research, report of study by Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Research of Geophysics Research Board of NRG. Among recommendations were new facility to exploit incoherent-scatter techniques for investigation of ionospheric and magnetospheric dynamics, program of controlled sounding of magnetosphere based on new VLF transmitter facility near 60° invariant latitude in Antarctic, and relocation of Stanford Research Institute’s incoherent-scatter facility at Palo Alto, Calif., to auroral zone at College, Alaska, to measure F-region electron density and temperature and ion temperature. Report advocated increased support for specific solar radioastronomy techniques, improvements in balloon technology, and acquisition of ground-based geophysical data via satellite links, possibly using comsat channel. (Text)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXCV11 from Plesetsk into orbit with 309-km (192.0-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.6min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 10. (gsfc SSR, 9/15/69; SBD, 9/3/69, 8)
Intelsat-III F—3 comsat, launched Feb. 5 and in orbit over Pacific, had lost some of potential capacity and would be moved to 62.5° east longitude over Indian Ocean, ComSatCorp announced. In new position satellite would link directly all countries with appropriate earth stations in Western Europe, Near East, Africa, Asia, and Australia. Move would be made soon after launch of Intelsat-III F—4 May 21. Future satellites would be modified for additional redundancy. (ComSatCorp Release 69—27)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXCI from Baikonur into orbit with 527-km (327.5-mi) apogee, 143-km (88.9-mi) perigee, 91.2-min period, and 62.2° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 8. (gsfc SSR, 8/15/69; 9/15/69; SBD, 8/7/69, 109)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXXXVIII into orbit with 270-km (167.7-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered July 5. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/69; 7/15/69)
House passed and returned to Senate S. 17, bill to amend Communications Satellite Act of 1962 to provide for apportionment of ComSatCorp directors according to percentages of stock held by public and communications corporations. {CR, 2/19/69, H1037—40)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXIV into orbit with 295-km (183.3-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.3-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 69.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 5. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/69; 2/15/69)
l/g Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) criticized mol cancellation in Detroit News: Although 80% of U.S. space budget had been devoted to peaceful purposes in space, “it has been recognized generally that prudence dictated that we should ultimately possess the capability of intercepting, inspecting and, if need be, destroying hostile weapons in space. . . . Cancellation of the mol project concedes to the Russians control of space. After about 1972 the Russians will have the capability of overhauling and destroying our reconnaissance satellites, and they will also be capable of placing weapons in space which we can neither intercept, identify nor disarm.” (Detroit News, 6/30/69)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCII from Plesetsk into orbit with 320-km (198.8-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 25. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69; SBD, 10/20/69, 226)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCCXVI entered orbit with 1,638-km (1,017.8-mi) apogee, 147-km (91.3-mi) perigee, 102.8-min period, and 49.4° inclination. Cosmos CCCXVll entered orbit with 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee, 191-km (118.7-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 65.4° inclination; it reentered Jan. 5, 1970. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/69; 1/15/70)
New York Times editorial: “The space age is here to stay, but the precise contours of how far and how fast this nation will go in the decades ahead will have to be determined on a pragmatic basis, almost year by year and Administration by Administration.” (NYT, 9/17/69, 40) September 18: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXCIX from Baikonur into orbit with 219-km (136.1-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 89.2min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 22. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/69; SBD, 9/19/69, 81)
usaf announced it had selected TRW Inc. for initial increment of $14 million to estimated $37,653,090 contract to design new, synchronous comsats for Phase II of Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) . New satellites would be used with small surface terminals. Steerable, narrow-beam antennas would focus portion of satellite energy to areas of 1,000- or 2,000-mi dia and could be steered to different locations on earth’s surface in minutes. Satellites could be moved to new position in days as needed, (dod Release 148—69)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos CCCXI entered orbit with 467-km (290.2-mi) apogee, 272-km (169.0-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 71.0° inclination and reentered March 10, 1970. Cosmos CCCXII entered orbit with 1,180-km (773.2-mi) apogee, 1,141-km (709.0-mi) perigee, 108.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/69; 3/31/70; SBD, 11/26/69, 112)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXCIV from Plesetsk into orbit with 343-km (213.1-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.7-mi period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 27. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/69; SBD, 8/20/69, 166; UN Public Registry)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXIII into orbit with 362-km (224.9-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 20. (upi, W Star, 1/13/69, Al; gsfc SSR, 1/15/69; 1/31/69)
ComSatCorp announced earnings of $1,525,000, or 15 cents per share, for first quarter of 1969. It had earned $1,798,000 (18 cents per share) for similar period in 1968. Expected decline followed increased operating expenses from expansion of satellite and earth station system. (ComSatCorp Release 69-18)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXC1I1 from Plesetsk into orbit with 244-km (151.6-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 28. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/69; UN Public Registry; SBD, 8/20/69, 166)
Cosmos CCLXXXIV was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 297-km (184.6-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered June 6. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/69; 6/15/69)
Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) System—joint effort of NASA and essa to provide systematic, daily, worldwide cloud-cover observations—was adjudged successful by NASA. TOS system was operated in support of National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). It included four advanced vidicon-camera-system stored-data spacecraft for remote global cloud-cover observations and five automatic-picture-transmission (APT) direct-readout spacecraft for local cloud-cover observations. Nine spacecraft had been successfully launched and operated in orbit; tenth had been qualified but had not been launched because of extended life of earlier spacecraft. (NASA Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXVIIIfrom Plesetsk into orbit with 316-km (196.4-mi) apogee, 206-km (128.0-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered April 9. (GSFC SSR, 3/31/70, 4/30/70; SBD, 313 W0, 142)
International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey Systems at Univ. of Michigan May 3-14, 1971, would study use of satellites to survey earth resources and surface features, NASA announced. Workshop would be sponsored by NASA, Dept of Agriculture, noaa, U.S. Geological Survey, Dept, of State, aid, and Naval Oceanographic Office. Invitations had been sent to administrators and experts from U.N. member states in accordance with President Nixon’s Sept. 18 statement before U.N. General Assembly. Workshop would survey data already acquired and methods of collecting, processing, and analyzing earth resources data. Potential action for countries initiating earth resources programs would be discussed, including costs and opportunities for international cooperation and assistance. (NASA Release 70-215)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXLV into orbit with 257-km (159.7mi) apogee, 187-km (116.2-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered May 28. (GSFC SSR, 5/31/70)
U.K.’s Skynet A (idcsp-a) comsat, launched by NASA for usaf Nov. 21, 1969, was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite was adjusted into final orbit Jan. 7 and USAF reported all systems were operating satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXV into orbit from Baykonur with 210-km (130.5-mi) apogee, 144-km (89.5-mi) perigee, and 49.5° inclination. Satellite reentered same day. (Spacewarn, 10/20/70, 2; GSFC SSR, 9/30/70; Spaceflight, 3/71,94)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXXXIII from Plesetsk into orbit with 323-km (200.7-mi) apogee, 180-km (111.9-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 16. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/70; SF, 6/71,213)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLIX into orbit with 853-km (530.0-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 95.2-min period, and 51.1.° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 6. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/70; 11/30/70)
Cosmos CCCLI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 464km (288.3-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 13. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/ 70; 10/31/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXIV into orbit with 465-km (288.9-mi) apogee, 264-km (164.0-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 71.0° inclination. Satellite reentered May 23. (GSFC SSR, 2/ 28/70; 5/31/70)
U.S.S.R. was using long- and medium-range bombers and, possibly, communications satellites to coordinate global naval exercises, dod sources were reported as saying. No violations of territorial air space of any nation had been reported, (upi, C Trib, 4/26/70, A4; AP, NYT, 4/29/70,8)
NASA launched series of six sounding rockets from Wallops Station— two Areas, Nike-Cajun, Nike-Apache, Viper Dart, and Loki Dart— to obtain data on atmosphere. Data would be compared with that from orbiting Nimbus III and IV satellites to improve understanding of relations between various data, (nasa Rpts srl)
Nimbus IV meteorological satellite, launched April 8, had contacted elk fitted with instrumented collar in Wyoming April 1 and had transmitted data on elk’s temperature, NASA announced, (upi, W Post, 4/12/70,60)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXVIII from Baykonur into orbit with 276-km (171.5-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 21. (GSFC SSR, 1/15/70,1/30/70; SBD, 1/12/70, 38)
International conference on global communications satellite system adjourned until autumn without reaching agreement on permanent operating arrangements. Conference established Intersessional Working Group to negotiate and draft intergovernmental and operating agreement reflecting compromise proposals offered by Australia and Japan. (Rpt of US Del to Sec State 4-3-70)
Second attempt to locate Monique, instrumented elk, by satellite [see Feb. 16] was unsuccessful. Feb. 19 attempt had failed. NASA attributed failures to interference or failure of collar transmitter. NASA observer would be sent to track Monique on foot. (AP, NYT, 2/22/ 70)
AT&T and ComSatCorp formally announced details of proposed satellite system under which ComSatCorp would furnish two 10 800-circuit satellites that would be leased entirely to AT&T for $205 million over seven years. ComSatCorp filed with fcc application to provide advanced high-capacity satellites for domestic communications that would double capacity by doubling use of limited frequency spectrum. ComSatCorp said it would file in near future for separate multiservice system to provide services to other customers, (at&t Release; ComSatCorp Release 70-54)
Tests to determine full capabilities of satellite communications were being conducted by afsc Rome Air Development Center engineers with orbiting Les VI (launched Sept. 26, 1968) and Tacsat J(Feb. 9, 1969), afsc announced. Using two parabolic antennas and new equipment at Verona Test Site near Griffiss AFB, N.Y., engineers simulated traffic conditions of a comsat system being used simultaneously by hundreds of separate stations. Simulation permitted measurement of number of possible communications circuits through satellite before actual construction of stations. Tests were being conducted with terminals on ground, aircraft, surface vessels, submarines, and land vehicles, with participation by U.K., Canada, and Netherlands. (AFSC Release 72.70)
ComSatCorp announced it would file promptly with fcc for authority to proceed with domestic satellite services. (ComSatCorp Release 70-5)
Twelfth anniversary of Explorer I, first U.S. satellite. Launched Jan. 31,1958, stovepipe-shaped 14-kg (30.8-lb) satellite was in orbit with 585.7-km (364-mi) apogee and 294-km (182.7-mi) perigee and was expected to reenter and disintegrate in May. (msfc Release 70-11)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites, from Plesetsk. Cosmos CCCLXXXVIH entered orbit with 499-km (310.1-mi) apogee, 269-km (167.2-mi) perigee, 92.2-min period, and 70.9° inclination and reentered May 10, 1971. Cosmos CCCLXXXIX entered orbit with 687-km (426.9-mi) apogee, 642-km (398.9-mi) perigee, 98min period, and 81.1° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/70; 5/31/71; SF, 6/71,213)
Afghanistan was allowing New Mexico State Univ. team to track satellites from mobile tracking station in area near Kabul that bordered on U.S.S.R. and Communist China, AP said. Project, supported by aid, had begun after U.S. closed base in Peshawar on orders from Pakistan government in November 1969. Embassy spokesman had said project was directed by Afghan Cartographic Institute and data collected was “probably available to the Russians.” (AP, C Trib, 10/7/70)
Battle over choice of undersea cables and comsats had begun at fcc, Washington Evening Star said, at&t was urging quick decision authorizing sixth Atlantic cable. ComSatCorp’s satellite facilities in Atlantic area were operating at 50% of capacity and company could benefit from more volume if existing five undersea cables became overcrowded. (Aug, W Star, 9/6/70, C5)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor V weather satellite into orbit with 888-km (551.8-mi) apogee, 830-km (515.7-km) perigee, 102.0-min period, and 81.2° inclination. Spacecraft would photograph cloud and snow cover and collect weather data, Tass announced. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; AP, C Trib, 6/25/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXX from Kapustin Yar into orbit with 297-km (184.6-mi) apogee, 239-km (148.5-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 10. (GSFC SSR, 1/31/70; 2/15/70; SF, 7/70, 282)
NASA announced it had granted Alaska permission to use Ats I (launched Dec. 7, 1966) to transmit educational radio programs to remote areas in Alaska and instructional and public TV from Fairbanks to Kodiak, Nome, and Fort Yukon, Alaska. Experiment— intended to help Alaska develop operational experience with which to plan follow-on operational satellite system—would operate seven hours per day through spring 1971. Radio transmissions would begin in March 1970 and TV in October 1970. ComSatCorp would provide at least three ground stations and RCA Global Communications Inc. would provide one. Alaska would finance operation of experiment, provide programming, and evaluate results, reimbursing NASA for any costs over those for normal experimental operations. Potential users of operational satellite systems willing to invest in necessary facilities, provide programming, and cover ground costs were being permitted to present proposals for use of Ats I and Ats III (launched Nov. 6, 1967) for worthwhile experiments as long as satellites continued to operate. (NASA Release 70-16)
Cosmos CCCLV1 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 502-km (31 L9-mi) apogee, 224-km (139.2-mi) perigee, 91.7-min period, and 81.9“ inclination. Satellite reentered Oct, 2. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/70,10/31/70)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of world’s first atomic bomb explosion by U.S. in Hiroshima, Japan. Hiroshima marked event by tolling solitary bell and stopping all activities for moment of silence and prayer. Prime Minister Eisaku Sato said in message that Japan, as only nation to suffer nuclear attack, now aspired to establish permanent world peace to protect mankind from nuclear war. (AP, WPost, 7/6/ 70, A3) August 7; U.S.S.R. launched two satellites. Intercosmos III, launched from Kapustin Yar, carried Soviet and Czechoslovak experiments into orbit with 1192-km (740.7-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-min) perigee, 98.7-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 6. Cosmos CCCLV entered orbit with 321-km (199.5-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-km) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.3° inclination and reentered Aug. 15. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/70,12/31/70; SBD, 8/10/70,173)
gsfc announced award of $2 831 670 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. to develop millimeter-wave communications experiment for NASA’s ATS-F satellite, scheduled for launch in 1972. Millimeter-wave frequencies would offer relief for saturated lower frequency bands and provide large bandwidth channels for transmission of TV and high-density data-relay traffic, (gsfc Release 1-70)
ESRO’s Boreas satellite (launched by NASA Oct. 1, 1969) was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite had entered lower than planned orbit and had reentered Nov. 23, 1969, but all experiments functioned satisfactorily. ESROhad obtained large quantity of scientific data and considered mission a success, (nasa Proj Off)
White-hot metal slabs, each weighing approximately 45 kg (100 lbs), fell from sky and landed on Adrian, Tex., farm; near farmer at Beaver, Okla.; and near oil crew at Pratt, Kansas. AP later said Government team would investigate. , On Aug. 31 USAF announced that chunks were probably part of U.S.S.R.’s reentering Cosmos CCCXVI(launched Dec. 23, 1969). Decay of satellite along path where pieces were found had been predicted by norad. Parts were being analyzed by USAF and would be returned to U.S.S.R. if positively identified. (W Post, 8/31/70, A8; upi, NYT, 9/1/70,59; AP, CSM, 9/2/70, 3)
NASA announced delay in selection of contractor to develop, fabricate, test, and operate ats f and ats-g Applications Technology Satellites because of “recent decisions in connection with the NASA Fiscal Year 1971 budget.” Fairchild Hiller Corp. and General Electric Co., final competitors, had been asked to revise their proposals. (nasa Release 70-18)
NASA announced selection of General Electric Co. for negotiation of $50-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for hardware development of Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) system. Work —to be directed by GSFC—would include development of two flight spacecraft, equipment and services for ground data-handling system, spacecraft receiver, and six ground platforms for remote-site data-collection-system experiment. (NASA Release 70-123)
Pravda editorial had charged Communist China’s first satellite was part of warlike anti-Soviet program, upi reported. Pravda said Communist China was building “military psychosis” and splitting world Communist movement. (Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/20/70)
European industrial consortium star (Satellites for Telecommunications. Applications and' Research) was formed to compete for future ESRO contracts. Members were British Aircraft Corp., Contraves A. G. of Switzerland, cge Fiar and Montedel-Montecatini Edison Electronica S.p.A. of Italy, sabca of Belgium, L. M. Ericsson AB of Sweden, Fokker ffw of the Netherlands, Domier-System GmbH of West Germany , and Thomson csf of France. AEG-Telefunken of West Germany would contribute on comsat work. (SF, 3/71, 81)
New European satellite consortium was pooling talents to strengthen chances for large share of European space business, including possible work on U.S. shuttle program, Nature reported. Seven-member group with D. W. Malim of Marconi Space and Defence Systems of U.K. as Chairman of Managing Board, included French Societe' Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, Etudes Techniques et Constructions Aerospiatales of Belgium, Societe Anonyme de Telecommunications of France, Messeschmitt-Boelkow-BIohm and Siemens of West Germany, and Selenia of Italy. (Nature, 11/7/70, 494)
Development of light source 20 times more powerful than largest light source commercially produced was announced by LeRC. Operating at 400 kw, 76-mm (3-in) electric arc radiated through 125 lenses and lit 47-sq-m (500-sq-ft) area. It had been installed in Space Power Facility vacuum chamber at Plum Brook Station, Ohio, to simulate deep space environment for testing power-generation systems on communications satellites or manned orbiting laboratories. (LeRC Release 70-36)
Blanche S. Scott, first woman pilot in U.S*, died at age 84. Mrs. Scott had made solo flight in Hammondsport, N.Y., Sept. 6, 1910, in Curtiss Pusher aircraft and had become first woman to ride in jet aircraft in 1948. (UPI, WPost, 1/14/70, C6) Nike-Apache launched at dusk was unsuccessful because 2nd stage failed to ignite. Nike-Apache launched at dawn carried sodium experiment that created reddish-orange cloud visible for hundreds of miles along East Coast. Nike-Cajun and four Nike-Apaches carried trimethylaluminum (tma) payloads that formed pale white clouds. Data were obtained by photographing continuously motions of trails from five ground-based camera sites. Similar tests had been conducted Feb. 13-14, 1969. In conjunction with vapor series two Nike-Apaches and one Nike-Cajun were launched at 6:47 am, 12:23 pm, and 12:55 pm EST Jan. 14, carrying acoustic grenade experiments to obtain correlative data on atmosphere between 48- and 121-km (30- and 75-mi) altitudes by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Areas was launched at 1:27 pm est Jan. 14 to obtain additional meteorological data. (WS Release 70-1) Apogee motor was fired at 8:29 am EST Jan. 16 to place satellite in near-synchronous orbit of 35 900-km (22 300-mi) altitude over Atlantic and antenna was deployed. Full-time commercial service was scheduled to begin Feb. 1, with 955 circuits carrying telephone and telegraph traffic between 17 earth stations in Atlantic region. Satellite could also carry TV traffic at same time and had 1200-circuit capacity. Intelsat-III F-6 was fourth successful launch in Intelsat III series. Last successful mission, Intelsat-III F-4 (May 21-23, 1969), had been followed by Intelsat-III F-5 (July 25, 1969), which failed to reach planned orbit, (gsfc Dir Wkly Rpt; ComSatCorp Releases 701,70-4, 70-6; Proj Off)
International reaction to first Chinese satellite launch: In U.S.S.R. Pravda devoted 10 words on inside page to report of launch. Washington Post said it was “continuation of a war of words”; Chinese had barely mentioned Soviet space activities since nations became enemies. Romania congratulated Chinese for “fresh successes in the field of scientific investigation of outer space.” Albania also hailed achievement. U.K. Minister of Technology Anthony Wedgwood Benn sent message to Chinese government congratulating engineers and space workers on launch. West Germany’s Bochum Observatory called event greater technological feat than 1957 launch of Soviet Sputnik I. North Vietnam news agency said launching “brings out the supremacy of socialism and contributes to the development of science and technology in the interests of progressive mankind.” Pakistan President Yahya Khan in message to Chinese Premier Chou En-lai called launch “great step forward,” demonstrating progress of China’s technology. He said feat “by our friendly neighbor has been received by us with a feeling of admiration.” Japanese officials said if China had developed guidance system for satellite launching, it soon would be able to fire intercontinental missiles with high precision. (WPost, 4/27/70, A9; WSJ, 4/27/70)
aiaa Earth Resources Conference to consider technical, economic, and political aspects of global satellite system was held in Annapolis, Md. In keynote address Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson said surveying earth’s resources from space could change face of international relations. He warned nations must organize international survey program to avoid serious diplomatic problems when system became operational in few years. “We should start now to consider with other countries how best to capitalize and coordinate earth resource surveying systems as they come to serve the interests of many countries. People value what they pay for and they will not contribute to a U.S. program.” Problem of how to handle data gathered from country not participating or not wanting information known was major problem. Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said NASA’s projected new program costs were “unrealistically low.” He predicted, “There will be pressure on Congress to reduce the space budget still further unless the future orientation of the program is based less on space spectaculars and more on the production of tangible benefits.” ERC and mit research teams reported that camera and sensor systems for survey satellites had shown in aircraft and balloon tests along northeastern coast of U S. that air and water pollution could be monitored effectively and traced to sources by satellites. (AP, Huntsville News, 3/30/70; Lannan, W Star, 3/4/70, A4; AP, C Trib, 3/4/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLII from Baykonur into orbit with 292-km (181.4-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered July 15. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/70; SBD, 7/10/70,41)
nae President Eric A. Walker announced selection of Dr. C. Stark Draper, vice-director of MIT’s Charles Stark Draper Laboratory (formerly Instrumentation Laboratory), to receive nae’s fifth Founders Medal. Dr. Draper would receive medal and deliver Founders Lecture at luncheon April 30 in conjunction with nae’s annual meeting, (nae Release) March I3. U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXVIinto orbit with 239-km (148.5-mi) apogee, 209-km (129.9-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 81.3° inclination. Satellite reentered March 21. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/70)
With advent of SST, information on meteorological conditions at higher levels of stratosphere would be needed for routine civil-aviation operations, Frederick G. Finger and Raymond M. Mclnturff of ESSA’s Weather Bureau said in Science. Forecast system would be extended from 12-km (7.5-mi) to 20-km (12.4-mi) altitudes or higher. Forecasting techniques to support SST might be facilitated by exploiting similarities between stratosphere and troposphere weather. Much remained to be done on phenomenon forecasting. Wind effects should be smaller for SST than for subsonic aircraft but wind forecasts might be necessary during winter, when variations were high enough to effect economics of operation. Knowledge of temperature fields and of ozone distribution could prove valuable. Possible solar cosmic radiation hazards would be minimized by ground-based forecasting system and onboard detection equipment but sonic boom problem at ground level might be less tractable. Amplification and attenuation of boom by meteorological conditions could be predicted. World Weather Watch of U.N. and ESSA’s satellites and spacecraft with ability to depict continuous three-dimensional temperature distribution and wind pressure over entire globe would play major role in providing SST meteorological information, as would SST itself. (Science, 1/2/70, 16-24)
West Germany’s Azur research satellite, launched by NASA Nov. 7, 1969, was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite had achieved nominal orbit and had obtained very good data. Spacecraft and instruments were functioning satisfactorily except for tape recorder that had failed 30 days after launch. (NASA Proj Off)
AT&T had urged FCC to adopt overseas communications policy that would permit building of 10 additional undersea cables by end of 1979, Wall Street Journal reported. Company had told FCC it did not object to fcc approval of pending applications for four additional satellites beyond four new ones already approved for launching, but asked that fcc also approve new cable projects “to avoid a serious imbalance between cable and satellite facilities in the future.” {WSJ, 8/21/70)
NASA announced it was seeking proposals for use of six orbiting satellites which had fulfilled their original scientific objectives but were still operational. Satellites—Ogo I (launched Sept. 4, 1964), Ogo III (launched June 6, 1966), Explorer XXXI(launched Nov. 28, 1965), Explorer XXXIII (launched July 1, 1966), Oso III (launched March 8, 1967), and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967)—had exceeded one-year design lifetimes with most of onboard experiments still functional and were available for new or expanded experimentation. (NASA Release 70-120)
State Dept, spokesman said usn would build $19-million post for satellite communications on British island of Diego-Garcia in Indian Ocean. As part of joint U.S.-U.K. project, island would also serve as air base for reconnaissance aircraft monitoring increased U.S.S.R,. naval presence in Indian Ocean. (Reuters, B Sun, 12/16/ 70,6; dodpio)
Japan’s Institute of Aeronautical Science had announced that Japan on Aug. 19 would launch 61.7-kg (136-lb) satellite equipped with four telemetric antennas, two solar-electric-wave antennas, and solar batteries, upi reported. (NYT, 7/26/70)
Western Union Telegraph Co. announced it had filed proposal with fcc to build domestic satellite system to serve all 50 states. Application called for launching of three comsats, initial construction of six earth stations, and construction of 31 terrestrial microwave stations. First comsat would be launched two years after FCC approval. (Western Union Release)
Cosmos CCCXXXI was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 323-km (200.7-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered April 16. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/70)
Aurorae (Esro I) satellite, launched by NASA for ESRO Oct. 3, 1968, reentered atmosphere after investigating auroras and related phenomena for 21 mos. Satellite—designed, developed, and constructed by ESRO—was second ESRO spacecraft launched under nasa-esro agreement. (NASA Proj Off; gsfc SSR, 6/30/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor III weather satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 633-km (393.3-mi) apogee, 537-km (333.7-mi) perigee, 96.3-min period, and 81.1° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 3/31/70; SBD, 3/19/70,94)
Article on birth pangs of first satellite, written by Dr. Clifford C. Furnas shortly before his death in April 1969, was published in Research Trends. Dr. Furnas had been member in 1955 of DOD’s Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Special Capabilities, a panel appointed to investigate feasibility of U.S. satellite program. (Research Trends, Spring 1970,15-8)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXXXVl from Baykonur into orbit with 270-km (167.8-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 28. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/70; SBD, 12/17/70, 191)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, participated in international medical conference by two-way satellite TV relay between msc and 11 European cities. Conference was part of program of 18th International Post-Graduate Congress of German Federal Medical Council. Central meeting was at Davos, Switzerland, with other medical groups participating through TV projection from nine German cities and Vienna, Austria, (msc Release 70-29; nasa pao)
UiS.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXV into orbit with 321-km (199.5mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered March 12. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/70)
Science editorial commented on comsats: The communications satellites have a variety of applications. . . . One application that will probably be implemented fairly soon is aeronautical and ship communication. Radio works well on line of sight but is undependable at distances greater than 300 miles [483 km]. Many ships have been lost while radio operators were trying in vain to communicate their peril. Midocean aeronautical navigation represents another growing need which could also be filled. Satellite enthusiasts point to other potential uses. One of these is Picturephone, which now requires about 100 telephone circuits for a single two-way conversation. High-capacity; low-cost satellite circuits would help to make feasible large-scale use of this device. Perhaps more distant but of great consequence would be exploitation of future inexpensive communications for use in educational television. Constructive applications of satellites are now a reality, and extension of technological potentials will have profound and global consequences.” (Science, 11/20/70)
Nimbus IV meterorological satellite, launched April 8, was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had acquired sufficient number of global samples of atmospheric radiation measurements to compare vertical temperature, water vapor, and ozone profiles, and to compare merits of several instrument approaches, (nasa Proj Off)
Nato I, satellite, launched by NASA March 20 for nato, had met mission objectives and was operating satisfactorily, nasa announced. (nasa Proj Off)
U.S. Patent Office granted patent No. 3 495 260 to gsfc engineers Charles R. Laughlin and Roger C. Hollenbaugh for North Atlantic air traffic control system using satellite. System, in which aircraft would transmit positions to ground stations and data would be relayed to all aircraft via satellite, would be tested with ats in 1972 or 1973. Position of ssts flying at three times speed of subsonic aircraft would be calculated by computers and supplied to traffic controllers. (NYT, 2/14/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXIIIinto orbit with 314km (195.1-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.3° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 18. (gsfc SSR, 2/15/ 70; 2/28/70)
ComSatCorp had been “bouncing from one controversy to another” since its 1962 inception, Robert J. Samuelson said in Washington Post. “Last week it was the International Telephone and Telegraph World Communications, Inc., that asked the FCC to scrub the satellite launch. ITT argued that the Commission was favoring satellite communications over underseas cable systems. . .. Others share iTT’s irritation. The remaining communications carriers with cable interests. . .are similarly unhappy with their new satellite competitor.” ComSatCorp stock holders were displeased that company had yet to pay dividend. “Even foreign countries, which have benefited by Comsat’s experience in establishing an international satellite network now resent Comsat’s dominant position in that system.” But international satellite traffic had been growing at annual rate of 20%. With initial investment nearly completed, ComSatCorp’s operating revenues were rising rapidly. (WPost, 4/26/70, L3)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXLVI from Baykonur into orbit with 351-km (218.1-mi) apogee, 206-km (128.0-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite reentered June 17. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; SBD, 6/11/70, 196)
U.S.S.R. launched Intercosmos IV from Kapustin Yar into orbit with 602-km (374.1-mi) apogee, 255-km (158.5-mi) perigee, 93.1-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Purpose of launch was investigation of uv and x-radiation of sun and its effect on structure of earth’s upper atmosphere, U.S.S.R. said. Satellite reentered Jan. 17, 1971. (Gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; 1/31/71; UN Gen Assembly Release 70-29113; SF, 4/71,138)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXXXIV from Plesetsk into orbit with 277-km (172.1-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 22. (GSFC SSR 12/31/70; SBD, 12/17/70, 191)
Radio interference experiment on board NASA’s Sert II satellite (launched Feb. 3) stopped operating. Experiment had supplied more than three months of useful data and indicated operation of electric engine in space was unlikely to interfere with radio communications between ground and spacecraft at signal strengths measured. Halt would not affect mission’s primary objective, operation of ion engine in space for six months, (nasa Release 70-79)
ComSatCorp had made formal proposal to faa for satellite system to enable faa and foreign air controllers to maintain radar surveillance of commercial aircraft over oceans, Washington Post reported. System would be used exclusively to improve airline communications. (Samuelson, WPost, 5/12/70)
General Dynamics Corp. announced Convair Div. had received $2 585 000 USAF contract for OY 1-20 and OY 1-21 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, scheduled for launch in 1971. Contract was managed by SAMSO. (General Dynamics Release 1529)
samso had proposed development of usaf System 621B, navigation system employing several clusters of satellites and system of ground stations, ASFC announced. System would provide three-dimensional position and velocity information for users, reduce equipment weight problem, and solve military logistics problem through uniformity. samso had awarded eight contracts totaling more than $1.5 million for additional verification of system design concepts and for mathematical model of ionosphere, (afsc Release 263.70)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor VI meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 647-km (402.0-mi) apogee, 627-km (389.6mi) perigee, 97.4-min period, and 81.2° inclination. Satellite would study clouds and weather changes, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; SBD, 10/ 19/70,209)
at&t announced it would apply to fcc for permission to use satellites in its domestic operations. (Samuelson, WPost, 1/27/70)
Lord Ritchie-Calder wrote in Foreign Affairs: “Past civilizations are buried in the graveyards of their own mistakes, but as each died of its greed, its carelessness or its effeteness another took its place. That was because such civilizations took their character from a locality or region. Today ours is a global civilization; it is not bounded by the Tigris and the Euphrates nor even the Hellespont and the Indus; it is the whole world. Its planet has shrunk to a neighborhood round which a man-made satellite can patrol sixteen times a day, riding the gravitational fences of Man’s family estate. It is a community so interdependent that our mistakes are exaggerated on a world scale. ... Modern Man can outboast the Ancients, who in the arrogance of their material achievements built pyramids as the gravestones of their civilizations. We can blast our pyramids into space to orbit through all eternity round a planet which perished by our neglect.” (Foreign Affairs, 1/70,207-20)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Communist Chinese satellite: “To assume that the Red Chinese will refrain from placing hydrogen warheads in orbiting satellites, capable of being released by remote control on signal from Peking, is to engage in the most dangerous kind of head-in-the-sand complacency.” (PInq, 4/17/70)
Vice Premier Chiang Ching-kuo of Nationalist China watched technicians track Communist China’s first satellite at norad Hq. in Colorado Springs, Colo. (WPost, 4/26/70, A14)
U.S. was continuing to survey Suez Canal area periodically by earthorbiting satellites, New York Times sources said. Meanwhile U.S. was keeping two U-2 high-level reconnaissance aircraft at British base of Akrotiri in Cyprus after stopping their flights over Suez area. Sources thought flights had been ended because U.S. believed that Egypt had completed buildup of antiaircraft missiles and likelihood of renewed fighting between Israel and Egypt was diminishing. (Welles, NYT, 12/2/70,7)
Gen. John D. Ryan, usaf Chief of Staff, presented usaf FY 1971 budget request to House Committee on Armed Services: U.S.S.R.’s operational icbm force outnumbered that of U.S. and, “by mid-1971, will probably exceed ours by several hundred launchers.’’ Soviets had technology to develop hard-target MIRV and “Fractional Orbit Bombardment (fobs) or depressed trajectory icbm (dicbm) may already be operational. Their new ‘swing-wing’ bomber prototype could become operational, and their submarine-launched ballistic missile force is expanding rapidly.” U.S. continued to reduce bomber strength of Strategic Air Command. “We have phased out the B-58s, and severely cut back the FB-llls. At end FY-71, we will have fewer B-52s and 66 FB-llls. We hope to offset the reduced strength by increasing the capability of our bombers with the Short Range Attack Missile (sram) and the Subsonic Cruise Armed Decoy (scad) and providing for increased prelaunch survivability through satellite basing and improved warning.” In last five years, “we have cut our active interceptor strength by two-thirds and our radars by one-half. The Soviets during this period have maintained their Long Range Aviation forces at about 200 heavy bombers and over 700 medium bombers and tankers. ...” (Testimony) In testimony before Senate Armed Services Committee, L/G Otto J.	Glasser (usaf) said development of short-range attack missile (sram) would be completed in September, usaf would run 12 tests of advanced ballistic reentry system (abres), push studies of new midcourse surveillance system to warn of attacking missiles, operate four large-payload flight tests using Atlas E and F boosters in abres program, and continue advanced development “to apply new technology to the mid-course tracking and discrimination problem.” Satellite system looked “promising” but usaf was investigating alternate sensor/platform combinations “to assure that no promising concept is overlooked.” usaf advanced avionics program was pursuing electronically scanned, phased-array radar antenna for strike aircraft and completion of all-weather close-support weapon-delivery system. (Aero Daily, 3/18/70, 20)
Ailing aerospace industry” was described by Leroy F. Aarons in Washington Post: Since early 1968, aerospace employment in California had dropped from high of 616 000 to 525 000 in March 1969. “Roughly 30 percent of these were professional and technical personnel.” North American Rockwell Corp. had accounted for “nearly a third of the layoffs.” Since December 1969, NR had cut Los Angeles Div. to “skeleton force of 4660, half of whom took pay cuts.” Spokesman for State Unemployment Office in Van Nuys, Calif., had said desperation had driven out-of-work professionals into variety of positions at pay cuts of 50% to 60%. Aerospace engineering association official had explained that base technology had been developed. “We don’t need propulsion groups of thousands of people to figure out how to make a missile fly any longer. Maybe we need 100 to come up with amodification.” (WPost, 5/18/70, Al) Daniel Z. Henkin, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs), disclosed in speech the existence of second “Chinese object” orbiting earth about 3200 km (2000 mi) ahead of active satellite launched by Communist Chinese April 24. He said dod believed “that this is part of the final stage of the missile which orbited the satellite.” Significance of launch was “that the Communist Chinese have the capability to put in orbit a considerable payload,” which confirmed technological progress; “prudence requires that we continue to credit them with a near term capability to fire their first icbm.” (faa Release 70-48; Text)
Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, described Brazilian proposal for educational broadcast experiment using NASA ATS-F or ATS-G satellite to House Committee on Foreign Affairs’ Subcommittee on National Security Policy and Scientific Development: “The project is intended ... as the development prototype of a system that will broadcast television and radio instructional material to the entire country through a government-owned geostationary satellite. The experiment itself contemplates TV and radio broadcasting into some 500 schools in the Rio Grande de Norte region. It would test the use of satellites for central broadcasting using a balance of TV and radio, to upgrade teacher quality, permit the use of local monitors with less training, and so facilitate rapid expansion of the educational system.” Proposal was undergoing revision before final technical evaluation by NASA. (Testimony)
U.S. Geological Survey announced it was photographing 26 cities in U.S. and Puerto Rico from aircraft at altitudes exceeding 15 200 m (50000 ft) to test feasibility of detecting urban changes from earthorbiting satellites in 1972. Study to develop erts-a techniques to provide data for urban planning organizations and other potential clients was being conducted with NASA cooperation. RB-57F aircraft on loan from usaf Weather Service were based at msc and operated by NASA personnel. Project, part of Dept, of Interior’s Earth Resources Observation Systems program, had been under way since April and was scheduled for completion in fall. (Interior Dept Release 27013-70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXII from Plesetsk into orbit with 311-km (193.3-mi) apogee, 195-km (121.2-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 29. (GSFC SSR, 1/31/70; SF, 7/70, 282)
Itos I (Tiros M), Improved Tiros Operational Satellite launched by NASA from wtr Jan. 23, 1970, was turned over to essa for operational use after five-month engineering checkout by NASA. (NASA Release 70-96)
Sovetsky Voin in Moscow published article on conquering universe, by Soviet Academician Boris N. Petrov: “During the next few years’ studies of circumterrestrial space, the upper atmosphere and earth from space will undoubtedly develop further with the use of satellites with automatic instrumentation, periodically launched manned spaceships and large orbiting scientific stations operating for long periods and having a replaceable crew, as well as by sounding the atmosphere with geophysical rockets.” (jprs, 50505, 5/13/70, 53-4)
FCC announced it would consider “applications to establish and operate domestic communication satellite facilities for multiple or specialized common carrier services, for lease to other common carriers, for private use, joint cooperative use, or any combination of such services.” FCC had been unable to “determine on the basis of information it now has whether a domestic satellite program could best be developed by authorization of a multi-purpose or specialized or a combination of systems or through an ‘open entry’ policy.” Commission would permit “potential applicants to take the initiative in submitting concrete system proposals for . . . consideration.” (fcc Public Notice Rpt 5862)
NASA announced selection of Philco-Ford Corp. for negotiation of $12 500 000, cost-plus-award-fee contract to develop Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) system that would become part of National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss), managed and operated by essa. (nasa Release 70-127)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXXVfrom Kapustin Yar into orbit with 398-km (247.3-mi) apogee, 249-km (154.7-mi) perigee, 91-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Satellite reentered June 22. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70; 6/30/70; SBD, 4/28/70, 272)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLX into orbit with 286-km (177.7-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 8 . (gsfc SSR, 8/31/70; 9/30/70)
U.S.S.R.. launched Cosmos CCCLXXIII from Baykonur into orbit with 562-km (349.2-mi) apogee, 459-km (285.2-mi) perigee, 94.8-min period, and 62.9° inclination. Spaceflight magazine later reported that satellite made close approach to two other Cosmos satellites on days they were launched: Cosmos CCCLXXIV Oct. 23 and Cosmos CCCLXXV Oct. 30. Fragments of the other satellites were cataloged, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; SF, 4/71, 138-9)
Aerospace said usaf’s Vela nuclear test satellite program had been credited with longest continually operating spacecraft, saving Government $26 million and achieving 100% of its objectives. April 8 launch of two Vela satellites had been final launch in program. (Aerospace, 6/7/70)
Cosmos CCCLIV was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykonur into orbit with 208-km (129.3-mi) apogee, 144-km (89.5-mi) perigee, and 50° inclination. Satellite reentered same day. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/ 70; SBD, 7/30/70,128; Spacewarn, 8/11/70,1)
Tenth anniversary of Tiros I (Television Infrared Observation Satellite), world’s first weather satellite, launched by NASA from Cape Canaveral, Fla. Satellite had transmitted 22 952 pictures during 89-day lifetime. Since Tiros I, 23 meteorological satellites—10 Tiros, 3 Nimbus, 9 essa, and 1 itos—had been orbited, returning more than one million pictures of earth’s cloud cover and other data for weather forecasting and research, (essa Release 70-18)
NASA announced selection of 15 investigators and experiments for Atmosphere Explorer (ae) flights C, D, and E scheduled for launch in 1973, 1974, and 1975. Spacecraft would investigate atmosphere at altitudes between 120 and 150 km (75 and 95 mi). Region had not been investigated by satellites because air drag slowed satellites’ Eeriods and caused premature reentry. New ae spacecraft would ave onboard hydrazine propulsion systems that would overcome air drag and permit automated variable orbits. (NASA Release 70-29)
General Telephone & Electronics Corp. announced proposed plan to establish satellite communications system within U.S. If FCC approved, system would be operational within 24 mos. Hughes Aircraft Co. would lease eight radio channels required by General Telephone & Electronics in one of two 12-channel comsats that Hughes Aircraft had proposed for domestic use. Backup channels would be provided in second comsat for reliable short-term use during peak periods. Gross investment for system was estimated at nearly $27 million, (gt&e Release; Reuters, B Sun, 12/23/70)
U.S.S.R. launched two satellites: Molniya 1-14 comsat entered orbit with 39 233-km (24 378.2-mi) apogee, 468-km (290.8-mi) perigee, 704.5-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Cosmos CCCL entered orbit with 249-km (154.7-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 89.0-min period, and 51.7° inclination and reentered July 8. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/70; 7/31/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXI from Plesetsk into orbit with 473-km (293.9-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered March 23. (GSFC SSR, 1/31/70; 3/31/70; SF, 7/70, 282)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXLIV into orbit with 326-km (202.6-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 87.3-min period, and 72.0° inclination. Satellite reentered May 20. (gsfcSSR, 5/31/70)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCCLXXIX, from Baykonur, entered orbit with 14 026-km (8715.4mi) apogee, 176-km (109.4-mi) perigee, 259.5-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Cosmos CCCLXXX, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 1491-km (926.5-mi) apogee, 198-km (123.0-mi) perigee, 101.7-min period, and 81.9° inclination. (GSFC SSR, 11/30/70; SBD, 11/25/70, 106;ll/30/70,114)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXXIV into orbit with 482km (299.5-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 9. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70; 8/31/70)
Feasibility of replacing existing primary and secondary radar in 1970s with satellite system to perform air surveillance would be studied by new ad hoc air traffic control panel of President’s Science Advisory Committee, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Panel’s report was due in June. (Av Wk, 1/26/70,25)
Cosmos CCCLXX was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykon-ur into orbit with 264-km (164.0-mi) apogee, I85-km (115.0-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 22. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; SF. 4/71, 138)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXVIfrom Baykonur into orbit with 288-km (179-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.4min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 13. (GSFC SSR, 10/31/70; SF, 4/71,138)
Orbiting Nimbus IV satellite (launched April 8) was relaying temperature of steam emitted from 4392.2-m (14 410-ft) Mt. Ranier mountain on command eight times weekly, NASA and Dept, of Interior announced. Satellite received radio signals from special temperature-monitoring station on mountain’s peak and relayed them to ground station at Fairbanks, Alaska, for transmission to GSFC. Temperature had varied only few degrees from 343.2 K (158°F) recorded at time of installation. Experiment marked first time volcanic temperatures had been relayed through satellite. (DOI Release)
Arrangement for mutual satellite tracking support had been made by NASA and French Centre National D’Etudes Spatiales (cnes), nasa announced. Each agency would provide free network support in tracking, data acquisition, and command activities of space vehicles when workload permitted. For first time, French equipment was compatible with U.S. Arrangment was applicable to French stations in Canary Islands, Upper V,olta, Congo, South Africa, French Guiana, and France. NASA stations would be in stadan network in Australia, Madagascar, South Africa, Ecuador, Chile, England, and U.S. (nasa Release 70-94)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial on Communist Chinese satellite launch: “To identify Peking’s satellite as proof of a perfected weapon is to orient debate on the ABM to expansion of that system— and the proliferation of weapons. This at a time when the world’s two prime producers of nuclear weapons are trying to agree on curtailing them. For these talks [salt] to fail is to deliver the world to witless expansion of arsenals, with the always accompanying threat to use them. The ultimate promise is catastrophe far beyond anything the Chinese could execute.” (PBull, 4/27/70)
President Nixon’s address to Nation on situation in Southeast Asia was televised live by satellite to Australia, Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, the Philippines, and Hong Kong. (PD, 5/4/70, 596-601; upi, W Star, 5/1/70, A10)
Lawrence Lessing said in Fortune that satellites were “only hope in sight” for comprehensive air traffic control: “Growing congestion and delays are seriously impairing U.S. and international airline operations, and air-traffic control is at the nerve center of the congestive problem. For nearly a decade leading scientists have urged the development of an advanced space-satellite system for navigation and traffic control. Indeed, such a system is the only hope in sight if air traffic is to grow to its full potential through the rest of this century. Only now, under the pressure of events, is this proposal reaching a critical point of decision.” (Fortune, 8/70, 11586) .
Uhuru (Explorer XLII) (sas-a) Small Astronomy Satellite was launched for NASA by Italy at 1:45 pm local time (5:45 am est) from San Marco launch platform off coast of Kenya. Four-stage Scout launch vehicle boosted 142.9-kg (315-lb) satellite into orbit with 572-km (355.4-mi) apogee, 531-km (330.0-mi) perigee, 95.7-min period, and 3.04° inclination. Primary objective was to develop catalog of celestial x-ray sources by systematic scanning of sky in 2- to 20-kev range. Satellite—first equippeed with sensitive instruments to detect high-energy x-ray sources in space—would pinpoint location of x-ray sources; transmit data on intensity, frequency, and time variation; and map diffuse x-ray background. NASA controllers would maneuver satellite from ground by energizing electromagnet in attitude control system. Electrical energy caused electromagnet to act like compass needle, aligning itself to north-south lines of earth’s magnetic field and permitting controllers to point spacecraft to any direction.
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCCLXVIII, launched from Baykonur, entered orbit with 383-km (238-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 90.4-min period, and 65° inclination. Satellite, whose objective was to conduct biological investigations and study physical characteristics of outer space, reentered Oct. 14. Cosmos CCCLXIX, launched from Plesetsk to investigate upper atmosphere and outer space, entered orbit with 467-km (290.2-mi) apogee, 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 70.9° inclination. It reentered Jan. 22, 1971. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; 1/31/71; SBD, 10/9/70, 169; UN Gen Assembly Release 70-29113)
nasa announced selection of experiments for ats-f Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled for launch in 1973: very-high-reso-lution radiometric experiment; position-location and aircraft communications experiment (place ); television relay using small terminals (trust); radio-frequency-interference measurement experiment; 10.6^ laser experiment; millimeter-wave-propagation/com-munication experiment; data-relay experiment (Nimbus); radio beacon experiment; low-energy electron-proton experiment; measurement of low-energy protons; solar cosmic rays and geomagnetically trapped radiation; particle-acceleration mechanisms and dynamics of outer trapping region; magnetometer experiment; auroral-particle experiment; solar-cell-radiation flight experiment; flight demonstration of self-adaptive precision-pointing spacecraft attitude-control systems; and cesium bombardment ion engine experiment, (nasa Release 70-194)
In letter to NASA, TRW Inc. asked review of July 15 award of $50-million contract for hardware development of Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) system to General Electric Co. TRW, losing bidder, said there had been “significant information available to our competitor and not available to TRW during the period of competition.” TRW said it had not received Bendix Corp. study of computer and ground components of system until 10 days before preliminary bid was due. (Nossiter, WPost, 8/29/70, Al)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXIIIfrom Baykonur into orbit with 288-km (179.0-mi) apogee, 201-km C124.9-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 65.0° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 29. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/70; SBD, 9/21/70,88)
U.S.S.R. launched Molniya P17 comsat from Plesetsk into orbit with 39 569-km (24 587.0-mi) apogee, 493-km (306.3-mi) perigee, 711.8-min period, and 64.7° inclination. Tass said satellite would transmit telephone, telegraph, radio, and TV communications to remote areas, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/70; AP, W Post, 12/26/70, A9; SF, 6/71, 213)	'
Announcement of launch of first Communist Chinese satellite was greeted in Peking with crashing of drums and cymbals. Thousands of Chinese converged on Tien An Men Square in demonstration which Washington Post said had been “well organized” since launch had been expected for “some time.” Groups of teenagers, children, and even grandmothers marched behind red banners and large portraits of Chairman Mao Tse-tung. People’s Liberation Army group carried six-foot-high model of Chinese character for double happiness. Downtown office buldings were outlined in white lights when news was relayed by TV at 9:30 pm Peking time; colored bulbs lit trees along Boulevard of Eternal Peace. Firecrackers exploded everywhere, and crowds, said Post, “seemed very relaxed and grinned happily at foreigners.” (Webster, W Post, 4/28/ 70, A12)
Operation of electron-bombardment thruster on board NASA’s Sert II satellite (launched Feb. 3) was interrupted when excessive arcing triggered automatic shutdown. LeRC controllers returned engine to full thrust within 11 hrs. (NASA Release 70-79)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXI from Plesetsk into orbit with 338-km (210.0-mi) apogee, 195-km (121.2-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 21. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/70; SBD, 9/9/70, 38)
USAF satellite launched July 23 “was placed in an unusual orbit which is especially suited to taking photos which could be used to police the ceasefire in the Middle East,” Aviation Week and Space Technology editorial noted. “The orbit was an inclination of only 60 deg., in contrast to most reconnaissance satellites. ... Since the satellite went into its unusual orbit two weeks prior to the [Middle East] cease-fire, it should have been possible to obtain photos of Soviet missile deployment prior to the truce, if that is its intended function. If the U.S. has obtained such photos by satellite, this fact as well as the pictures themselves would be closely guarded. ... Reconnaisance satellite pictures are among this nation’s most closely guarded secrets.” (Av Wk, 8/31/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXXIII into orbit with 226-km (140.4-mi) apogee, 211-km (131.1-mi) perigee, 88.8-min period, and 81.3° inclination. Satellite reentered April 28. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70)
U.S.S.R. had agreed in December to build comsat station in Cuba, Philadelphia Inquirer reported. Experts had said purpose could be to monitor and track U.S. missiles. Officially station was to permit exchange of radio and TV between Moscow and Havana. (P Inq, 1/14/70) January IS: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXIX from Plesetsk into orbit with 1490-km (925.8-mi) apogee, 195-km (121.2-mi) perigee, 101.9-min period, and 81.8° inclination. Satellite reentered July 1. (GSFC SSR, 1/15/70; 7/31/70; SF, 7/70, 282)
George C, Wilson said in Washington Post that “top secret” DOD report based on photos taken by U.S. Samos satellites indicated U.S.S.R. had built fewer SS-9 missile sites in 1969 than in 1965. (W Post, 5/7/70, A7)
Edmund J. Habib, Associate Chief of gsfc’s Advanced Development Div., Tracking and Data Systems Directorate, received AlAA’s 1970 Space Communications Award at Los Angeles luncheon. Habib was cited for “pioneering developments of the advanced tracking and telemetry data processing systems of NASA’s Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network, and for leadership of the development of technology for the future Tracking and Data Relay Satellite space network.” (aiaa Release 4/6/70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLIII from Plesetsk into orbit with 304-km (188.9-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered July 21. (GSFC SSR, 7/31/70; SBD, 7/10/70,41)
Fifth anniversary of ComSatCorp’s Early Bird I, world’s first commercial comsat, launched by NASA from ksc. First commercial space link between North America and Europe, Early Bird I had been retired from full-time service in 1969 after receiving and transmitting more than 235 hrs of TV and operating for more than 3 1/2 yrs with 100% reliability. Satellite could still be used for emergency service to handle 300 circuits between U.S. and Europe. (Com-SatCorp Release 70-16)
Spacecraft in deep space, earth-orbiting satellites, barage of sounding rockets, and instruments on the ground were used to make intense study of the 1970 solar eclipse and its effect on the earth's atmosphere and ionosphere. Totality of the eclipse fat top) occurred at Wallops Station at 1:38 pm est. passing over tracking antenna (lower left) as if began to sweep the Eastern Seaboard. A Nike-Cajun (above right), one of 31 sounding rockets launched from Wallops March 6-8, lifted off during totality. Five photos 0eft to right on facing page) taken by Ats III satellite from synchronous altitude 35 900 kilometers (22 300 miles) above the earth show the moon’s shadow (dark spots among clouds) moving northeast from the Gulf of Mexico and out into the Atlantic. with data from barrage of sounding rockets launched March 6-8. (NASA Release 70-28; msc Roundup, 3/27/70, 1)
Aerospace Defense Command reported that U.S. had 290 satellites in orbit around earth at end of January, with 18 deep-space probes still active. U.S.S.R. had 75 satellites and 14 deep-space probes. U.K. had 3, France 5, Canada 3, West Germany 1, Australia 1, and esro 3. (SD Union, 2/8/70) During January: Space/Aeronautics reviewed status of aerospace and aeronautical projects at commencement of 1970s. Commercial transport industry was “microcosm of the capitalistic system. The health of any constituent, sst or airbus or Stol, is on trial in a harshly profit-motivated atmosphere that says. .. ‘shape up or ship out.’ Nowhere is this test more evident than in the troubled, hesitant posture of the U.S. SST program.” With retrenchment to fixed-wing design “and a continual dropback in the urgency level of our SST effort,” sst’s competitive advantages were “being dissipated by an inexorable calendar.” Apollo 11 lunar landing had alleviated Congressional opposition to further expensive long-term space commitments. “Suddenly, it was practical to think of going ahead with an expanded lunar exploration program.” Space science and applications program had been marking time, “with most programs stretched out to match the diminished funding made smaller still by the nasty bite of inflation.” But “light is beginning to show at the end of the long, dark tunnel of fiscal retrenchment.” Success of satellite infrared spectrometer (sirs), “welcome and long overdue test of ATS-3” for coast-to-coast relay of TV programs, and climb in “Comsat’s ’69 operating profiles” above Si-million mark had led space science program steadily to shift “its dollar focus away from the earth.” Civil systems activity by aerospace community was only token. “Yet 1969 may prove to have been a landmark year for the industry’s relations with this strange and often self-contradictory market. New initiatives by the federal government indicate a growing awareness in Washington of what aerospace may be able to contribute to the solution of complex civil problems.” (S/A, 1/70, 27-69, 81-132)
usaf Aerospace Defense Command reported that 141 satellites were orbited and 142 decayed during first six months of 1970. ADC had cataloged 4428 objects between Oct. 4, 1957, and June 29, 1970. (AP,W Star, 8/11/70)
Although Communist China officially had entered space age with April 24 launch of satellite, milch of the country’s industrial machinery was “product of an earlier age,” New York Times said. Workers at Shanghai factories had said they “used the equipment of the twenties to turn out products of the seventies.” While Communist China’s space success reflected “application of a more advanced technology,” even this was said to have been achieved “because the Chinese people adhered to the ‘principle of independence and selfreliance.’ ” (NYT, 5/3/70,18)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 399 from Baykonur into orbit with 438-km (272.2-mi) apogee, 196-km (121.8-mi) perigee, 90.8-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered March 17. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/71; SBD, 3/8/71, 40)
France’s Eole (CAS-1) Cooperative Applications Satellite was launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 2:39 pm edt. Four-stage Scout boosted spacecraft into orbit with 906.1-km (563.6-mi) apogee, 677.8-km (421.2-mi) perigee, 100.7-min period, and 50.2° inclination. Primary NASA objectives were to place spacecraft into appropriate earth orbit to obtain meteorological data from balloons and to analyze meteorological data acquired from constant-density surface balloons for study of characteristics and movements of air masses. Secondary NASA objective was to acquire technology of satellite range and range-rate system for locating free-moving balloons. The 85-kg (187-lb) satellite—developed by France’s Centre Nationale d’fitudes Spatiales (cnes) and named for mythical God of Winds— would collect information on wind, temperatures, and pressures from up to 500 instrumented balloons flying at 11 900-m (39 000-ft) altitude in Southern Hemisphere. Balloons, to be launched by cnes and Argentine personnel from three sites in Argentina, could be interrogated by Eole day and night, individually, in sequence, or in programmed group of up to 64 at a time. Eole’s meteorological objectives were to study circulation of atmosphere from tracks of balloons, provide basis for standard reference system of pressure and temperature to be used in World Weather Program, and learn more about local winds. Mission would prove feasibility of modified Doppler system plus range measurements to determine accurately location of each balloon and prove out superpressure balloon design and lightweight, frangible balloon-borne electronics. Eole was launched under May 27, 1966, Memorandum of Understanding between cnes and NASA with no exchange of funds, cnes designed, built, and tested spacecraft and balloons and would manage balloon launchings, spacecraft tracking, data acquisition, and data processing. NASA provided launch vehicle, prelaunch support, launch operations, and initial tracking and data acquisition. Data would be analyzed simultaneously by cnes and by Eole Data Interpretation Group comprising representatives of NASA, cnes, ncar, NOAA, and ucla. (nasa Proj Off; NASA; Release 71-144)
President Nixon signed H.R. 11731, $70.5-billion, FY 1972 DOD defense establishment appropriation bill. Bill became P.L. 92-204. (CR, 12/17/71, D1339) Apogee kick motor was fired at 12:49 pm est Dec. 20, and Intelsat-IV F-3 entered orbit with 36 052.9-km (22 402.2-mi) apogee, 35 745.5km (22 211.2-mi) perigee, 1442-min period, and 0.47° inclination. Satellite would drift from position at 284.2° east longitude to permanent station over Atlantic at 19.5° west longitude by end of January 1972. Intelsat-IV F—3 was second comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and weighed 1412 kg (3090 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000—9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years. Intelsat-IV F—2 had been launched Jan. 25 and was operating satisfactorily over Atlantic, (nasa Proj Off; ComSat-Corp Release 71-66)
Release of “Statement of Government Policy on Satellite Telecommunications for International Civil Aviation Operations” was announced by Clay T. Whitehead, Director of Telecommunications Policy for Executive Office of the President. Statement said U.S. would promote preoperational deployment of satellite communications in Pacific in 1973 and in Atlantic in 1975. dot and faa would assume program management responsibility for preoperational and operational systems and services. Dept, of State, with dot, would seek international use of preoperational system and initiate cooperative efforts with other nations to establish operational system by 1980. U.S. would use commercial communications facilities to maximum. U.S. Government would use uhf frequency band near 1600 mhz in both preoperational and operational satellite air-traffic-control communications. Experimental evaluation of independent surveillance by satellite should begin with system deployment in Pacific and be followed by preoperational evaluation in air-traffic-control environment after 1975. Unified program to satisfy Government and airline requirements should be adopted to provide economic benefits of single program, (eop Release)
ESRO and faa announced in Madrid agreement on program for use of satellites to control civil air traffic. At least four satellites would be launched over Atlantic and Pacific beginning in 1975. System would be used for air-to-air communications and as navaid to avoid midair collisions. Committee to administer program would be appointed from ESRO, fa A, and representatives of Australia, Canada, Ireland, Philippines, Japan, and Portugal. (Reuters, B Sun, 8/6/71, A2)
Dr. Armand N. Spitz, astronomer and author, died at age 66 after heart attack. Dr. Spitz had founded Spitz Laboratories, organized NASA Moonwatch program of using volunteer astronomers to track satellites, and created Spitz planetarium—small, inexpensive instrument used in schools and small museums. He was member of aas, fellow of aaas, consultant to nsf, and author of numerous publications. (W Star, 4/16/71, B5)
Time magazine reviewed Secret Sentries in Space by Philip J. Klass. “No one else has written in comparable detail about spy satellites,” Time said. Klass had described latest U.S. SAMOS (satellite and missile observations system). “Big Bird” was 10 900-kg (12-ton) spacecraft capable of operating in orbit for several months. It could transmit high-quality pictures by radio and eject capsules of exposed film, which then dropped by parachute. Big Bird also included infrared heat-sensing equipment that allowed it to “see” through ice and snow to locate Soviet underground weapons. Klass had reported heaviest concentration of long-range Soviet missiles in Siberia and behind Ural mountains in Central Asia. (Time, 8/30/71, 26)
Two usaf comsats launched Nov. 2 from etr by Titan IIIC as part of improved series of Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) satellites were in operational modes as programmed. After insertion into synchronous orbit over Pacific, first satellite had failed to turn on its telemetry system. Second satellite had turned on telemetry, but telemetry was sporadic. Subsequent efforts of ground controllers were successful and both satellites responded to ground commands. (SBD, 11/11/71, 55)
usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization planned conceptual design study by industry of spaceborne system for tracking Soviet satellites at altitudes beyond 480-km (300-mi) range of existing ground-based Spacetrack system, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Five-month study was expected to begin in 1972, magazine said. (Av Wk, 10/18/71, 9)
U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—19 comsat from Plesetsk into orbit with 39146-km (24 324.2-mi) apogee, 493-km (306.3-mi) perigee, 703.3-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite would transmit telephone, telegraph, radio, and TV signals to link far north, Siberia, Central Asia, and Far East, (gsfc Operations Off; Space-warn, 12/28/71, 1; SBD, 12/21/71, 230)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 424 from Plesetsk into orbit with 287-km (178.3-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 65.3° inclination. Satellite reentered June 10. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/71; 6/30/71; SBD, 6/2/71,169)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 439 from Plesetsk into orbit with 278-km (172.7-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.3-mi) apogee, 89.3-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 2. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/71; 10/31/71; SBD, 10/1/71,101)
Locked-on antenna control system on NASA’s Ats 3 applications technology satellite (launched Nov. 5, 1967) had caused satellite to stop transmitting data temporarily, NASA announced. Officials believed antenna, on top and north side of spacecraft, had overheated and stopped spinning when sun was north of equator during summer. Antenna had operated sporadically during July and August, but officials said malfunctioning was consistent with similar past problems and antenna would recover as sun moved south. (NASA Release 71-158)
Intelsat-IV F—2, launched by nasa for ComSatCorp on behalf of intelsat Jan. 25, was adjudged successful by nasa. Satellite had been placed in desired synchronous orbit Jan. 27 and was now in service at 24° west longitude over Atlantic, (nasa Proj Off)
Bell Aerospace Rendezvous articles described GSFC-devised positionlocation and aircraft communications experiment (place) to test feasibility of transoceanic air traffic control system that would use earth-orbit satellites. Experiment was designed following earlier mission analyses by erc. “Scheduled for 1973, the year-long experiment will determine the technical and operational feasibility of using communications satellites to give ground control centers precise and uninterrupted readings and control of air traffic over the North Atlantic 24 hours a day.” Experiment would employ two satellites—Ats 5 launched Aug. 12, 1969) and ats-f (to be launched in 1973)—and three ground stations, place would be able automatically to pinpoint to within one mile [1.6 km] actual positions of up to 250 aircraft, update information once a minute, and predict locations between updates. Operational place system could reduce flight-corridor widths to 48 km (30 mi) and aircraft spacings from 15- to 5-min intervals, permitting same corridors to accommodate 12 times as much traffic without affecting flight safety. In bad weather, place could simultaneously reroute every aircraft within flight corridor. Although place was geared only to North Atlantic air traffic, “it is the forerunner of what could become a worldwide satellite air traffic and surface control network.” (Rendezvous, Summer/Fall, 71, 9—11; Aerospace Technology, 2/26/68, 33)
French cnes satellite control station at Bretigny, France, inadvertently transmitted destruct command to balloons being tracked by Eole satellite (launched Aug. 16), causing 70 of 135 flying balloons to be cut down. Although error was not expected to degrade planned scientific accomplishments of mission significantly, it would delay beginning of scientific experiment by 7 to 10 days, cnes instituted new training procedures to Eole control station personnel on transmitting commands to satellite and designed system which would alarm when certain critical commands—such as balloon destruct, gravity gradient retraction, and activation of magnetic hysteris rods—were to be placed into Eole. (nasa Proj Off)
White House announced President Nixon’s approval of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements negotiated at salt to reduce risk of outbreak of nuclear war and to improve and modernize Washington-Moscow direct communications link. Both nations would guard against accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons, arrange for rapid communication should danger of nuclear war arise, and notify each other in advance of certain planned missile launches. Two satellite circuits would be established, one by each nation, as well as multiple terminals to increase reliability of link. U.S.S.R. would provide circuit through its own satellite system and U.S. would arrange for channel through intelsat system. Agreements were to be signed in Washington Sept. 30. (PD, 9/27/71, 1318-9)
usaf had accepted delivery of 520-kg (1150-lb) comsat from trw Systems Group, AFSC Newsreview reported. Comsat was first of six being built for samso use in Phase II of U.S. Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs). (asfc Newsreview, 11/71, 4)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 390 from Baykonur into orbit with 270-km (167.8-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65.0° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 25. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/71; SBD, 1/13/71, 40)
U.S.S.R. launched two satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 467 entered orbit with 465-km (288.9-mi) apogee, 266-km (165.3-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 71° inclination and reentered April 18, 1972. Cosmos 468 entered orbit with 808-km (502.1-mi) apogee, 786-km (488.4-mi) perigee, 100.7-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/71; 4/30/72; SBD, 12/20/71, 226; 12/21/71, 230)
NRL’s Solrad 10 (Explorer 44) solar radiation satellite, launched by NASA July 8, was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft was functioning nominally and all 15 scientific instruments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Astrologer Jeane Dixon in Washington Daily News predicted “tremendous adventures in space for the United States . . . provided we keep an eye on platform placements and docking attempts above earth.” She also said that three U.S. satellites had been intercepted “and deadened” by U.S.S.R. (W News, 7/6/71, 7)
Travel writer Morris D. Rosenberg described his visit to ksc in New York Times article: Visit had provided “whole new point of reference, more understanding of the complex drama you see on TV and read about in the newspapers, and a better appreciation of the U.S. role in space.” Those opposed to space funding might be unimpressed by “avalanche of facts and figures” but it was doubtful that they could “walk away from this 2-hour and 15-minute bus tour without a strong feeling of pride.” (NYT, 12/5/71, 1) *	Contract with NR that was expected to set pattern for aerospace industry settlements under negotiation was approved by Long Beach, Calif., Local 887 of United Automobile Workers. Proposed contract called for increases of 30% in salary over 34-mo period. (Wright, NYT, 12/6/71, 25) Changes in orbit supported earlier reports of U.S.S.R.’s ability to maneuver satellites for precise target coverage. Flights of Cosmos 463 and Cosmos 464 [see Dec. 10-16] were made during time of Indo-Pakistan war. Paths would permit observation of events in Pakistan before early reentry; any film cassettes could have been recovered within four hours of last pass over East Pakistan on each flight. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/71; SBD, 12/7/71, 160; SF, 9/9/72, 351; W Post, 1/7/72, A16)
FCC ordered at&t to activate transatlantic cable and satellite circuits on one-to-one ratio. Order reversed decision made in May to set ratio at five-to-one in favor of satellites, fcc said it had received “strong representations” protesting five-to-one ratio from European countries that had 50% ownership in cables but less than 50% ownership in satellites. (W Post, 10/20/71, CIO)
U.S.S.R. launched Molniya ll-l comsat from Plesetsk to ensure “functioning of the remote telephone-telegraph radio communications systems in the Soviet Union, for relaying central television programs to stations” in Orbita network and participating international networks. Satellite was new comsat and part of further development of Soviet satellite communications system. Orbital parameters: 39 553-km (24 577.1-mi) apogee, 516-km (320.6-mi) perigee, 712.0min period, and 65.0° inclination. (fbis-Sov—71-228-3, 11/26/71, Ll; gsfc SSR, 11/30/71; UN Gen’l Assembly, A/AC.105/INF.243; SF, 5/72, 179)
ESRO awarded six-month study contracts for European regional comsat to three European consortiums—mesh (S.A. Engins M.A.T.R.A. of France, ERNO-Raumfahrttechnik GmbH of West Germany, saab Aktie-bolag of Sweden, and Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd. of U.K.), star (Satellites for Telecommunications, Applications, and Research), and cosmos, led by Marconi Space and Defence Systems in U.K. (SF, 4/71, 121)
Activity at Shuang-ch’eng spaceport—from which Chinese Communists launched Chicom I on April 24, 1970—indicated imminent launch of another satellite, according to sources quoted in Washington Post. U.S. space specialists had said second Communist Chinese launch would be further proof of steady scientific progress regardless of internal political turmoil in Red China. (Wilson, W Post, 2/23/71, A16)
U.S.-Canadian agreement on joint program to use satellites and aircraft in surveys of natural environment was announced by NASA. Objective was to advance remote sensing technology for monitoring air, water, land, forest, and crop conditions and for mapping ice movements, ocean currents, and geologic, hydrologic, vegetation, and soil phenomena. Canadian Dept, of Energy, Mines and Resources (emr) would receive data at ground station in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, and data-handling facility at Ottawa directly from nasa’s erts satellites, scheduled for 1972 and 1973 launch. Canadian and U.S. test areas would be designated. Ground and aircraft data acquired and exchanged would be available to international community as soon as practicable. No funds would be exchanged between EMR and NASA. (nasa Release 71-95)
Permanent charter for intelsat was signed by 54 nations—51 of whom were members of 80-member interim intelsat consortium—during State Dept, ceremonies. Signatures of three more original members were required for two-thirds majority necessary to inaugurate new agreement providing for gradual relaxation of U.S. control. Under permanent charter intelsat Assembly of Parties, prime organ of multitiered organization, would meet biennially and take decisions with one vote for each nation. Annual Meeting of Signatories would decide on financial, operational, and technical aspects of programs with one vote for each member, intelsat Board of Directors would meet at least four times a year to vote on design, development, construction, establishment, operation, and maintenance of space segment. No single Board member could cast more than 40% of total vote; decisions would be taken by two-thirds majority; and nonveto provisions had been written into charter. U.S. had agreed to relinquish unilateral veto power it had under interim arrangements. Permanent charter created new executive organ to assist Board of Governors, headed first by Secretary General and later by Director General. ComSatCorp would continue to provide technical and operational management of intelsat space segment under six-year contract. Net investment ceiling of U.S. $5 million was established with discretion in Board of Governors to increase ceiling by 10%. (Lydon, NYT, 8/21/71, 40; “Permanent Arrangements for the Global Commercial Communications Satellite System of Intelsat,” iaf 22nd Int’l Astro Congress, 9/25/71)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 432 from Baykonur into orbit with 252-km (156.6-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 18. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/71, SBD, 8/9/71,179)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 408 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1510-km (938.3-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 102-min period, and 81.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 29. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/71; 12/31/71; SF, 10/71, 386)
Italy’s San Marco 3 (launched April 24) reentered atmosphere after more than seven months in orbit. Design lifetime had been six months. Satellite had produced excellent data on density, composition, and temperature of equatorial neutral-particle atmosphere at altitudes of 222—723 km (137.9-449.2 mi), (gsfc SSR, 11/30/71; NASA Proj Off)
Satellite photos of U.S.S.R. had shown continued construction of two new classes of silos for large missile, construction of third class of silo, and doubling of production facilities for Soviet missile submarines, New York Times reported. (Beecher, NYT, 10/11/71, 9)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 8 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 633-km (393.3-mi) apogee, 609-km (378.4-mi) perigee, 97.1-min period, and 81.2° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/71; SBD, 4/21/71, 265)
Communist China’s technological progress was described by Bernard T. Feld in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: “The inescapable conclusion that the Chinese had mastered the difficult technologies of U—235 separation and hydrogen bomb production was somehow sublimated in the conviction that they would be much slower in mastering intercontinental ballistic missile technology. This conviction, advanced in the teeth of evidence—after all, the Chinese invented the rocket— was reinforced by reports of widespread technological disruption in the Cultural Revolution, Their two successful launchings of space satellites, the last one weighing around 480 pounds [218 kg], in March 1971, should have disabused even the most skeptical or prejudiced. In any case, there are a sufficient number of recent eyewitness accounts by Westerners of Chinese scientific achievements in various fields to dispell any notions of Chinese technical inferiority,” {Bull of Atomic Scientists, 9/71)
U.S. Geological Survey published The National Atlas of the United States of America, first official national atlas produced in U.S. Preface noted that revised editions might be “greatly expedited” by “repetitive coverage at short time-lapse intervals, possibly from orbiting satellite systems.” Systems might “expedite the production of more up-to-date and less costly regional and state as well as national atlases or even make it possible to obtain directly from storage data banks and electronic computers the type of information now gained in part from maps and atlases.” (doi pio; Text)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 423 from Plesetsk into orbit with 489-km (303.9-mi) apogee, 279-km (173.4-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 71° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 26. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/71; 11/30/71; SBD, 6/2/71, 169)
Study of telemetry from unsuccessful Europa 2 European launch vehicle that failed on launch Nov. 5 had shown vehicle buckled at lst-end stage junction 2 min 30 sec after liftoff during excessive pitch-over maneuver, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Vehicle’s structural limits were exceeded; 2nd stage nozzle pierced liquid oxygen tank atop 1st stage, causing it to explode; 2nd stage separated in tumbling flight and exploded 10 sec later; and 3rd stage, 4th stage perigee motor, and payload fell into South Atlantic about 490 km (305 mi) downrange. Failure had been attributed to loss of inertial-guidance-system signals between 1 min 45 sec and 1 min 47 sec after launch. Engines on 1st stage had driven Europa 2 below programmed trajectory because corrective signals had not been sent to stage’s autopilot. Exact cause of inertial-guidance-system breakdown had not been determined. If cause could not be established before Dec. 15, launch of 12th satellite in Europa 1-2 development series—scheduled for April 13, 1972—would have to be delayed. (Av Wk, 11/22/71, 19)
esro Council meeting in Paris agreed on future program based on applications satellites. Priority would be given to use of eldo launch vehicles provided eldo’s price did not exceed that of launch vehicles available elsewhere. ESRO budget would be equivalent of $283.6 million from 1972 to 1974 and $300 million for following three years. From 1974 to 1980 at least $70 million would be spent on construction of applications satellites. (AP, NYT, 12/12/71, 9) per day brought satellite over East Pakistan on revolution 44 Dec. 13 at height of 230 km (142.9 mi). On revolution 46, two-impulse maneuver lowered both apogee and perigee, with 89.0-min period and 182-km (113.1-mi) perigee. Westerly drift rate was reduced to less than 1° per day, permitting three further daylight passes over Pakistan area before reentry Dec. 16. Orbital changes supported earlier reports of Soviet maneuvering capability. Cosmos 463 [see Dec. 6-11] and Cosmos 464 were launched during Indo-Pakistan war; altered paths permitted observation of Pakistan before early reentry, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/71; SBD, 12/14/71, 199; SF, 9/9/72, 351; W Post, 1/7/72, A16)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 433 into orbit with 299-km (185.8-mi) apogee, 112-km (69.6-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period and 49.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 9. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/71)
New York Times commented on orbiting of second Communist Chinese satellite: It had provided “impressive evidence of the advance of Communist China in war-related technology. It hardly needs underlining that a rocket capable of orbiting a sputnik could also deliver a hydrogen bomb to a distant target on earlji.” It was evident that “Mao Tse-tung has been trying to insulate a small group of scientists and their activity in weapons development from the general turmoil of the cultural revolution as well as from the inadequate supply of practically everything in normal Chinese economic life. That effort has apparently been successful.” (NYT, 3/11/71, 38)
U.K. Aerospace Minister Frederick Corfield told Parliament Black Arrow launch vehicle would be abandoned after final launch in 1971. Project, which cost $27.6 million and took six years to develop, was U.K.’s only satellite launching program. (AP, W Star, 1/30/11)
nasa announced selection of RCA Corp. to receive $ 12-million, costplusaward-fee contract for Atmosphere Explorer (ae) satellites C, D, and E.	Spacecraft would be launched in 1973, 1974, and 1975 to study upper atmosphere between 80 and 240 km (50 to 150 mi), nasa Release 71—48)
Italy’s San Marco 3 (launched April 24 by nasa) was adjudged successful. Satellite had transmitted excellent data on density, composition, and neutral-particle atmosphere at altitudes of 222—723 km (127.9449.2 mi). Only failure had been in sun sensors, which were not essential to mission success. San Marco 3 had reentered Nov. 28 after more than seven months in orbit and had taken good measurements during reentry phase, (nasa Proj Off)
Discovery of cloud of hydrogen gas 80 billion km (50 billion mi) long and traveling through space at 210 000 km per hr (130 000 mph) in different direction and at 60° angle from solar system was reported in Washington Post. In interview Dr. Gary Thomas, head of Univ. of Colorado team of astronomers that discovered cloud, had said it would take cloud at least 50 yrs to pass by solar system and could take forever. “For all we know . . . it’s been there forever.” Cloud was discovered first by Ogo 5 in September 1969 and later confirmed by same satellite three times. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/4/71, All)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 452 from Plesetsk into orbit with 280-km (174-mi) apogee, 175-km (108.7-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 27. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/71; SF, 4/72, 132)
New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial commented on U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on New York-Moscow comsat link to prevent war by nuclear accident: “The technology of satellite relay is beyond us, but we recall a treaty signing recently in Washington and Moscow at which the signers watched each other on satellite-relayed television. Yet it is reported that the link may take a long time and require building ground stations near the two cities and launching special satellites. Cannot the hot line be given a reserved channel on present facilities?” (New Orleans Times-Picayune, 9/29/71)
NASA announced award of $61.6-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to General Electric Co. for hardware development of Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) system. Under provisions of award—which definitized July 27, 1970, letter contract—GE would develop two flight spacecraft (erts-a and erts—b), provide equipment and services needed for GSFC ground data-handling system, and develop spacecraft receiver and six ground platforms for remote-site data-eollection-system experiment, (nasa Release 71-89)
U.S.S.R. launched two satellites. Intercosmos 5, launched from KapustinYar, entered orbit with 1055-km (655.6-mi) apogee, 197-km (122.4-mi) perigee, 97.2-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Satellite—joint project of U.S.S.R. and Czechoslovakia—would continue investigation of radiation and dynamics of corpuscular flux in near-earth space and investigation of nature and spectrum of low-frequency electromagnetic oscillations in natural plasma. Intercosmos 5 reentered April 7, 1972. Cosmos 461, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 508-km (315.7-mi) apogee, 488-km (303.2-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 69.2° inclination, (fbis—Sov—71—233, 12/3/71, LI; L2; gsfc SSR, 12/31/71; 4/30/72; SBD, 12/7/71,164)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 393 into orbit with 417-km (259.1-mi) apogee, 281-km (174.6-mi) perigee, 91.3-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered June 16. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/71; 6/30/71)
Cosmos 427 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk. Satellite entered orbit with 301-km (187-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 72.9° inclination and reentered June 23. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/71; SF, 11/71,456)
Full deployment of Satellite Early Warning System (sews), “possibly in 1972,” would alert U.S. to attack from any point on globe in seconds —“time to get strategic bombers into the air and to launch a missile counterstrike before enemy warheads arrive on U.S. targets”—U.S. News & World Report article said, dod was “fairly confident” that Pearl Harbor type of attack was “becoming almost impossible.” Two sews satellites, launched May 5, were reported in near-stationary orbit about 40 000 km (25 000 mi) above Indian Ocean. They could monitor Soviet and Communist Chinese missile launches and detect and report nuclear explosions in atmosphere. {VS News, 11/15/71, 10)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 401 into orbit with 291-km (180.8mi) apogee, 186-km (115.6-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered April 9. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/71; 4/30/71)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 428 from Baykonur into orbit with 248-km (154.1-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered July 6. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/71, 7/31/71; SBD, 6/25/71, 299)
Challenge of educational satellite telecommunications was discussed in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists by Delbert E. Smith: While advances in comsat technology promised to revolutionize global communication, “it is not certain that educational uses of such a satellite system will develop concomitantly. They may, in fact, be lost in the speed with which our society utilizes the more spectacular and commercially viable facets of the medium.” Educational Satellite Center at Univ. of Wisconsin had been established to work toward “fuller understanding of the social, cultural, political and legal consequences of the inevitable massive transformations in global communication patterns which are imminent.” Objectives of EDSAT Center were: to provide focus for multidisciplinary research and training in educational and social applications and impact of comsats, to develop working models for application of satellite telecommunications systems to educational and social problems, to develop and maintain satellite transmission and reception capability for integration of hardware and software research, and to disseminate information on educational and social applications of space telecommunications. (Bull of Atomic Scientists, 4/71, 14-8)
Peking Radio announced that Communist China’s second satellite, launched March 3, was transmitting scientific data in “whistles, pips, bleeps, and blurrs.” Announcement broke two-week silence on launching of satellite. New China News Agency said satellite weighed 220.5	kg (486 lbs) and was in elliptical orbit. (Reuters, W Post, 3/17/71, A12)
Defeat of sst program and “widespread public antipathy toward technology” had “encouraged the political liberals to intensify their attack on defense spending and press for a larger welfare budget,” Robert Hotz said in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial. “The Air Force B—1 supersonic bomber program will inherit all the supersonic transport’s onus since it has basically the same flight characteristics.” (Av Wk, 5/3/71, 9) systems. Workshop was sponsored by nasa, Dept, of Agriculture, noaa, U.S. Geological Survey, usn Naval Oceanographic Office, aid, and Dept, of State. Ambassador George H. W. Bush, U.S. Representative to U.N., in welcoming address called space technology a global tool and said, “for a global tool to be used productively and efficiently, there must be a climate of international cooperation.” Workshop and U.N. could “provide policy makers and program managers in developing countries with the basic information to enable them to consider seriously how this new technology may help them meet their needs.” Dr. William T. Pecora, Under Secretary of the Interior, said in keynote address that earth-surveying satellites were “must” for world’s welfare. “Whether or not our great population can avoid intolerable social problems of a crowded world and maintain the hoped-for living standards is a matter of conjecture, but our ability to survive will depend in large part on critical assessment of all the earth’s resources.” Leonard Jaffe, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, described nasa Earth Resources Aircraft Program (erap) : “Instead of waiting for data acquired from spacecraft, users are presently obtaining multispectral data of Earth phenomena from sensors carried by NASA aircraft ... to evaluate the sensors and to develop a solid foundation for observational and interpretive techniques for earth-resources space missions.” erap included RB-57F, P-3A, and C-130B aircraft. “We shall shortly add two more high altitude (U-2) aircraft.” Lockheed C-130B was flying optical and infrared laboratory with 24-channel multispectral scanner to provide information on signatures used to separate, classify, and identify specific earth resources. “This is an expansion of the 12-channel scanner of the University of Michigan C-^47 aircraft which we also use for the same purposes. The P—3A or Electra is our radio-wave instrument development laboratory.” Radio antennas on underside of aircraft were used heavily for oceanographic and hydrological studies. Since remotely sensed data had to be verified with actual ground data, “complementary ground efforts are necessary during the research phase of the program.” In spacecraft program to begin in 1972, “erts satellites will be placed into a 920-kilometer [570-mi], sun-synchronous (near polar) orbit. This will permit the satellite, with its narrow-angle sensors, to observe the same spot on Earth once every 18 days. It also ensures that observations are made with a nearly constant solar-illumination angle required for developing identification signatures. The altitude permits narrow-angle sensors to be used to obtain virtually undistorted images.” (nasa Release 71—74; GE Challenge, Summer 1971; Transcript)
Communist China launched her second satellite, from Shuang-ch’eng at 8:15 pm local time. Satellite entered orbit with 1815-km (1127.8-mi) apogee, 266-km (165.3-mi) perigee, 105.9-min period, and 69.9° inclination. Launch was unannounced, but it was monitored by NORAD and accidently observed by USN pilot returning to carrier off Vietnam coast after mission over Southeast Asia. First satellite, Chicom 1, had been launched April 24, 1970. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/71; Finney, NYT, 3/4/71, 1)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 410 from Baykonur into orbit with 288km (179-mi) apogee, 203-km (126-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65° inclination. Satellite reentered May 18. (SBD, 5/7/71, 39; GSFC SSR, 5/31/71)
Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite—launched Dec. 12, 1970—was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite had completed full systematic scanning of galactic plane and substantially complete scan (95%) of celestial sphere. Experiment instrumentation was functioning in outstanding manner, exceeding many design objectives. Spacecraft control section performance—except for tape recorder and slight decrease in telemetry modulation, which had not affected data quality—was excellent. Acquired scientific data had touched on every aspect of observational x-ray astronomy and significant unexpected phenomena had been observed. Discovery of three new x-ray pulsars—■ Cygnus X—1, Centaurus X—3, and Lupus X-l—revealed class of pulsating x-ray source that differed in many respects from previously known x-ray pulsar in Crab Nebula, (nasa Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 438 from Plesetsk into orbit with 273-km (169.6-mi) apogee, 181-km (112.5-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 65.3° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 27. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/71; SBD, 9/23/71, 64)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 9 from Plesetsk into orbit with 642-km (398.9mi) apogee, 615-km (382.1-mi) perigee, 97.2-min period, and 81.1° inclination. Tass said satellite carried meteorological equipment to obtain pictures of clouds and snowcaps on day and night sides of earth and data on thermal energy reflected and radiated by earth and atmosphere. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; SBD, 7/19/71, 78; fbis-Sov-71-137, 7/16/71, LI)	_
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 458 reached 497-km (308.8-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 92.2min period, and 70.0° inclination and reentered April 20, 1972. Cosmos 459 reached 286-km (177.7-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.0Q inclination and reentered Dec. 27 [see Dec. 27], (gsfc, SSR, 11/30/71; 12/1/71; 4/30/72; SBD, 11/30/71, 129; SA, 12/13/71,15)
Representatives of nine European Space Conference member countries and five Atlantic and Pacific area countries met at FAA Hq. to explore possibilities for unified preoperational program in aeronautical satellites over Pacific and Atlantic Ocean areas. At final meeting, group decided to establish International Collaboration Ad Hoc Group to make specific proposals for unified program to Second Aeronautical Satellite Meeting in Madrid Aug. 3. (faa Releases 71—91, 71—93)
ComSatCorp filed with fcc for first-step rate reduction of 25% for Atlantic area satellite services, effective July 1, and proposed second-step reduction for leased voice-grade channels affecting Atlantic and Pacific area in early 1972, provided satellite traffic met forecast increases. (ComSatCorp Release 71—36)
usaf reconnaissance satellite “Big Bird” launched in June was described in Newsweek article: “Streaking through its orbit, Big Bird scans broad land areas with one wide-angle camera, radios what it sees back to ground stations, and, on order, turns a giant ‘narrow angle’ second camera on targets of special interest for closeup pictures—a multiple function that used to require at least two less sophisticated satellites.” Cameras in satellites 160 km (100 mi) above earth “can clearly photograph objects on the ground the size of small cars.” {Newsweek, 11/22/71, 18)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 391 from Plesetsk into orbit with 796-km (494.6-mi) apogee, 266-km (165.3-mi) perigee, 95.2-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 21, 1972. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/71; 2/29/72; SBD, 1/15/71, 56)
Intelsat 1 (Early Bird), in orbit over Pacific, was reactivated to mark its sixth anniversary and relay first message ever transmitted directly from Hawaii to U.S. East Coast via commercial satellite. Satellite—first commercial comsat—had been launched from ksc April 6, 1965, (ComSatCorp Release 71-23)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences continued hearings on nasa FY 1972 authorization. Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified that LeRC quiet engine program was proceeding on schedule: “Tests of full-scale fans for the engine have revealed much new information von the interrelationships among noise, aerodynamic performance, and structural integrity. The complete experimental engine will be operated in about 6 months. Results . . . indicate that we may expect to better the original noise abatement goals. Program results are given to industry on a continuing basis. . . . We can expect some of our improvements to be adopted by industry in new engine designs before completion of our program.” nasa—aec Space Nuclear Systems Office Manager Milton Klein said: “Reactor power sources will be required to provide power in amounts greater than a few kilowatts for many of the missions of the future. For unmanned military satellites, radiation hardening—mandatory for certain military missions—and low recurring costs for multiple missions are important advantages of small reactor systems. For unmanned NASA earth orbit missions, reactors become cost effective above a few kilowatts, a power range needed for such applications missions as communications satellites. In manned missions . . . overriding advantage of reactor systems is their ability to accommodate unforeseen large increases in power demand.” Advanced reactor systems “are needed for electric propulsion systems capable of high energy missions ... to the far planets.” Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski reported that satellite network included “ten electronic ground stations . . . operated by NASA, which are supplemented by an optical tracking network operated by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. The electronic stations provide a worldwide system which . . . tracks each satellite, . . . determines the status of onboard systems, . . . commands the satellite’s functions, and . . . acquires stored or real-time data from the satellite. The optical stations, which include laser capabilities at selected sites, provide specialized services in precision orbital tracking.” (Transcript)
Administration officials had been “playing politics with some of the most sensitive secrets that come into the Pentagon—namely, the intelligence gleaned from our space photography,” Jack Anderson said in Washington Post. Satellite reconnaissance intelligence, known by code name “Tango-Kilo” was so tightly guarded that some DOD intelligence analysts could not get clearance. “Yet Defense Secretary Mel Laird and cia Chief Richard Helms have been giving out selective T—K intelligence to favorite senators to win support for the defense budget.” (W Post, 5/6/71, F7)
U.S.S.R. had again tested “hunter” satellites, designed to locate and destroy other satellites, George C. Wilson reported in the Washington Post. Cosmos 394 (launched Feb. 9) had entered circular orbit and had been intercepted by Cosmos 397 (launched Feb. 25), he said. Satellites’ inclination suggested launches were from Plesetsk rather than Tyuratum [ Baykonur] and “probably means that the Soviet Union considers its satellite inspection system in the operational rather than experimental category.” (WPost, 3/9/71, A3)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 462 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1782-km (1107.3-mi) apogee, 227-km (141.1-mi) perigee, 105.2-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Within hours after launch, Cosmos 462 passed close to Cosmos 459 (launched Nov. 29) and exploded in apparent test of satellite interceptor system at low altitude. Mission was first satellite-intercept test using target below 258-km (160-mi) altitude; previous tests had occurred at altitudes between 580 and 885 km (360 and 550 mi), (gsfc SSR, 12/31/71; AP, NYT, 1/2/71, 25; Av Wk, 12/13/71, 20)
SES-100B Surface Effect Ship, built for usn by Textron Bell Aerospace Div., was launched at Michoud Assembly Facility. Ship was 23.7 m (78 ft) long, weighed 90 700 kg (100 tons), and traveled at 41 m per sec (80 knots) on air cushion maintained by eight lift fans and contained by catamaran-style side hulls and flexible bow and stern seals. Test and evaluation program would be conducted in Lake Pontchartrain and Gulf of Mexico beginning July 23. (Bell Aerospace Div Release) July 23: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 430 from Plesetsk into orbit with 265km (164.7-mi) apogee, 187-km (116.2-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 5. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; 8/31/71; SBD, 7/26/71, 109)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 420 from Baykonur into orbit with 248-km (154.1-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered May 29. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/71)
Ofo Orbiting Frog Otolith satellite, launched by NASA Nov. 9, 1970, reentered atmosphere. Mission had been adjudged successful Dec. 11, 1970.	All objectives—including maintenance of two bullfrogs in space to obtain information on functioning and adaptability in weightlessness of vestibule, portion of inner ear which controlled balance—had been achieved, (gsfc SSR, 5/31/71)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 406 from Plesetsk into orbit with 222-km (137.9-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 81.3° inclination. Satellite reentered April 24. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/71)
Members of 28-nation U.N. Scientific Subcommittee on Space, meeting in New York, had agreed to establish study panel to examine uses of satellites for earth resources surveys, New York Times reported. Agreement represented compromise. U.S. and U.S.S.R. had opposed earlier Swedish proposal that panel consider establishment of operational systems within U.N. framework. U.S. position, expressed by nasa Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin, had been that practical application of using satellites for remote sensing of earth would be demonstrated adequately only after testing of nasa’s erts in spring of 1972. (Teltsch, NYT, 7/20/71, 12)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 443 from Plesetsk into orbit with 297-km (184.6-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 19. (gfsc SSR, 10/13/71; SF, 4/72, 132)
ABC, cbs, and nbc TV networks had filed statement with fcc saying they planned use of other domestic comsats for program transmission rather than building separate satellite system of their own, Wall Street Journal reported. Networks were negotiating with several companies on use of domestic comsats but would like to keep their own option open in case negotiations failed to lead to “satisfactory” arrangements. (WSJ, 30/30/71, 6)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 441 from Baykonur into orbit with 266-km (165.3-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 10. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/71; 10/31/71; SBD, 10/1/71, 101)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 7 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 655-km (407.0-mi) apogee, 629-km (390.8-mi) perigee, 97.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 1/31/71; SBD,1/26/71, 96)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 429 from Baykonur into orbit with 256-km (159.1-mi) apogee, 177-km (110-mi) perigee, 88.8-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 2. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; 8/31/71; SBD, 7/26/71, 109)
Cosmos 466 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykonur into orbit with 375-km (233-mi) apogee, 175-km (108.7-mi) perigee, 90-min period, and 64° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 27. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/71; SBD, 12/17/71, 217)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 442 from Plesetsk into orbit with 272-km (169.0-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 12. (csfc SSR, 9/30/71; 10/31/71; SBD, 10/4/71,108) * Fourteenth flight of TF-8A jet aircraft equipped with supercritical wing was completed, flown from frc by nasa test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry in accelerated TF-8A flight test program [see Sept. 15]. (nasa Proj Off)
Ats 3 applications technology satellite, which had temporarily stopped transmitting weather pictures because of locked-on antenna [see Aug. 24], was operating again, nasa announced. Although spacecraft was still not working properly, it was transmitting cloud-cover pictures of Western Hemisphere during the five per cent of the time when camera was aimed at earth, (nasa Release 71—171)
France’s Eole Cooperative Applications Satellite, launched by NASA Aug. 16, was adjudged successful by nasa. Initial data tape had been received by GSFC from CNES for reduction and analysis of balloon-temperature, pressure-sensor, and wind-velocity information. Preliminary results indicated that balloon sensors, interrogation method, and range-rate system for position-locating balloons had been operating within design limits. Satellite position-location technique had been able to locate fixed balloon electronics package to within 1.2 km (0.8 mi) of its surveyed position. Location of free moving balloons had been within 3 km (1.9 mi), (nasa Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. launched two satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 470 entered orbit with 257-km (159.7-mi) apogee, 190-km (118.1-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 65.4° inclination. It reentered Jan. 6, 1972. Oreol, joint Soviet-French experiment in Arcade program to study upper atmosphere at high latitudes and determine nature of polar lights, entered orbit with 2477-km (1539.2-mi) apogee, 400-km (248.6mi) perigee, 114,6-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Satellite carried instruments to study spectrum of protrons and electrons, to measure integral intensity of protons, and to determine ionic composition of atmosphere, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/71; 1/31/72; Tass, fbis-Sov-71-249, 12/28/71, LI; Sov Aero, 1/17/72, 15)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 456 from Plesetsk into orbit with 287-km (178.3-mi) apogee, 175-km (108.7-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 2. (csfc SSR, 11/30/71; 12/31/71; SBD, 11/23/71, 111)
High-power radar transmitter was being added to 3000-m-dia (1000ftdia) radio telescope near Arecibo, Puerto Rico, in joint nasa—nsf program, nsf announced. Modifications would make telescope most powerful antenna in world for radar studies of planets and satellites. (nsf Release 71-178)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 396 from Plesetsk into orbit with 268-km (166.5-mi) apogee, 189-km (117.4-mi) perigee, 89.0-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered March 3. (gsfc SSR, 2/28/71; 3/31/71; SRD, 2/19/71, 224)
Execution of faa— esro Memorandum of Understanding for joint aviation satellite program had been delayed from Nov. 3 to early December because Office of Management and Budget could not complete review of proposed program in time, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Final pre-bid briefings for prospective contractors also had been delayed. (Av Wk, 10/25/71, 23)
Cosmos 392 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 276-km (171.5-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 2. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/71; 2/28/71)
RM Radiation/Meteoroid satellite launched pickaback with Ofo satellite Nov. 9, 1970, reentered atmosphere and disintegrated. Satellite had demonstrated that advanced radiation system was feasible and accurate and had verified improved instrumentation for measuring meteoroid impact, flux, direction, and speed, (nasa Release 71—40)
Interview with Chien Wei-chang, professor of engineering at Chinghua Univ. in Peking who had worked at jpl from 1940 to 1946, was published in Washington Post. Asked if he had had anything to do with China’s earth satellite program, Chien had replied, “What do you think?” (Roderick, AP, W Post, 4/25/71, A26)
IATA Secretary General Knut Hammarskjold expressed iata’s opposition to proposed use of UHF band in satellite communications along air routes over Pacific Ocean. He said its use would make system twice as costly as one functioning on vhf band already employed in airway communications. Opposition was expressed in letter to U.S. and member governments of ESRO, which planned similar system for Atlantic Ocean. (NYT, 6/26/71)
Intersputnik, international space communications organization, was formed under agreement signed in Moscow by U.S.S.R., Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia. Tass later quoted agreement as saying “organization is open for accession by all states of the world. It will coordinate its activities with the International Telecommunications Union as well as with other organizations whose activities are related to the use of communication satellites.” (upi, NYT, 11/17/71, 9)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 419 from Baykonur into orbit with 340-km (211.3-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 87.5-min period, and 51.5° inclination. Satellite reentered May 12. (SBD, 5/18/71, 88; gsfc SSR, 5/31/71)
Pressure was increasing on Nixon Administration to relax aeronautical satellite system policy to allow first preoperational system to be jointly owned by esro and faa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Original decision that system should be owned by com-merical company with faa leasing its service had become unpopular because of legal complexities. (Av Wk, 9/13/71, 21)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 454 into orbit from Plesetsk with 346-km (215-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 16. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/71; SF, 7/72,179)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 431 from Baykonur into orbit with 284-km (176.5-mi) apogee, 165-km (102.5-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 11. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; 8/31/71, SBD, 8/2/71,148)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Microwave Communications, Inc., would petition fcc for authorization to construct and operate $ 169.4-million domestic comsat system under name MCI Lockheed Satellite Corp., Washington Evening Star reported. Firms said system could be operational by 1975 and produce $70 million per year revenues. (W Star, 3/8/71,A12)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 404 from Baykonur into orbit with 1009-km (627-mi) apogee, 817-km (507.7-mi) perigee, 103.1-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Satellite reentered same day. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/71; SF, 10/71, 386)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 421 from Plesetsk into orbit with 464-km (288.3-mi) apogee, 273-km (169.6-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 8. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/71; 11/30/71; SBD, 5/21/71, 119)
Miniature computer, the size of an automobile battery, was being developed by Honeywell Aerospace Div. to pilot satellite to beam educational TV to India under NASA and Indian government project to start in 1973, AP reported. Computer would use as much electricity as 30-w light bulb. (NYT, 9/23/71, 14)
France’s Eole satellite, launched by nasa Aug. 16, was functioning almost perfectly after 22 days in orbit. Total of 111 balloons had been launched from three Argentina sites for Eole to track and acquire data from on winds, temperatures, and pressures. Five had completed one revolution around earth at 11 850-m (38 880-ft) altitude and had been tracked by Eole. Only five balloons had failed to respond to satellite commands and were assumed lost. Balloons would be launched at rate of 8 to 10 per day until about 400 to 450 balloons were launched; another 50 to 100 balloons would be launched to fill in gaps in array caused by failures, (nasa Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 455 from Plesetsk into orbit with 487-km (302.6-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered April 9, 1972. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/71; 4/30/72; sbd, 11/23/71, 111)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 403 from Plesetsk into orbit with 213km (132.4-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 81.3° inclination. Satellite reentered April 14. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/71; SF, 10/71, 386)
fcc deadline for filing proposals to build domestic comsat systems. Eight proposals had been filed, calling for launch of 19 satellites and expenditure of more than $1 billion. Fairchild Hiller Corp. and Tele-Communications, Inc., had said they would petition FCC for permission to orbit domestic comsat systems, Wall Street Journal reported. Fairchild Hiller proposal called for two satellites in equatorial orbit with third reserve satellite on ground. Tele-Communications envisioned $66-million comsat system of two satellites and six ground stations to start. (WSJ, 3/15/71, 13; 3/16/71,7)	_	_	_
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testified on dod space activities during authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: dod space funding program for FY 1972 called for $1552.6 million, slightly under the $1553.1 million of FY 1971. “The design and fabrication of a new set of satellites intended to replace the interim Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) will be completed in 1971. These satellites, to be launched next month, have significantly higher power and greater bandwidth than their predecessors, and each is equipped with a versatile set of antennas capable of serving fixed and transportable users dispersed over large areas of the earth. Among these are steerable antennas which can be oriented to satisfy contingency needs in changing global situations. To exploit the potential of this new system, we will need better surface terminal equipment. Accordingly, we intend to continue the intensive development of new reliable terminals and modulation and antijamming equipment.” In FY 1972, dod expected “to start developing a satellite communications system that operates in the military ultra-high-frequency (uhf ) hand and is tailored to the characteristics of the mobile users. When deployed, this system should allow us to retire much of our hf radio equipment.” Use of navigational satellites “has the potential of attaining a continuous, highly accurate worldwide position-fixing system. That system could support many ground, sea, airborne and space applications.” In FY 1972, dod planned “to undertake system definition and design studies of the next-generation Defense Navigation Satellite System (dnss).” Under Doppler Geodetic Satellite Program coordinated by Defense Intelligence Agency, geodetic Doppler receivers would observe USN navigation and other Doppler-equipped satellites. Program would provide worldwide geodetic data. dod proposed “to continue a small effort in FY 1972 to develop propulsion technology for high-energy orbit-to-orbit stages that will be compatible with the shuttle system, with a view to future space maneuvering missions projected for the late 1970’s and early 1980’s.” (Transcript)
Intelsat-IV F—2, launched by NASA for ComSatCorp Jan. 25, began commercial service, transmitting to 15 earth stations in Western Europe, Latin America, and North America. Satellite was initially carrying 830 circuits and transmission was excellent, (intelsat Release 71—20; ComSatCorp pio )
U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos 463 (launched Dec. 6, 1971) and Cosmos 464 (launched Dec. 10, 1971) had been launched “in quick succession” to observe India-Pakistan war and had been brought down ahead of schedule in Soviet “rush to analyze the pictures,” George C. Wilson said in Washington Post. “The rapid-fire space shots are fresh evidence that the era of open skies has arrived” even though neither U.S. nor U.S.S.R. openly acknowledged it. “Instead, both superpowers look down on the other from space, cameras rolling, and mobilize this new space tool for special missions in time of crisis... . Some . .. specialists think that since both superpowers depend heavily on their satellites for information, there is now a form of mutual deterrence in space which will keep one side from attacking the other’s satellites. However, there is widespread agreement that the United States has nothing to compare with the Soviets’ satellite inspection ability.” (W Post, 1/7/72, A16)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 523 from Plesetsk into orbit with 457-km (284-mi) apogee, 268-km (166.5-mi) perigee, 91.7-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered March 7, 1973. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; 3/31/73; SBD, 10/10/72, 174)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s first Cosmos satellite, Cosmos 1, launched
NASA announced award of $445 669 contract to Univ. of Minnesota to build mass spectrometer measurement instruments for Dual Air Density (dad) Explorer satellites, scheduled for launch in 1974. (nasa Release 72-168)
President Nixon exchanged remarks with President Felix HouphouetBoigny in telephone call that inaugurated satellite communication service for Republic of Ivory Coast via ground station at Abidjan. President Nixon said he was pleased to talk “through this historic new satellite communication.” {PD, 12/4/72, 1700)
France’s Eole satellite (launched by NASA Aug. 16, 1971) would be used by Australian marine biologists to track ocean movements of crayfish larvae, Reuters reported. Biologists would attempt with tracking buoy to solve mystery of crayfish cycle in which crayfish drifted during its plankton stage. Minute crayfish larvae in free-floating stage had been found up to 1100 km (700 mi) from their hatching grounds outside coastal reefs, but there was little information on currents that carried them there. (CSM, 2/26/72; French Embassy)
At least seven major U.S. companies had asked to lease part of Canadian telecommunications satellite system, Telesat, Washington Post reported. Negotiations were not final, but it was probable that at least one company would decide to use Canadian system until comparable U.S. systems were ready. Canadian system used U.S. designed and manufactured satellites launched by NASA under contract with Telesat Canada, first of which, Anik 1, had been launched Nov. 9. (Samuelson, W Post, 11/24/72)	.	_
Arthur D. Little, Inc., had announced signing of agreement with Raytheon Co., Grumman Corp., and Textron, Inc., to study feasibility of large-scale satellite system to harness solar energy for earth use, Wall Street Journal reported. {WSJ, 3/30/72)
Communications Satellite Corp. and Cunard Line, Ltd., jointly announced beginning of two-month test to demonstrate high-auality, reliable communications between Queen Elizabeth 2 at sea and ComSatCorp Laboratories in Clarksburg, Md., via Intelsat-IV F—2 over Atlantic. Test was first transmission of voice and data communications via satellite with commercial passenger liner at sea. Ship carried 2.4-m (8-ft) parabolic antenna, antenna control and stabilization system, and digital communications terminal for communications in C-band frequencies (400600 mhz). When satellite communications became operationally available for use with ships at sea, service would be provided in L-band frequencies (1500-1600 mhz). (ComSatCorp Release 72—16; ComSatCorp pio)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 522 from Plesetsk into orbit with 317-km (197-mi) apogee, 198-km (123.0-m) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 17. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; SBD, 10/6/72, 170)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 502 from Plesetsk into orbit with 248-km (154.1-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.3-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered July 25. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/72; SBD, 7/20/72, 98)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) took photo from space of Nicaraguan capital of Managua that showed why city had been devastated by earthquake Dec. 23. Picture showed that Managua was built on ashes of volcanoes that stretched in straight line from Managua almost to Pacific shore. Quake had registered only 6.5 on Richter scale, but it had been close enough to surface to shake loose ash fill beneath city. (O’Toole, W Post, 12/31/72, A2)
Cosmos 538 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with 280-km (174-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 65.4° inclination, and 89.3-min period. Satellite reentered Dec. 27. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; SBD, 12/18/72, 209)
NASA controllers expected Pioneer 10 (launched March 2) to pass behind Jupiter satellite Io because of Sept. 19 course correction. Brief firing of spacecraft’s thrusters had increased velocity by 0.227 mps (0.745 fps) so that Pioneer 10 would arrive at Jupiter 17.2 min earlier than originally planned. Spacecraft was expected to make its closest approach to planet at 9:23.5 pm est Dec. 3, 1973, when Io would pass between spacecraft and earth. Io would then be about 531 700 km (330 400 mi) from spacecraft. Scientists could measure Io’s atmosphere, if any, as Pioneer 10’s radio signals passed through it. (nasa Release 72-231)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 526 from Plesetsk into orbit with 480-km (298.3-mi) apogee, 272-km (169.0-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered April 8, 1973. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; 4/30/73; SBD, 10/26/72, 250)
World’s first nuclear-powered artificial heart was exhibited for first time by National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. Dr. Theodore Cooper, Director of National Heart and Lung Institute in NIH, said heart might be perfected for human use toward end of decade. Electrically powered version and atom-powered heart-helper had already been implanted in calves. System was expected to operate for 10 yrs. (Asher, W Post, 3/3/72, Al)	_ March 3:	U.S. had obtained clearance from Coordinating Committee on Trade in Strategic Materials (cocom), whose members represented North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries and Japan, for sale of satellite ground station to Coi'nmunist China, New York Times reported. Japan and other allies had interpreted sale as political act and “made it clear that they intend to use the same criterion. Japan . . . was reported to have insisted that the political aspect of the deal be entered into the record,” and had accused U.S. of “selling equipment of advanced technology because it was politically advantageous but restraining others from doing the same thing.” Station had been installed at Shanghai Airport to cover President Nixon’s visit to Communist China [see March 13]. (Giniger, NYT, 3/4/72, 2)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 492 from Baykonur into orbit with 316-km (196.4-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 65° inclination. Satellite reentered June 22. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/72; SBD, 6/26/72, 241)
Air-transportable satellite communications earth station for use in disasters would be designed by Nippon Electric Co. of Tokyo and Technology Resources of Berne, Switzerland, under United Nations contract, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. (Av Wk, 11/20/72,11)
European space activity was reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology: Dornier Aeros satellite had been cleared for December launch by NASA. Integration of Helios solar research satellite prototype would begin in early 1973 at Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm’s Ottobrunn facility. First Helios was scheduled for mid-1974 launch by NASA, to fly within 37 million km (23 million mi) of sun. Second launch was planned for 1975. (Av Wk, 11/6/72, 9)
Cosmos 513 was launched from Baykonur by U.S.S.R. Satellite entered orbit with 322-km (200.1-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 65° inclination and reentered Aug. 15. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; SBD, 8/4/72, 182)
U.S.S.R. launched Intercosmos 6 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 334-km (207.5-mi) apogee, 197-km (122.4-mi) perigee, 90-min period, 51.8° inclination. Purpose of mission was to study “particles of primary radiation with an energy range of 1012 to 1013 electron volts; the chemical composition and energy spectrum of space beams in the high energy sphere; [and] meteoric particles in inner space.” Instruments—including 1070-kg (2359-lb) photo-emulsionary block and ionization calorimeter—had been designed by U.S.S.R., Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia. Satellite reentered April 11. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/72; SBD, 4/25/72, 301; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/7/72, LI)	_
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Communications Satellite Corp. asked Federal Communications Commission to reconsider its June 16 ruling permitting “multiple entry” of firms into communications satellite field but placing major operating restrictions on AT&T and ComSatCorp. at&t protested Fee’s barring proposed agreement under which ComSatCorp would lease satellites from at&t and protested limitations on its initial use of satellites. ComSatCorp asked Fee to eliminate what it contended were unjustified restrictive conditions that jeopardized “viable, competitive domestic satellite service.” (Shifrin, W Post, 7/18/72, D8)
Federal Communications Commission made public recommendations by its staff for domestic communications satellite system. Recommendations were for “policy of limited open entry permitting all qualified applicants to own and operate domestic satellite systems.” Applicants for related uses of satellite systems would be expected to join forces. fcc spokesman said proposals for satellite use might ultimately be grouped into as many as four independent systems, each requiring its own satellite. Cost of complete system was estimated at $60 million to $100 million. Satellites would cost between $11 million and $26 million. Cost-sharing plan among applicants was recommended. Hearings on fcc staff report were scheduled to start May 1. (Schmeck, NYT, 3/16/72, 1)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial described “tremendous new thrust of avionics into electronic countermeasures” (devices and systems for countering enemy electronic defenses) as “most dynamic element of modern warfare.” ecm had “expanded its sphere from ground operations to the sea, air and even the space environment” of satellites and icbms. There was “half-billion-dollar market for hardware with over another billion dollars expended on operational use of ecm equipment.” There was “ample evidence . . . that the Soviet Union has also embarked on a major ecm effort.” There were still elements of “legitimate military secrecy” in ecm design and operation “but most of its functions are now well known to both sides.” Electronic operations had expanded to “full range of a finite definable spectrum that both sides can scan fully and detect what is being done.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 2/21/72, 9)
Noaa 1 Improved Tiros Operational Satellite (launched by NASA for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Dec. 11, 1970) was adjudged successful by NASA. Mission objectives of placing spacecraft in desired sun-synchronous orbit and collecting daytime and nighttime cloud-cover data had been achieved and spacecraft had been officially deactivated Aug. 19, 1971, when attitude control could no longer be exercised. (NASA proj off)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 518 from Plesetsk into orbit with 308-km (191.4-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.6min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 24. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; Sov Aero, 9/25/72, 82)
Publication of NASA Earth Resources Survey Program Weekly Abstracts was announced by nasa. NASA-funded bulletin, prepared and distributed by National Technical Information Service of Dept, of Commerce, contained abstracts of technical reports on imagery received from Earth Resources Satellite Erts 1 (launched July 23). (nasa Release 72-205)
U.S.S.R. launched Molniya II—2 comsat from Plesetsk into orbit with 39 295-km (24 416.8-mi) apogee, 433-km (269.1-mi) perigee, 705.1-min period, and 65.3° inclination. Objective was to maintain “a system of long-distance telephone and telegraph radio-communications” in U.S.S.R., relay programs of Central Television Service to stations of Orhita network, and further international cooperation. Satellite operated in centimeter wave band, (gsfc SSR, 5/31/72; SBD, 5/23/72, 123; Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/22/72, LI)
ITOS-b Improved Tiros Operational Satellite (launched by NASA for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Oct. 21, 1971) was adjudged unsuccessful by NASA. Satellite had failed to reach orbit when pitch-and-yaw attitude control jets began pulsating to counteract tumbling force from leak in 2nd-stage oxidizer system. Jets kept spacecraft in proper attitude until control gas was expended and vehicle tumbled out of control and impacted above Arctic Circle, itos-b was to have been-placed in sun-synchronous orbit to observe daytime and nighttime cloud cover, (nasa proj off) February 27:	Launch of NASA’s Pioneer-F Jupiter probe was postponed because of momentary power shutdown at Eastern Test Range launch pad. (NYT, 3/1/72, 4)	•
Canadian government purchase of video equipment valued at $500 000 to receive direct TV transmissions from NASA’s Earth Resources Technology Satellites (erts) was announced by RCA. First data-acquisition facilities installed outside U.S., equipment would be at central receiver site in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, and Canadian Centre for Remote Sensing in Ottawa. Facilities would go into full-scale operation when first experimental erts was launched from Western Test Range. (rca Release)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched by NASA July 23, was adjudged a success. Mission had accomplished primary objective, acquisition of synoptic, multispectral repetitive images for three-month period. By Oct. 24 Erts 1 had obtained data which equaled or exceeded quantity and quality required. Data would be used for investigations in agriculture, forestry resources, mineral and land resources, and environment and for mapping and charting, (nasa proj off)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial commented on Apollo program: Six lunar landings had marked “historic watershed in the annals of man.” They had been “boldest, most imaginative and technically complex achievements of man” and had “added a dimension to the human spirit that cannot be fully measured for decades.” Among Apollo’s most important benefits were: (1) “Development of new technology faster, and on a far broader front than is generally realized. The spearhead technology spawned ... is not just confined to aerospace but has spilled over into other broader areas such as medicine, communications and education.” (2) “Creation of a cooperative blend of engineering and scientific effort that appears to have begun bridging a divisive gulf and providing a pattern for more fruitful future work.” Apollo 17 “with its first scientist-astronaut crewmember, foreshadows the increasing opportunity for scientists to work in space as Skylab and the space shuttle provide sufficient capacity for non-flightcrew specialists.” (3) “Creation of a management capacity in both government and industry for marshaling vast resources to focus on a specific goal to achieve results within a limited time. Hopefully, these techniques can be applied to other complex problems facing modern society.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 12/11/72, 7) December 12:	Molniya II—4 communications satellite was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with 39 300-km (24 420-mi) apogee, 470-km (292-mi) perigee, 11-hr 45-min period, and 65.3° inclination. Purpose of satellite was to provide system of distant telephone and telegraph radio communications in U.S.S.R. and transmission of Moscow TV programs to Orbita network. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 12/13/72, LI; SBD, 12/5/73; 12/14/72; gsfc SSR, 12/31/72)
Nimbus 4 meteorological satellite (launched by NASA April 8, 1970) was continuing to gather data, working with ground IRLS (interrogation, recording, and location system). Satellite earlier had tracked weather balloons floating around world, floating ocean buoys, wild animals, and British Aviatrix Sheila Scott, who set several aviation records while circling globe in 1971. In October 1971 IRLS platform had been placed in buoy off Arctic ice island T3 to measure atmospheric pressure, surface and water temperatures, and, in tandem with Nimbus 4, platform position. In April six more buoys would be installed on ice floes in Arctic Ocean north of Alaska to obtain basic weather information during summer. Data had never before been obtained because ice islands melted into brackish ponds and streams covered by fog and rain and were impossible to reach. Monitoring platform in Ohio was transmitting water-quality data from Great Miami River near Cincinnati. IRLS platforms would also be attached to fixed stations in Lake Erie to monitor water oxygen content, electrical conductivity, alkaline and acid content, and temperatures and to test efficiency of collecting water data quickly and repetitively from many different areas simultaneously. Drifting platform in Lake Ontario would collect water data and information on currents. About 15 sensors on Mt. Kilauea, Hawaii, volcano would monitor temperatures to determine relationship between temperature rise and volcano eruption. (NASA Special Release)
Successful “freezing” of orbiting solar research satellite during first space hibernation operation undertaken in Europe had been reported by European Space Research Organization (esro), Christian Science Monitor said, esro center at Darmstadt, West Germany, had rendered TD—1A satellite, launched for esro by NASA March 11, nonoperational during partial solar eclipse. Hibernation enabled satellite to preserve full power intact until it emerged from eclipse. (Reuters, CSM, 11/14/72)
General Telephone & Electronics Corp. announced formation of new subsidiary, GTE Satellite Corp., to provide domestic satellite communications system. System would include multipurpose satellite earth stations in Hawaii, California, Florida, Indiana, and Pennsylvania and could be operational within 24 mos after receipt of Federal Communications Commission approval, (gte Release)
Cosmos 487 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with 504-km (313.2-mi) apogee, 267-km (165.9-mi) perigee, 92.2-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 24. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/72; 9/30/72; SBD, 4/25/72, 301)
First successful transmission of fingerprint records via satellite, using Ats 1 (launched Dec. 6, 1966) was reported by Government Photography. Fingerprints and photos filed by Videofilm system equipment in Sacramento, Calif., were transmitted as video signals to Videofile system in Tallahassee, Fla.; converted to video recordings; and retrieved by “instant replay” as TV pictures and printed copies in experiment to demonstrate possible state-to-Federal Government fingerprint transmission under permanent satellite system. Experiment had been conducted in December 1971 by Project Search (System for Electronic Analysis and Retrieval of Criminal Histories), funded by Law Enforcement Assistance Administration and administered by California Crime Technological Research Foundation. (Govt Photo, 3/72, 24-5)
Discovery by instruments aboard Uhuru (Explorer 42 Small Astronomy Satellite launched Dec. 12, 1970) of regular pulse rhythm in x-ray pulsar was reported by Washington Post. Pulsar discovered in constellation Hercules by Uhuru in November 1971 pulsed for 9 days; then stopped pulsing for 27 days, in repeated pattern. Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Frank D. Drake had said discovery was “every bit as bewildering” as discovery of pulsar itself. “There is no known reason why a star should disappear and then reappear at such regular and predictable times.” Possibilities advanced by astronomers included one that pulsar was orbiting another pulsar whose radio waves were unobservable by Uhuru and that second pulsar overwhelmed first for 27 out of 36 days. Second possibility was that Hercules pulsar was outermost of two stars circling third star in egg-shaped orbits and that eccentric orbits and eclipsing behavior of second orbiting star kept Hercules pulsar hidden from earth three fourths of time. Third and most likely possibility was that pulsar wobbled off orbiting path around its fellow star so that it cast beam into space, away from earth, for 27 out of 36 days. (O’Toole, W Post, 7/17/72, Al)
transpo ’72, held May 27-June 4, had been “surprising success,” Aviation & Space Technology editorial said. It had been “tremendous public report” on advanced technology, particularly aerospace, to the American public; surprising business stimulant; and “triumph of construction expertise, logistics and short-term management by the team brought in at the last possible minute ... to salvage what was shaping into a major disaster.” Exhibition—plagued in beginning by construction holdups due to inclement weather, lack of cooperation from exhibitors, and “fuzzy management”—had been “major success against formidable odds.” But “to mold its successors into the type of operation that will effectively achieve the multiple goals established for it will require the organization of a competent, permanent management right now that can begin to work on Transpo 74 next week.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 6/12/72, 7) Apogee-kick motor was fired at 9:00 pm edt June 14 and Intelsat-IV F—5 entered circular orbit with 36 824.2-km (22 882.1-mi) altitude at 124° east longitude. It would drift westward 4.4° per day to reach station at 61.4° east longitude over Indian Ocean by end of July. Satellite’s first major transmission would be coverage of Olympic Games in Munich in August. Intelsat-IV F-5 was fourth comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and weighed 1387 kg (3058 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000-9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years. Intelsat-IV F-4 had been launched Jan. 22 and was operating satisfactorily over Pacific, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-119) June 13:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress U.S.—U.S.S.R. Treaty on Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems and also Interim Agreem*” t on Strategic Offensive Arms, both signed in Moscow May 26. In filmed TV broadcast from White House President said: “. . . these agreements are in the security interest of the United States.” They would enable U.S. “to maintain defenses second to none.” In transmission message he said agreements “open the opportunity for a new and more constructive U.S.—Soviet relationship, characterized by negotiated settlements of differences, rather than by the hostility and confrontation of decades past.” (PD, 6/19/72, 1026)
Indian Space Research Organization hoped to launch communications satellite in 1982, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Launch would be part of national effort to establish communications network to reach greater portion of population, 80% of which was “incommunicado.” (Av Wk, 12/11/72, 20)
Oscar 6, amateur radio satellite launched Oct. 15 as pickaback payload on Noaa 2, was operating satisfactorily and providing worldwide communications relay. Traffic through satellite’s transponder had been particularly heavy over U.S. and Europe and use by stations in U.S.S.R. and Czechoslovakia had been reported. Anomaly in switching of experiment control logic had been overcome by use of ground command. Satellite’s temperatures were higher than had been predicted. (NASA proj off)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 488 from Plesetsk into orbit with 317-km (197-mi) apogee, 185-km (115-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65.2° inclination. Satellite reentered May 18. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/72; SBD, 5/9/72, 48)
Atomic Energy Commission designated nearly 81 000 hectares (200 000 acres) of land in South Carolina as first environmental research park in U.S. Land surrounded aec facilities near Aiken, (aec Release P-181) June 20-23:	Three Federal scientists attended meeting of Project CICAR (Cooperative Investigation of the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions) in Havana, Cuba, on first official U.S. mission to Cuba since 1959 break in U.S.-Cuban diplomatic relations. State Dept, later said trio, from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, could attend only because meeting was held under aegis of United Nations. (Cohn, / W Post, 7/11/72, A4) June 21:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 493 from Baykonur into orbit with 266-km (165.3-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered July 3. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/72; 7/31/72; SBD, 6/26/72, 241)
Award by U.K. government of two contracts for definition phase of Geostationary Technology Satellite (gts) was reported by Spaceflight. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd. would be responsible for project coordination and design of spacecraft and equipment; Marconi Co. Ltd. Space and Defence Systems Div. would design communications package and electronic subsystems. (SF, 12/72, 457)
Communications Satellite Corp., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and Microwave Communications, Inc., announced agreement on terms for jointly owned company to provide nationwide satellite communications services. Each corporation would have one-third ownership. Intention to establish jointly owned company had been announced Sept. 8. Agreement was subject to approval by Federal Communications Commission. (Joint ComSatCorp, Lockheed, mci Release 72-49)
People’s Republic of China signed $5.7-million contract with RCA Global Communications, Inc., to install satellite earth station outside Peking and enlarge existing earth stations near Shanghai. (Samuelson, W Post, 8/18/72, D8)
Maritime Administration of Dept, of Commerce announced signing of $7.8-million cost-sharing research contract with General Electric Co. Space Div. to develop and test integrated vessel-control system using shipboard computer linked through orbiting satellites to shore-based computer. Maritime Administration would contribute $4.6 million and GE would pay balance. Project was part of program to adapt aerospace technology to marine operations and to equip fleet of 30-50 ships with satellite communications and navigation systems by late 1970s. (Maritime Release 72-32)
United Nations General Assembly adopted, by vote of 102 to 1 with 7 abstentions, resolution to prepare international convention on principles governing use of artificial earth satellites for direct TV broadcasting. U.S. cast opposing vote; U.S.S.R. and 11 other nations that voted against similar measure in U.N. First Committee Oct. 20 voted for General Assembly’s resolution. Resolution noted “need to prevent the conversion of direct television broadcasting into a source of international conflict and of aggravation of the relations among States and to protect the sovereignty of States from any external interference.” U.S. Representative Robert C. Tyson said main reasons for U.S. opposition were that decision overlooked potential in direct satellite broadcasting for “furthering understanding among peoples” and importance of that potential to U.N. and did not sufficiently emphasize central importance of the “free flow of information and ideas in the modern world.” (Dept of State Bull, 12/11/72, 691-2; NYT, 11/10/72, 16; SF, 3/73, 93)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced new record volume of TV via satellite during 17-day coverage of Olympic Games in Munich, West Germany. Total of 1005 half-channel hours of satellite time— more than twice TV use of satellites for any event since commercial satellite service began in 1965—had been used for 144 different international telecasts via four Intelsat satellites during Olympics. (Com-SatCorp Release 72—48)
Intelsat-IV F—3 comsat, launched by NASA for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium Dec. 19, 1971, began full-time commercial service over Atlantic with acceptance of 700 circuits between 8 earth stations. Satellite had been held in orbital position between Atlantic and Pacific pending successful launch and checkout of Intelsat-IV F—4 (launched Jan. 22). (ComSatCorp Release 72-12; ComSatCorp pio)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 491 from Baykonur into orbit with 369-km (229.3-mi) apogee, 173-km (107.5-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered June 8. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/72; 6/30/72; SBD, 5/30/72, 153)
NASA announced issuance of Monitoring Earth, Resources from Aircraft and Spacecraft (nasa SP—275). Illustrated technical report had been prepared by Univ. of California at Berkeley conservationist Dr. Robert N.	Colwell and team to describe potential uses for photos of earth from satellites. Text stressed need for reliable current inventories of agricultural and vegetational resources. Illustrations compared views of sections of U.S. photographed from Gemini spacecraft, from aircraft, and on the ground, (nasa Release 72-70)
Ats 1 applications technology satellite (launched by NASA Dec. 6, 1966) had again helped save lives of two Alaskans, NASA reported. Satellite had been used in 1971 to summon medical aid for two stricken residents of remote sections of state. Recently, satellite had been used to alert Public Health physicians to plights of 11-yr-old girl with appendicitis and man severely injured in snowmobile accident. (NASA Release 72—74)
U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1-21 communications satellite to transmit Soviet TV programs and provide multichannel radio communications throughout Orbita network. Orbital parameters: 39 300-km (24 419.9-mi) apogee, 480-km (298.3-mi) perigee, 11-hr 45-min period, and 65.3° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; Spacewarn, 10/31/72)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched by NASA July 23, was regarded by scientists as “most significant unmanned satellite ever put into space,” Aerospace Facts reported. More than 300 independent investigators were examining photos and data being returned by Erts 1. Investigators were from 43 states, District of Columbia, 31 foreign countries, and 2 international organizations. (Aerospace Facts, 10-12/72, 1)
Award of $185 000 grant for joint Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare, NASA, and Corp. for Public Broadcasting project to beam educational TV programs to rural residents in eight Rocky Mountain states was announced by hew. Total of $500 000 was to be spent on early childhood and career education programs to be transmitted via ATS—f satellite scheduled for May 1973 launch. (AP, NYT, 2/6/72)
Western Union Telegraph Co. outlined plans for possible start of domestic satellite communications system before mid-1974 at New York press briefing. Company said it had signed contract to purchase three satellites from Hughes Aircraft Co. for $20 706 500, with incentive payments to be made after satellites were orbited. Hughes would supply launch support and options for additional satellites and services. Western Union was first company to order satellites under waiver granted by Federal Communications Commission July 26 that permitted ordering spacecraft in advance of issuance of construction permits. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/72)
Smithsonian Institution had recommended California Museum of Science and Industry in Los Angeles as National Aerospace Museum of the West, San Diego Union reported. If Congress approved, funds from Federal agencies would be used for public exhibit of aircraft, rockets, spacecraft, and satellites. (Copley News Service, SD Union, 8/13/72)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 515 from Plesetsk into orbit with 286-km (177.7-mi) apogee, 179-km (111.2-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 73° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 31. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; Sov Aero, 9/11/72, 70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 503 from Plesetsk into orbit with 308-km (191.4-mi) apogee, 170-km (105.6-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 1. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/72; 8/31/72; SBD, 7/21/72, 104)
President Nixon issued statement on receiving necessary ratifications of Definitive Agreements of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization: “We can now look forward to the day when nations around the world will be linked together for instantaneous communications. The implications of this development are enormous, presaging improved international relations in the political, economic, cultural, and scientific spheres.” {PD, 12/18/72, 1759)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 480 entered orbit with 1202-km (746.9-mi) apogee, 1174-km (729.5mi) perigee, 109.1-min period, and 82.9° inclination. Cosmos 481 entered orbit with 511-km (317.5-mi) apogee, 269-km (167.2-mi) perigee, 92.3-min period, and 71° inclination and reentered Sept. 2. (csfc SSR, 3/31/72; 12/31/72; SBD, 3/28/72, 149)
Tenth anniversary of Navy Astronautics Group at Point Mugu, Calif. Group operated Navy Navigation Satellite System, by which Navy ships at sea pinpointed their positions. Group had five navigation satellites in orbit, (pmr Missile, 4/21/72, 1)
People’s Republic of China signed preliminary purchasing contract with British Aircraft Corp. in Peking for third Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner. PRC had signed similar agreement for two Concordes July 24. (bac Release 14C/72) August 29:	Low-cost navigation aid Transim had been developed by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory for Navy Space Projects Office, Baltimore Sun reported. Instrument, for shipboard use, was no larger than “ham” radio and gathered data from five Navy Transit satellites in earth orbit. (B Sun, 8/29/72)
Cosmos 483 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with 290-km (180.2-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 72.8° inclination. Satellite reentered April 15. (gsfc SSR, 4/20/72; Sov Aero, 5/1/72, 9)
U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1-22 communications satellite from Baykonur Cosmodrome to transmit radio communications and broadcast TV programs on the Orbita network to areas in north, Siberia, Soviet Far East, and Central Asia. Orbital parameters: 39 797-km (24 728.7-mi) apogee, 555-km (344.9-mi) perigee, 65° inclination and 11-hr 57-min period, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12/4/72, LI; SBD, 12/5/72, 143; 12/14/72, 197)
NASA announced issuance to scientists of requests for proposals for International Ultraviolet Explorer (iue) satellite that would be built and operated jointly by nasa, United Kingdom Science Research Council, and European Space Research Organization (esro). Plans called for launch of 303-kg (669-lb) spacecraft in 1976 to make high-and low-resolution ultraviolet observations of stars, planets, and other celestial objects. Satellite would transmit to ground stations in U.S. and Europe and make observations 24 hrs daily. Soviet observers would be able to direct and monitor own programs, (nasa Release 72-114)
Administration sources quoted in New York Times said U.S. and U.S.S.R. would pledge not to interfere with each other’s reconnaissance satellites as part of agreement to limit strategic weapons that President Nixon expected to initial on forthcoming Moscow visit. U.S. had insisted on “open skies” arrangement because, with U.S.S.R. ban on inspection, spy satellites were primary means of checking on compliance with terms of arms control agreements. (Beecher, NYT, 5/20/72, 1)
Cosmos satellites’ wide variety of functions were described in Trud by Soviet engineer T. Borisov.. Primary objectives of Cosmos program —which had included almost 500 spacecraft—were “profound and comprehensive scientific investigations of circumterrestrial space” and earth, improvement of space vehicles, and application of experiments “connected with the extensive use of space for national economic and cultural purposes. Very appreciable results have been achieved in . . . the historically short span of 10 years.” Cosmos satellites had studied circumterrestrial plasma and its interconnection with earth’s magnetic field, previously unknown dynamics of processes in upper atmosphere and space, and relationship between sun and earth. “Cosmos-261 and Cosmos-348 explored the plasma ocean. Cosmos-166, which spent a long time patrolling the sun, made a careful survey of the solar disc. Cosmos-92 and Cosmos-149 could be described as modern geophysical laboratories. The astronomers’ automatic laboratory Cosmos-215 had eight telescopes on board to observe hot stars in visible and ultraviolet rays. It also had an X-ray telescope and two photometers to record solar radiation dispersed by the earth’s upper atmosphere.” Series had also contributed to “the further improvement of space technology” and led to creation of first orbital station. “It was only after testing all the complex mechanical, electrical, and radio engineering systems and installations, and after two Cosmos satellite automatic dockings that the way was opened to Soyuz . . . and Salyut. The Cosmos satellites have tested many systems, units and assemblies of lunar and interplanetary automatic apparatuses. . . . the thermo regulating system assemblies, the solar batteries, means of communication, and many scientific instruments for the Luna, Venera, Zond, and Mars apparatuses were created on the basis of or having regard to experience gained in the operation of similar installations in Cosmos satellites.” (fbis-Sov, 3/30/72, LI)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 499 from Baykonur into orbit with 284-km (176.5-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.9° inclination. Satellite reentered July 17. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/72; SBD, 7/7/72, 30)
Cosmos 537 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 302-km (187.7-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 7. (gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; SBD, 11/29/72, 113)
U.S.S.R. award of $l-million contract to ITT Space Communications for earth station equipment for new Kremlin-White House satellite communications link was announced by parent firm International Telephone & Telegraph Corp. Existing hotline was direct Washington-Moscow teleprinter link for transmission of top-priority government messages. ITT Space Communications would provide orientation and training for Soviet personnel. U.S.S.R. would provide antenna structure. (itt Release)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 474 into orbit with 365-km (226.8-mi) apogee, 179-km (111.2-mi) perigee, 90-min period, and 65° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 29. (gsfc SSR, 2/29/72)
U.S.S.R.’s meteorological satellite system was described by Tass as “a turning point in the history of Soviet meteorology.” Three operating Meteor spacecraft transmitted data on area from pole to pole every 1% hrs in band up to 1500 km (900 mi) wide—covering over two thirds of globe daily—to network of ground stations covering about one fourth of earth. Meteor system had helped accumulate valuable data for further perfection of onboard equipment and ground reception, registration, and processing of information. “The operation of sputniks outside the boundaries of the atmosphere enabled a new approach to the study of the air ocean of the planet [and] led to interesting discoveries in the sphere. The sputniks . . . made it possible for the first time ‘to cast a glance’ on strong currents in the upper layers of the atmosphere.” (fbis-Sov, 3/7/72, L2)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (noaa) had indefinitely postponed launch of itos-c meteorological satellite, originally scheduled for last February, because of NASA’s delay in updating Thor-Delta launch vehicle with onboard computer for inertial guidance, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Spacecraft would be retrofitted with improved instrumentation and launched after itos-d, scheduled for launch in fall with improved Thor-Delta. (Av Wk, 5/15/72, 11)	_
DOD’s Tacsat 1 Tactical Communications Satellite ceased operations, after having served military service requirements for mobile communications in the Pacific since its launch Feb. 9, 1969. (Av Wk, 8/20/73, 21; A&A 1969)
Eight nations had reserved satellite TV coverage time for 53 separate broadcasts on U.S. elections, according to Communications Satellite Corp. (AP, NYT, 11/5/72, 83)
U.S.S.R. launched Molniya II—3 communications satellite to transmit Soviet TV programs and provide multichannel radio communications throughout Orbita network. Orbital parameters: 39 200-km (24 357.8-mi) apogee, 480-km (298.3-mi) perigee, 11-hr 43-min period, and 65.3° inclination. (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, LI; Spacewarn, 10/17/72)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 512 from Plesetsk into orbit with 273-km (169.6-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65.3° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 9. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/72, 8/31/72; SBD, 8/1/72, 163)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 527 from Plesetsk into orbit with 295-km (183.3-mi) apogee, 177-km (110-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 13. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; 11/31 [30]/72; SBD, 11/2/72, 2)
White House Office of Telecommunications Policy would review all major Government communications satellite programs to avoid duplication and to influence preparation of FY 1974 budget, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. (Av Wk, 2/28/72, 11)
Navy was seeking approval from Dept, of Defense to develop advanced Transit navigation satellite to meet USN operational needs during last half of 1970s and early 1980s, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Spacecraft would be made less vulnerable to nuclear weapon radiation and to Soviet “killer-satellites.” Navy also hoped to maintain more operational satellites in space to provide more frequent navigation fixes. {Av Wk, 5/22/72, 20)
U.S.S.R. launched three satellites. Intercosmos 7, launched from Kapustin Yar, entered orbit with 550-km (341.8-mi) apogee, 260-km (161.6-mi) perigee, 92.7-min period, and 48.4° inclination. Objective of mission was “to continue joint studies of the sun’s ultraviolet and X-ray radiation and the influence of these radiations on the structure of the earth’s upper atmosphere.” Spacecraft carried equipment designed and built by specialists from East Germany, U.S.S.R., and Czechoslovakia. It reentered Oct. 5. Cosmos 497, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 787-km (489.0-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 95.2-min period, and 71° inclination. Meteor 12 weather satellite was launched from Plesetsk to obtain “meteorological information necessary for swift forecasting.” Orbital parameters: 904-km (561.7-mi) apogee, 888-km (551.8-mi) perigee, 81.2° inclination, and 102.8-min period, (gsfc SSR, 6/30/72; 7/31/72; 10/31/72; Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/30/72, LI; 7/12/72, LI; Sov Aero, 7/3/72, 7; 7/10/72, 15; SF, 12/72, 46)
U.S.S.R. had dismantled about 100 of its older SS-4 and SS-5 mediumand intermediate-range missiles that could strike China and Europe, Dept, of Defense announced. Newer SS-11 icbms that could reach U.S. were replacing older missiles and were being stored in underground silos, dod spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim said dismantling and storing appeared to be “a force modernization on their part” that had been going on for about five years at the rate of about 20 missiles per year. (W Post, 3/4/72) March 4:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 477 from Plesetsk. Satellite entered orbit with 309-km (192-mi) apogee, 214-km (133-mi) perigee, 89.5min period, and 72.8° inclination and reentered March 16. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/72; SBD, 3/7/72, 36)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 525 from Plesetsk into orbit with 292-km (181.4-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 29. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; SBD, 10/23/72, 26)
NASA announced award of $5-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to ITT Gilfillan to develop visible laser communications experiment for ATS—G Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled for launch in 1975. Contract was for five years, including ground station operational support throughout experiment’s two-year lifetime, (nasa Release 72-170)
U.S.S.R. requested that international convention on use of artificial earth satellites for direct TV broadcasting he placed on agenda of 27th session of United Nations General Assembly in September. Provisions of draft convention delivered to U.N. Secretary General Kurt M. Waldheim were: (1) Broadcasts were to be “in the interests of peace, progress, development of mutual understanding and stronger friendly relations” and to improve educational and cultural levels and effect wider international exchanges. (2) All states had equal right to receive and disseminate direct TV. (3) Broadcasts to foreign states would be made only with “definitely expressed consent” of receiving states. (4) Transmission to other states without their consent of programs that “prejudice the cause of safeguarding international peace and security, which represent interference into internal affairs of states, which encroach upon basic human rights, which contain propaganda of violence and horrors, which undermine the foundations of local civilization and culture and which misinform the population are considered to be unlawful and involving international liability.” (5) States could act to counteract unlawful direct TV broadcasts beamed at them on their own territory, from outer space, and from other places outside national jurisdiction of any state. (6) A state was responsible for all national activities on its direct TV. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 8/10/72, Al)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 519 from Plesetsk into orbit with 313-km (194.5-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 71.2° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 26. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; Sov Aero, 10/2/72, 6)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 517 from Baykonur into orbit with 285-km (177.1-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 11. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; 9/11/72; Sov Aero, 9/11/72, 70)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 498 from Plesetsk into orbit with 469-km (291.4-mi) apogee, 267-km (165.9-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 25. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/72; 11/31/72; SBD, 7/7/72, 30)
Photos from Earth Resources Technology Satellite Erts 1 (launched July 23) would be available to public through imagery dissemination centers at Depts. of Interior, Commerce, and Agriculture, NASA announced. Public and private sector organizations participatiiig in NASA Technology Utilization program could obtain photos, analyses, and background material from six NASA-sponsored regional dissemination centers, (nasa Release 72-158)
Two-month program to demonstrate feasibility of transmitting TV and voice communications direct via satellite to six Alaskan communities began at Juneau, Alaska. ComSatCorp would install small transportable ground station at six locations—Juneau (May 3-5), Kodiak (May 16-18), Bethel (May 29-31), Nome (June 7-9), Barrow (June 20-22), and Ft. Yukon (July 3-7). TV programming by Alaskan Educational Broadcasting Commission would be transmitted from ComSatCorp’s Bartlett ground station in Talkeetna, Alaska, via Intelsat-IV F-4 over Pacific, to transportable station. (ComSatCorp info sheet, 5/1/72; ComSatCorp pio)
Cosmos 473 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykonur into orbit with 356-km (221.2-mi) apogee, 176-km (109.4-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 15. (gsfc SSR, 2/29/72; SBD, 2/7/72, 191)
Univ. of Tokyo Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science announced plans to launch radio explorer satellite from Kagoshima Prefecture Aug. 16. The 75-kg (165-lb) satellite, 68 cm (2 ft) long, would be boosted by Mu-4S launch vehicle into elliptical orbit, where it would study cosmic radiation. (Kyodo, FBis-Japan, 7/20/72, C7; SBD, 7/21/72, 101)
RCA Global Communications, Inc., and China National Machinery Import and Export Corp. signed $2.9-million contract under which rca would sell People’s Republic of China P.R.C.’s first permanent satellite earth station. Station, to be completed in time to cover President Nixon’s visit to Shanghai Feb. 28, would initially carry TV transmission, 23 two-way voice bands, and 12 two-way teleprinted channels and would be expanded to 60 voice-grade circuits. (W Post, 2/16/72, A29; 3/24/72, DIO)
Analysis oif “exceptional” satellite picture of Alaskan topography obtained by image dissector camera system (idcs) aboard Nimbus 4 (launched April 8, 1970) was described by U.S. Geological Survey scientist Ernest H. Lathram in Science. Major structural features had been identified despite relatively low degree of ground resolution of image, which had been exposed at altitude of 1100 km (680 mi). Regional lines not yet recognized in surface mapping had been perceived. Synoptic view provided by image showed orthogonal fractures not heretofore apparent in regional maps of Alaska that might reflect “conjugate set of fractures within the crust which has exerted significant control over the geological history of the state.” Scientists had concluded increased resolution in other images from space platforms, like resolution of 60 to 200 m (200 to 650 ft) planned for Earth Resources Technology Satellite program TV cameras, “will permit the discernment of finer detail and a greater accuracy in identifying and locating geologic features.” (Science, 3/31/72, 1423-7)
Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite, launched Jan. 31, was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had entered planned orbit and all experiments were functioning satisfactorily, (nasa proj off)
Use of reconnaissance satellite under control of United Nations to spy out opium gardens throughout world was recommended by Gen. Lewis W. Walt (usmc, Ret.) in testimony before Senate Judiciary Committee’s Subcommittee on Internal Security. Gen. Walt had made worldwide study of heroin addiction and smuggling, (upi, D News, 9/15/72)
NASA released report of Explorer 46 Meteoroid Technology Satellite (mts) Review Committee on failure of panels in bumper penetration experiment to deploy following Aug. 13 launch. Partial instead of full extension of one pair of mts bumper wings had been caused by desynchronization between deployment actuators for that wing pair. Experiment continued to provide good data on effectiveness of bumpers to protect against meteoroids in space, with 17 penetrations recorded to date. One secondary experiment, to measure impact flux of small mass meteoroids, had accomplished objective in detecting ahout 2000 micrometeoroids in near-earth space. Remaining secondary experiment, to measure velocities of meteoroids striking space vehicles, would require several months of successful operation to complete objective, (nasa Release 72-238)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 524 from Plesetsk into orbit with 490-km (304.5-mi) apogee, 264-km (164-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 71° inclination. Satellite reentered March 25, 1973. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; 3/31/73; SBD, 10/13/72, 193)
U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos 476 (launched March 1) was believed by U.S. military and space experts to he a new-generation electronic-intelligence satellite, Associated Press reported. Cosmos 476 payload was estimated at between 4500 and 5400 kg (10 000 and 12 000 lbs), about 10 times heavier than earlier generation ferrets designed to eavesdrop on other nations’ radio traffic and to monitor radar. Heavier weight suggested Cosmos 476 incorporated much more equipment that was probably more technically sophisticated. (W Star, 3/24/72, A5)
Formation of Hughes Aircraft Corp. and British Aircraft Corp. team to study development of new-generation communications satellite had been confirmed by Hughes, Wall Street Journal reported. Hughes spokesman had said team was being formed because current global satellite system was expected to reach capacity by 1975. ComSatCorp, acting for International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, had contracted with Hughes to study means of meeting increasing demand. BAC, primary contractor to Hughes, had participated in Intelsat IV program. (WSJ, 9/6/72, 3; SF, 12/72, 458)
' Nixon Administration was reported in press to be considering public display of “super-secret satellite spy system” to counter congressional criticism of U.S.-U.S.S.R. strategic arms limitation agreement. (Sloyan, Baltimore News-American, 6/1/72, 3)
Launch, by Italy, of NASA Small Astronomy Satellite B (sas-b) had been postponed from Nov. 2 to Nov. 16, at earliest, because of malfunction of Scout launch-rocket gyro package, NASA announced. Package was being replaced with spare system and telemetry encoder had been returned to U.S. for repairs. (NASA Note to Editors)
Ariel 4, cooperative United Kingdom and U.S. satellite (launched by NASA Dec. 11, 1971), was adjudged successful. During more than 10 mos in orbit, spacecraft had operated satisfactorily except for tape recorder failures and minor experiment problems. Primary mission objective—to investigate interaction of electromagnetic waves, plasmas, and energetic particles in upper ionosphere— had been achieved. High-frequency noise experiment had shown several apparently distinct kinds of radio noise, which were under study. Extremely-low-and very-low-frequency experiment and impulse experiment showed elf noise spectrum depended on latitude and therefore on shape of magnetosphere. Univ. of Iowa charged-particle detector was observing auroral charged particles, large field-aligned currents over auroral zone, and higher-energy protons of ring current. Observations, when combined with those from other satellites, were expected to delineate dissipation mechanism for ring current responsible for magnetic storms. Electron density experiment was providing worldwide coverage for morphological study of topside ionosphere, (nasa proj off)
Canada and European Space Research Organization (esro) signed space cooperation agreement under which ESRO would fly equipment on board Canada’s Communications Technology Satellite, scheduled for launch by NASA in 1975. Equipment to be supplied by esro included traveling-wave tube, parametric amplifier, and solar cells. (SBD, 5/30/72, 150; Canadian Embassy pio)
U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 11 meteorological satellite into orbit with 890-km (553.0-mi) apogee, 867-km (538.7-mi) perigee, 102.5min period, and 81.2° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 3/31/72)
Cosmos 472 was launched from Plesetsk by U.S.S.R. Orbital parameters: 1536-km (954.4-mi) apogee, 193-km (119.9-mi) perigee, 102.2-min period, and 82° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 18. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; 8/31/72; SF, 6/72, 262)
Intelsat-IV F-4—launched by NASA Jan. 22 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium—was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite had been launched into satisfactory transfer orbit and subsequently placed into synchronous orbit at 165° east longitude, from which it was drifting to station over Pacific at 174° east longitude, (nasa proj off)
Pan-Pacific Education and Communications Experiments Using Satellites (peacesat) program, using NASA’s orbiting Ats 1 satellite for longdistance educational exchange, was described in New York Times. System would be used to convey information instantaneously by voice, print, and pictures between classrooms, laboratories, or libraries in different countries. Key component was inexpensive, easily operated two-way broadcasting and receiving unit. Impulses beamed by transmitter from primary station at Univ. of Hawaii to satellite could be received by similar device on ground anywhere in Pacific area. University’s unit had been constructed for $1200, with $130 taxi radio as nucleus. Teachers on Honolulu campus had used system to conduct orientation classes for students traveling to Hawaii from Japan, Hong Kong, and Philippines aboard passenger ship thousands of kilometers away and to conduct five-week speech course between Honolulu and Hilo campuses. Other applications of peacesat might include multistation hookups for scholarly discussions among teachers and students, long-distance collaboration in medical activities, and exchange of library material. (Trumbull, NYT, 1/15/72)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 609 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 330-km (205.1-mi) apogee, 173-km (107.5-mi) perigee, 89.5min period, and 69.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Dec. 4. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; 12/31/73; SBD, 11/26/73, 123)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 583 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 298-km (185.2-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-min) perigee, 89.5min period, and 64.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Sept. 12. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; 9/30/73; SBD, 9/6/73, 10)
Cosmos 550 was launched by the U.S.S.R. into orbit from Plesetsk with a 313-km (194.5-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered March 11. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/73)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—26 communications satellite into orbit with a 40 830-km (25 370.6-mi) apogee, 618-km (384-mi) perigee, 740.0-min period, and 62.9° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12/5/73, Ul)
The Federal Communications Commission approved Communications Satellite Corp.’s request to provide communications satellite service to Navy and commercial shipping [see March 5]. (B Sun, 4/13/73, Cll)
The S.S. Hope, hospital ship of the People-to-People Health Foundation sailed from Baltimore and arrived in Maceio, Brazil, after having been equipped for communicating via satellite. Under an agreement between Communications Satellite Corp. and the Foundation, the ship had been fitted with a small, parabolic antenna and a transmit-receive comsat terminal to assess the use of reliable long-distance communications with medical teams in remote areas. (ComSatCorp brochure)
Measurements of ice, surface, and atmospheric conditions in the Bering Sea would be made by nasa and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, NASA announced. The experiment would be conducted Feb. 15-Mar. 7 on a Soviet weather ship and 11-18 aircraft and by a U.S. Coast Guard icebreaker and the instrumented NASA Convair 990. The project would be carried out under August 1971 recommendations of the Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Working Group on Satellite Meteorology for better understanding of interaction of sea ice and atmosphere on weather patterns in the Bering Sea area. (NASA Release 73-2)
The Air Force announced the award of a $62 426 400 fixed-price-incentive contract to Boeing Co. for operational and maintenance ground equipment for the Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile force for FY 1973. (dod Release 116-73) March 8:	Communications Satellite Corp. sought authority from the Federal Communications Commission to construct advanced satellites and related ground control facilities for lease to American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to provide domestic satellite services to all 50 states and Puerto Rico. Each satellite would provide 14 400 two-way voice-grade circuits. Ground stations for tracking, telemetry, and command duties would be in Connecticut and California. The ComSatCorp filing was similar to one made in October 1970 and revised in March 1971, and would expand coverage to include Hawaii and Puerto Rico. (ComSatCorp Release 73-12)
Cosmos 578 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 251-km (156-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.0-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Aug. 13. (gsfc SSR, 8/3/73; SBD, 8/3/73, 175)
Data from drifting buoys equipped with temperature and pressure sensors and satellite communications antennas that reported to French satellite Eole (launched by NASA Aug. 16, 1971) had shown that currents in the western Atlantic ocean were more erratic and unpredictable than earlier imagined, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced. Although in continuous motion, some buoys had ended up approximately where they had started after two or three months of monitoring; others had “moved in unpredicted directions, changed directions frequently, circled, or doubled back.” The buoys were part of a noaa project to identify large-scale mean surface flows, (noaa Release 73-118)
The People’s Republic of China was preparing to launch weather satellites, Deputy Director Chi Sheng-ying of the Central Meteorological Institute in Peking told an international conference on weather satellites in Paris. (Agence France-Presse, NYT, 5/22/73, 21)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 547 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 311-km (193.3-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered Feb. 13. (gsfc SSR, 2/28/73; SBD, 2/2/73, 183)
A satellite station for international communications being built near Belgrade, Yugoslavia, would be completed by Oct. 21, the Belgrade Politika newspaper reported. The station, containing $4-million equipment, would be able to make direct contracts with many countries without the expense of buying cable communications. Japan had designed and built the equipment and would train Yugoslav engineers to operate it. (fbis-Sov, 3/9/73, 119)
A video tape recorder aboard Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) had developed sporadic bursts of noise that degraded recorded photographic images, NASA announced. Investigations were underway to determine the cause and full impact of the problem. Real-time photos were unaffected, (nasa Release 73-62)
The U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 611 entered orbit with a 481-km (298.9-mi) apogee, 269-km (167.2-mi) perigee, 92.0-min period, and 71.0° inclination and reentered June 19, 1974.	, Cosmos 612 entered orbit with a 346-km (215.0-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and 72.8° inclination and reentered Dec. 11. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; 12/31/73; 6/30/74; SBD, 11/30/73, 160)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 561 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 290-km (180.2-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered June 6. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73, 6/30/73; SBD, 5/30/73, 162)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya II-5 communications satellite from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 39 828-km (24 748.0-mi) apogee, 525-km (326.2-mi) perigee, 717.7-min period, and 65.2° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/ 73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/6/73, LI; SBD, 4/6/73, 205)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 608 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 498-km (309.4-mi) apogee, 269-km (167.2-mi) perigee, 92.2-min period, and 70.9° inclination. The satellite reentered July 10, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73, 8/31/74; SBD, 11/21/73, 117)
Tenth anniversary of the formation of Communications Satellite Corp. In 10 yrs, ComSatCorp had grown to its present size from the mandate in the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 stating the corporation should be formed to establish a global commercial communications satellite system in cooperation with other countries. The organization employed 1100 persons at 11 locations to operate satellites in a global system for the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat), 7 U.S. earth stations for international satellite communications, ComSatCorp laboratories, and a wide range of technical activities. (ComSatCorp Release)
The Federal Communications Commission notified U.S. companies bidding on the European Space Research Organization’s aeronautical satellite system that participation was subject to fcc approval. (Av Wk, 2/12/73, 21; fcc pio)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 616 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 326-km (202.6-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Dec. 28. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; SBD, 1/2/74, 2)
The U.S.S.R., with the cooperation of the German Democratic Republic and Czechoslovakia, launched Intercosmos 10 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 1454-km (903.5-mi) apogee, 259-km (160.9-mi) perigee, 102.1-min period, and 74.0° inclination. The satellite would make geophysical investigations in high latitudes and study the electromagnetic connection between the magnetosphere and ionosphere and effects on the neutral atmosphere. Solar panels were of Soviet design and much of the antenna complex was built by Czechoslovak researchers. Meteorological rockets would be launched and simultaneous ground measurements made in support of the mission, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/31/73, Ul; SBD, 11/1/73, 3; Av Wk, 11/26/73, 65)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 587 from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 289-km (179.6-mi) apogee, 177-km (110-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 4. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; 10/31/73; SBD, 10/1/73, 152)
Cosmos 551 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 292-km (181.4-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered March 20. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/73; SBD, 3/7/73, 35)
The U.S.S.R. launched a Meteor 15 weather satellite from Plesetsk to obtain “meteorological information for the use of the operational weather service.” Orbital parameters: 896-km (556.7-mi) apogee, 852-km (529.4-mi) perigee, 102.4-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite carried equipment to receive day and night pictures of clouds and snow cover and data on the heat energy reflected and emitted by the earth and the atmosphere, (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; Tass, fbis— Sov, 5/30/73, LI; SBD, 5/30/73, 162)
NASA held a Hq. press conference with French oceanographer Jacques-Yves Cousteau on the joint NASA and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration project in which Cousteau and his oceanographic research ship Calypso had participated [see Feb. 8, 15, and 21]. Cousteau had gathered data on ocean temperature, color, and breeding areas which would be compared with data from satellites in the NASA Applications Satellite program and from noaa’s Environmental Satellite Service. Cousteau said the opportunity to contribute to the project had been “very thrilling, because we believe that one of the most urgent tasks is to monitor the earth’s resources and the ocean resources, and also to control—later on—directly from outer space, the degree of pollution of the surface of the ocean.” During the expedition in Antarctic waters Cousteau had received satellite photos from Nimbus 2 satellite (launched by NASA May 15, 1966), Essa 8 (launched Dec. 15, 1968), and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) to help him navigate the dangerous Drake passage between Antarctica and Ushuaia, Argentina. They were “the most valuable tool we had to plan our trip.” (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 602 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 332-km (206.3-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 90.0min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 29, believed by Western observers to be sixth in a series of reconnaissance spacecraft monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15]. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; SBD, 10/24/73, 266)
Cosmos 572 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 286-km (177.7-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.8° inclination. The 'satellite reentered June 23. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/13/73, 242)
President Nixon signed Executive Order 11718 designating the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (intelsat) as an international organization entitled to enjoy certain privileges, exemptions, and immunities. (PD, 5/21/73, 673-4)
Brazil was reported to be negotiating with several companies for a $100million domestic communications satellite system to link its cities with remote areas not reached by ground systems. A special government commission would study proposals for the satellite program to relay thousands of simultaneous phone calls and multiple TV channels. If the program was authorized, Brazil would become the third country in the world with a nationwide domestic comsat system, (latns, Today, 3/16/73)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said on the Senate floor that NASA had been “second to none in its record of accomplishments during its first decade and a half.” The past 15 yrs had seen the U.S. go “from the depths of postsputnik depression to undreamed of heights in both the exploration and exploitation of the benefits of space.” The Skylab 3 crew (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14) had “just completed 59 highly successful days in space, in a mission already being hailed as perhaps the most productive in our history. Eighty-three nations have joined in a global communications satellite system [Intelsat] now carrying three-quarters of the world’s intercontinental telecommunications traffic.” (CR, 10/1/73, S18200)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 580 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 490-km (304.5-mi) apogee, 273-km (169.6-mi) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 70.9° inclination. The satellite reentered April 1, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; 6/30/74; SBD, 9/6/73, 10)
The Federal Republic of Germany’s Aeros satellite (launched by NASA Dec. 16, 1972) was operating within expected limits. Five science experiments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. An anomaly had possibly degraded data from the U.S. neutral atmosphere temperature experiment; four other experiments were unaffected, (nasa prog off)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 11-8 communications satellite into orbit with a 40 809-km (25 357.5-mi) apogee, 488-km (303.2mi) perigee, 12-hr 17-min period, and 62.8° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12/26/73, Ul)
The Federal Communications Commission’s Common Carrier Bureau petitioned the FCC to force Communications Satellite Corp. into an immediate 25% rate cut. The Bureau, representing consumers in the eight-year-old FCC investigation of ComSatCorp, said that increasing satellite traffic and the use of more efficient plant had increased ComSatCorp’s annual earning rate from 10% in 1971 to about 25%. (Aug, W Star-News, 8/25/73, Al; fcc pio)
A New York Times editorial commented on the new role of science in President Nixon’s Administration: The extent to which technical expertise was indispensable to governmental decision-making in fields of environmental pollution, defense, and medical policy made it “surprising that the President now has chosen to lessen the role of science and scientists in his Administration.” Downgrading science and technology would have effect of a handicap “in getting first-class scientific advice quickly when he needs it. . . . The United States is powerful and prosperous today only because it has made such effective, large-scale use of scientific knowledge in all civilian and military fields.” (NYT, 2/7/73, 34) February 8:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 548 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 284-km (176.5-mi) apogee, 209-km (129.9-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Feb. 21. (gsfc SSR, 2/28/73; SBD, 2/9/73, 227)
A new satellite series, Intelsat IVA would begin service in mid-1975 to expand and improve communications capacity among nations, Com-SatCorp announced. The new series would double capacity by reusing frequencies for the first time by beam separation. The series would replace the global system of Intelsat IV satellites jointly owned with International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, in which Com-SatCorp held the major interest. Since Early Bird (Intelsat 1, launched April 9, 1965), satellites had expanded and improved world communications until, to date, there were 251 pathways among 80 antennas at 65 stations in 49 countries. Two thirds of all long-distance communications were via satellite. (ComSatCorp Release 73—5)
A Science article commented on President Nixon’s Oct. 3 speech announcing National Medal of Science winners [see Oct. 3] : “How serious Nixon is about achieving the objectives cited in his remarks will be indicated by future budgetary activities. In recent months, however, there has been plenty of evidence that the Administration wants to make changes not only in the substance of science policy, but also in the way that policy is made. The most obvious indicator was the shift of the science advisory apparatus from the White House to nsf. Underlying the change seems to have been not just a dissatisfaction with the science advisory machinery, but also with the basic relationship between the scientific community and its federal patrons which has prevailed since World War II.” It would be wise for the scientific community to examine carefully the new terms which President Nixon seems to he offering. “However, the recent invitation from the White House did, figuratively, seem to be directed to scientists and engineers in general.” (Walsh, Science, 10/ 26/73, 365-8) Octobkr 27: The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 603 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 356-km (221.2-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 90.0min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite, which reentered Nov. 9, was believed by Western observers to be the seventh reconnaissance Cosmos launched during October to monitor the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15]. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; 11/30/73; SBD, 10/31/73, 307)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 559 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 324-km (201.3-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered May 23. (GSFC SSR, 5/31/73; SBD, 5/21/73, 116)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 562 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 473-km (293.9-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 70.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 7, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/6/73, 208)
Direct satellite communications via Intelsat-IV F—4 began between Thailand and the People’s Republic of China, (upi, W Star-News, 8/24/73, A2; ComSatCorp pio)
Western Union Telegraph Co. President Earl D. Hilburn said the company had received letters from seven unidentified companies of intent to order $3 million worth of communications satellite transmission services. Identification would be withheld until all applications had been received. Western Union’s westar satellite system was the first U.S. system to be authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. Inauguration of services was set for mid-1974. (Western Union Release)
The U.S.S.R. launched its Molniya 1—24 communications satellite into orbit from Plesetsk. Tass announced a 37 970-km (23 593.5-mi) apogee, 480-km (298.3-mi) perigee, 679-min period, and 65.3° inclination. The satellite would ensure the operation of a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; fbis-Sov, 8/30/73, Ul; SBD, 9/6/73, 10)
U.S. heart specialist Dr. Paul Dudley White sent the first telegram via satellite between the U.S. and the People’s Republic of China, to inaugurate direct communications between Peking’s General Administration of Telecommunications and the New York headquarters of Western Union International Inc. Dr. White, one of the first U.S. physicians to visit the PRC in 1972, sent greetings from U.S. physicians to their colleagues in China, via Intelsat-IV F-4 (launched Jan. 22, 1972). (NYT, 7/20/73, 27; ComSatCorp pio)
The U.S. and United Kingdom concluded an agreement on U.K. access to U.S. space launch capabilities. The U.K. would purchase boosters and launch services from NASA for satellite projects of the U.K. Dept, of Trade and Industry. Launches would occur at NASA launch sites in U.S. The first U.K. satellite launched under terms of agreement would be X-4 technology satellite scheduled for 1974 launch from Western Test Range, (nasa Release 73-11)
The Federal Communications Commission granted permission to Communications Satellite Corp. to contract for three satellites to be used for a maritime communications satellite system. A construction permit would be granted later. FCC stipulated that ComSatCorp must allow all carriers already providing maritime service to invest and participate in the entire system. (AP, W Star-News, 8/30/73, D6; fcc pio)
A Univ. of Alaska Geophysical Institute team headed by Dr. Gerd Windier was examining potential of high-resolution satellite images in providing information on Alaska’s environmental conditions and hazards in a one-year pilot project of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NO A A announced. The project was using radiometer images received twice daily at noaa’s Gilmore Creek Command Data and Acquisition Center near Fairbanks from Noaa 2 and 3 satellites launched for noaa by nasa Oct. 15, 1972, and Nov. 6, 1973. (noaa Release 73-243)
West Germany’s Aeros Aeronomy Satellite (launched by nasa Dec. 16, 1972) was adjudged a success by NASA. Prelauch objectives—to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of main absorption— had been satisfied. Four of the five scientific instruments had performed satisfactorily. (NASA prog off)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) photos showing pollution spreading across Lake Champlain would be used in court as evidence against a factory accused of discharging pollution, the Washington Post reported. The case, brought by the state of Vermont against the state of New York and the International Paper Corp., would mark the first use of a satellite photo in legal action. The photo, of Lake Champlain from 900-km (560-mi) altitude, showed a brown circle extending 0.6 km (0.4 mi) from the New York shore and originating from an International Paper Corp. mill. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/8/73, A3)
Tracking of earth-orbiting satellites by the long-range perimeter acquisition radar (par) of the Safeguard Ballistic Missile Defense facility at Grand Forks, N.D., had been achieved ahead of schedule, Armed Forces Journal reported. PAR construction had begun in 1970; power testing, in June. The site was scheduled to be handed over to the Armed Air Defense Command in October 1974 and to become operational in early 1975. (AFJ, 9/73, 24)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 607 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 292-km (181.4-mi) apogee, 217-km (134.8-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 72.2° inclination. The satellite reentered Nov. 22. (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; SBD, 11/13/73, 66)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 625 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 340-km (211.3-mi) apogee, 187-km (116.2-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 3, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; 1/31/74; SBD, 1/2/74, 2)
The first direct TV transmission from the U.S.S.R. to Cuba was made. The Soviet Red Square Parade, telecast from Moscow, was transmitted via a Molniya satellite and a ground station in eastern Cuba. Regular TV and communications traffic was expected to begin in 1974. {Av Wk, 11/12/73, 9)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 11-7 communications satellite from Baykonur into orbit with 39 860-km (24 767.9-mi) apogee, 503km (312.6-mi) perigee, 717.9-min period, and 62.8° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; Tass, fbis—Sov, 10/24/73, Ul; Sov Aero, 1/7/74, 4)
Naval Air Test Center development of a rescue system to pinpoint the position of any downed aircraft anywhere on earth was reported by r/a Roy M. Isaman, Test Center Commander, in a telephone interview with the Associated Press. A distressed aircraft would use a transmitter of less than five watts to bounce a signal off a communications satellite in stationary orbit back to one of eight Navy navigation stations under construction. (B Sun, 11/30/73, A3)
Cosmos 575 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 267-km (165.9-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 65.3° inclination. The satellite reentered July 3. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/22/73, 304)
A $110-million “fail safe” satellite system to monitor the 1290-km (800mi) Alaskan oil pipeline was being planned by rca Alaska Communications, Inc., United Press International quoted rca Corp. Board Chairman Robert M. Sarnoff as saying in Anchorage, Alaska. (NYT, 9/15/ 73, 11)
Approval by both countries of results of the Feb. 12-17 Moscow meeting of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Working Group on the Natural Environment was announced by NASA. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed to a cooperative project for detecting features linked to changes in structure of the earth’s crust, for recognizing them on space images to develop a classification system, and for studying the relationship between the space imagery features and previously known subsurface geologic structures. The Group identified as a possible project development of remote-sensing methodology to determine vegetation productivity and agreed to develop a plan for a joint project to measure soil moisture content using microwave techniques. The U.S. would study a Soviet proposal to coordinate satellite water-temperature measurements with surface measurements obtained by a Soviet ship and to compare temperature, plankton, and color measurements by Soviet ships with U.S. satellite observations. The U.S.S.R. would study U.S. proposals to test a hydrological simulation model using remote-sensing data and environmental factors to infer the presence of shallow aquifers—areas of water underground and close to the surface. (NASA Release 73-106)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya II-6 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 39 284-km (24 410-mi) apogee, 441-km (274.0-mi) perigee, 705-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network. Western observers said later that Molniya II-6 also might transmit communications during a manned mission. Reports that Soviet tracking ships used for manned space flights had been sighted heading for their stations in the Atlantic possibly indicated an upcoming manned launch, (gsfc SSR, 7/31/73; fbis— Sov, 7/12/73, LI; SBD, 7/12/73, 58; NYT, 7/12/73, 4)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1-25 communications satellite from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 39 798-km (24 729.3-mi) apogee, 566-km (351.7-mi) perigee, 717.9-min period, and 64.8° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 11/15/73; SBD, 11/15/73, 96)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 597 from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 214-km (133-mi) apogee, 163-km (101.3-mi) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 12. Cosmos 597 was the second of seven Soviet satellites launched and returned in quick succession, leading to Western speculation that they were reconnaissance craft monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15]. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; SBD, 10/10/73, 193)
Explorer 48. Small Astronomy Satellite, launched for NASA by an Italian crew from the San Marco Facility Nov. 16, 1972, was adjudged a success. It had satisfied its primary objective of measuring the spatial and energy distribution of primary galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation for six months. Explorer 48 had observed a weak but finite component of high-energy gamma ray photons at galactic latitudes greater than 20° and a positive flux of gamma rays from the Crab Nebula, established as a source of 60 to 200 mev radiation. Spacecraft-control-section performance had excelled except for a degraded star sensor. An anomaly in the experiment readout system in late May had caused some degradation in the scientific data and a June failure in the experiment low-voltage power-supply circuitry had halted experiment data transmission. The first anomaly had corrected itself; attempts were being made to correct the second. (NASA prog off)
An emergency team put together by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Navy’s Fleet Weather Facility was aiding Jacques-Yves Cousteau’s damaged oceanographic research vessel Calypso. The Calypso, damaged by an iceberg Jan. 16 while exploring the Antarctic Ocean, would have to navigate the treacherous Drake Passage to the port of Ushuaia, Argentina, for repairs. The best conditions for the crossing passage would be determined from weather and ice floe information supplied by Nimbus and noaa weather satellite photos and fwf sea ice experts. Calypso had been instrumented to receive weather and satellite communications via Ats 3 (launched by NASA Nov. 6, 1967) by Goddard Space Flight Center for participation in an experiment with nasa [see Feb. 8]. (nasa Release 73—28) 0 Dr. Harold A. Rosen, codeveloper with Dr. Donald D. Williams of the first synchronous communications satellite (Syncom 1, launched Feb. 14, 1963), was named the “Southern California Inventor of the Year” by the Patent Law Assn, of Los Angeles. Dr. Rosen, manager of the commercial satellite systems division of the Hughes Aircraft Co. Space and Communications Group, held 18 patents for inventions related to the synchronous satellite. He was cited for “revolutionizing the satellite industry.” (LA Her-Exam, 2/16/73; SBD, 2/27/73, 301)
A European Space Conference in Brussels failed to reach agreement on future programs, including the establishment of a European space agency. Spaceflight magazine later attributed the failure to divergent interests. The U.K. was concentrating on its maritime satellite, West Germany on the Spacelab, and France on the L-3S launcher. Sweden and the Netherlands required more time, and France was disappointed that the U.K. would not join West Germany in supporting the L-3S project. The meeting would reconvene in Brussels July 31 to meet NASA’s Spacelab decision deadline of Aug. 10. (SF, 9/15/73, 321)
The U.S. Postal Service issued an eight-cent stamp commemorating the 500th anniversary of the birth of Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus. First-day ceremonies, sponsored by the Smithsonian Institution and the National Science Foundation, were held at the National Museum of History and Technology. The first-day flight cover featured a photo of Orbiting. Astronomy Satellite Oao 3, named Copernicus and launched by nasa Aug. 21, 1972. (usps Philatelic Release 8; Flight cover)
Cosmos 563 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 306-km (190.1-mi) apogee, 190-km (118.1-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 65.2° inclination. The satellite reentered June 18. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/7/73, 211)
The West German government announced it was withdrawing from the multinational European Launcher Development Organization (eldo). eldo had been building the Europa II launcher to launch a communications satellite into earth orbit Oct. 1, but the project collapsed with West Germany’s defection. (Kent, latns, M Her, 6/1/73)
The Federal Communications Commission authorized Western Union Telegraph Co. to build the first domestic satellite communications system in the U.S. Six other proposals were pending and fcc had indicated it would approve “all qualified applicants.” (Jacobs, WSJ, 1/31/73, 1)
The U.S.S.R. launched Oreol 2 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 1974-km (1226.6-mi) apogee, 399-km (247.9-mi) perigee, 109.1min period, and 73.9° inclination. The satellite, a Soviet-French cooperative mission, would continue the program begun by Oreol 1 (launched Dec. 27, 1971) to study the upper atmosphere at high latitudes and the nature of the polar lights, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; Tass, fbis~-Sov, 12/27/73, Ul; UN Registry)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 558 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 491-km (305.1-mi) apogee, 267-km (165.9-mi) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 70.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Dec. 22. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; 12/31/73; SBD, 5/18/73, 108)
The European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) Council, meeting in Paris, agreed to defer its final decision on the fate of the Europa II launcher until a further meeting, scheduled for March 30. France advocated continuing the project to provide a launch vehicle for communications satellites. West Germany said it desired to leave the Europa program. (SF, 4/73, 212)
Western Union Telegraph Co. announced it had received authorization from the Federal Communications Commission to construct four more earth stations for the terrestrial segment of its westar domestic communications satellite system. It would build on sites near Atlanta, Ga.; Chicago, 111.; Dallas, Tex.; and Los Angeles, Calif. The first westar earth station was under construction at Vernon Township, N.J. (Western Union Release, 6/14/73)
Cosmos 554 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 329-km (204.4-mi) apogee, 171-km (106.3-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The spacecraft reentered May 27. Western observers believed it was a reconnaissance satellite and that it had exploded or been exploded during recovery. By the end of May more than 180 pieces had been recorded by tracking stations, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73; 5/31/73; O’Toole, W Post, 5/19/73, A12; SBD, 4/20/73, 285; 5/21/73, 116)
The European Space Research Organization had begun negotiations with Communications Satellite Corp. and RCA Global Communications, Inc., to select a corporate partner that would own the U.S. portion of its proposed experimental communications satellite system, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Five companies had submitted bids to the ESRO competition. A final choice would be made before June. (Av Wk, 4/16/73, 9)	_	_	__
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 560 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 325-km (201.9-mi) apogee, 178-km (110.6-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite reentered June 5. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; 6/30/73; SBD, 5/30/73, 162)
Cosmos 576 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 331-km (205.7-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered July 9. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; 7/31/73; SBD, 6/29/73, 333)
An Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial commented on the July 23 anniversary of the launch of NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite. Its first year of operation “has proved that space technology has produced yet another useful tool for man to improve his life on earth. The erts experiment has shown—at a relatively modest cost of $160 million—that it is feasible to measure, catalogue and monitor the contents of the earth’s crust.” It had also yielded “more pertinent information faster and cheaper than all previous methods of tackling this job in the limited areas where it was possible.” Erts 7’s most important contribution probably would be “the tremendous capability it can provide for man to detect, monitor and control the sources of pollution that are poisoning his environment.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/30/73, 7) July 30—August 3:	Wallops Station used a Boeing 737 jet aircraft from Langley Research Center to measure aircraft noise characteristics for comparison with existing noise prediction techniques. The primary objective of the study—part of a Federal effort to understand and reduce aircraft noise pollution—was to obtain data on noise from aircraft landing and takeoff procedures close in and at long distances from airports. The data would be used to update existing analytical techniques. (Wallops Release 73-8) July 31:	At a European Space Conference meeting in Brussels, aerospace ministers from 11 countries decided to proceed with Spacelab development, linking with NASA’s shuttle program, as part of a European space “package deal.” The agreement also included development of the proposed French L-3S launcher, development of the MAROTS experimental maritime communications satellite, and creation of a new single European Space Agency (esa) by April 1, 1974. The new agency would merge die European Space Research Organization (esro) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo). (nasa Release 73191; Gatland, GSM, 8/28/73; W Post, 8/73/A3)
nasa’s Explorer 48 Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Nov. 16, 1972, from Italy’s San Marco Equatorial Range) successfully completed a two-month comprehensive study of celestial gamma rays. Its gamma ray detector had been turned on Nov. 19, 1972, and had observed gamma rays in the region of the galactic center, galactic plane, and various x-ray sources. A sky map of gamma rays would be prepared. (nasa Release 73-17)
Cosmos 555 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 230-km (142.9-mi) apogee, 216-km (134.2-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 81° inclination. The satellite reentered May 7. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73, 5/31/73; SBD, 4/30/73, 333)
Latin America opposed direct and uncontrolled satellite transmission of TV programs during the Second World Broadcasting Conference in Buenos Aires, Argentina, The U.S. delegation had maintained that censorship of direct transmission would be restriction of the freedom of information. Argentine jurist Augusto Ferrer replied that “without governmental control . . . individual countries would find themselves subject to various forms of intervention in their cultural sovereignty, in their national security, and in their psychological development.” Conference President Jose A. Castro said the rest of the Latin American countries had come out against direct broadcasting, (fbis—Inter-American Affairs, 12/21/73, Al)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 557 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 249-km (154.7-mi) apogee, 213-km (132.4-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Western observers noted the satellite, reported by some sources to be equipped with remotecontrolled photographic equipment, was put into an orbit almost identical to that of the crippled Salyut 2, launched April 3. Observers later speculated it had been a Salyut-class spacecraft launched as a docking target for a manned Soyuz [see May 19]. The satellite reentered May 22 without maneuvering to extend its lifetime or an apparent attempt to recover it. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; SBD, 5/15/73, 81; O’Toole, W Post, 5/15/73, A14; 5/19/73, A12; SF, 1/74, 39-40; Lyons, NYT, 9/26/73, 33)
Dr. Frank T. McClure, Deputy Director of the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, died in Baltimore, Md., following a heart attack. He was internationally known as an authority on combustion, rockets, and guided missile technology and was inventor of the Navy satellite doppler navigation system. For this invention he had received nasa’s first inventions award in 1961. (W Post, 10/19/73, Cll)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 577 from Plesetsk into orbit with 308-km (191.4-mi) apogee, 170-km (105.6-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Aug. 7. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/73; 8/31/73; SBD, 7/50/75, 147)
Newspaper editorials and columnists commented on the Aug. 17 Dept, of Defense announcement that the U.S.S.R. had flight-tested multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles (mirvs) . New York Times: “Since the Soviet mirv tests have been anticipated for so long, there is no justification for a panic reaction from Washington, or a further fattening of the strategic weapons budget. The latest Soviet tests increase the urgency of concluding a MIRV limitation accord, but they also add to the already overwhelming mutuality of interest in achieving it.” (NYT, 8/20/73, 20) Washington Post: “The potential of the mirv technology coupled with the Soviets’ giant missiles—especially given their present numerical advantage in certain key categories—could be menacing indeed.” It was “precisely this Soviet potential which argues for a serious, effective and non-wasteful approach to the circumstances in which we now find ourselves. This ... is no time to proceed with turkeys and lemons, or to box ourselves into investments in weapons systems whose cost is exceeded only by their irrelevance to such danger as we would be confronting a few years hence if the ‘worst case’ regarding Soviet armament came true.” Before the issue of phasing out the present U.S. arsenal in favor of less vulnerable sea- and air-based forces, “one reaches the more immediate question of how this Soviet development can or cannot be tamed within the context of the current phase of the arms negotiations.” (W Post, 8/20/73, 24) August 21:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by a Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with a 39 132-km (24 315.5-mi) apogee, 392-km (242.6-mi) perigee, 11-hr 41min period, and 63.3° inclination. The press later reported that the spacecraft would test techniques to be used in the usaf satellite communications system that provided polar coverage for the Strategic Air Command bombers. (UN Reg; Av Wk, 9/10/73, 17)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 14 from Plesetsk to obtain meteorological information for weather forecasts. Orbital parameters: 892-km (554.3-mi) apogee, 872-km (541,8-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite would study cloud and snow cover and gather data on reflected heat, (gsfc SSR, 3/31/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/21/73, LI; SBD, 3/22/73, 124)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 598 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 331-km (205.7-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 16. Cosmos 598 was the third of seven Soviet satellites launched and returned in quick succession, leading to Western speculation that they were monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15].
The opening of a direct telephone link via satellite between Canada and the People’s Republic of China was announced by the Canadian Overseas Telecommunications Corp. Calls would be transmitted via Intelsat-IV F—4, launched Jan. 22, 1972, by NASA for the Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Previously, calls originating in Canada had been Touted through submarine cables to Tokyo and relayed to China from there. (AP, W Post, 10/2/73, C2)
A New York Times editorial criticized “boom-and-bust science”: Scholarship and research were “caught between the penny-pinching of economy-minded conservatives and the hostility of those, at the other end of the spectrum, who equate science expenditures with support of the military. A more realistic view of national needs should make it evident that none of the nation’s and the world’s critical problems—from environmental issues to the urgent need for food, energy and transportation—will be solved without the innovative contributions of trained minds. The continued boom-and-bust cycles in support of education and research constitute a costly waste of the nation’s human resources. Perhaps the President’s recent presentation of the National Medal of Science to eleven top scientists—the first such awards since 1970—represents a signal of Administration desire for a sounder approach.” (NYT, 10/15/73, 36) October 16:	The U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 600 entered orbit with a 355-km (220.6-mi) apogee, 192-km (119.3-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and 72.8° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 23, believed by Western observers to be fifth in a series of reconnaissance spacecraft monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15], Cosmos 601 entered orbit with a 1494-km (928.3-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 101.8-min period, and 81.9° inclination. It reentered Aug. 15, 1974. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; 8/31/74; SBD, 10/18/ 73, 241-242)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 579 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 307-km (190.8-mi) apogee, 174-km (108.1-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Sept. 3. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/73; 9/30/73; SBD, 9/6/15, 10)	...	.
Erts I Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by NASA July 23, 1972) was “important tool” to facilitate better management of the earth “that has not received appropriate recognition,” a Science editorial said. Many investigators, selected from 600 research proposals, were studying its images. (Of 310 proposals accepted, 100 were from scientists of foreign nations.) “Policy with respect to distribution of pictures is one of complete openness. Nationals of any country are free to purchase them at a nominal cost.” Canada was operating its own Erts 1 receivers; Brazil, Mexico, and Venezuela were moving toward establishing their earth stations. “The Brazilians are particularly enthusiastic about erts, for it is giving them a first look at much of the Amazon valley. Their enthusiasm is likely to be contagious, and other developing countries will find erts a valuable source of many kinds of information.” (Abelson, Science, 2/2/73, 431; NASA OA)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Senate colleagues and the press that he had learned of consideration in the Executive branch of a proposal to transfer authority over all U.S. weather satellites from civilian to military control. He believed plans also were under consideration for placing all earth observation satellites under military control. He called for “serious reflection” over any such plans, noting that civilian control of peaceful space activities had been a standing U.S. policy for 15 yrs. (Sen Moss Release 73—304)
Western Union Telegraph Co. announced it had received Federal Communications Commission authorization to construct the first of five earth stations for the $70-million WESTAR domestic communications satellite system [see May 3]. The first station would be built in Vernon Township, N.J. (Western Union Release)
rca Global Communications, Inc., and RCA Alaska Communications, Inc., applied to the Federal Communications Commission for authority to build and operate an interim communications satellite system by Aug. 1. The $7.4-million system would use Telesat Canada’s satellite with five earth stations to provide voice, message, and TV traffic between both U.S. coasts and Alaska until rca’s domestic satellite system, proposed in 1971, was approved and began operation. (W Post, 3/13/73)
Noaa 2 (itos—d) meteorological satellite, launched Oct. 15, 1972, for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration hy NASA, was adjudged a success. NASA had achieved prelaunch ohjectives of launching the spacecraft into sun-synchronous orhit with a local equator crossing time between 9:00 and 9:20 am and of conducting in-orbit engineering evaluation before turning the operational control of the spacecraft over to NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service Noaa 2 had completed one year of flawless operation, making regular daytime and nighttime meteorological observations in both readout and stored modes of operation in support of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System and for incorporation into worldwide daily weather charts and reports. Day and night global scanning radiometer automatic picture transmissions were being supplied on direct readout to more than 700 worldwide users. (NASA prog off)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 556 from Plesetsk into orbit with a 233-km (144.8-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and an 81.4° inclination. The satellite reentered May 14. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/73; SBD, 5/9/73, 49)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya III—l communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 683-km apogee, 628-km perigee, 12-hr 17.3-min period, and 62.8° inclination. The spacecraft was intended for long-distance telephone and cable radio communications in the Soviet Union, for transmission of color TV programs within the Orbita network, and for international cooperation. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 22 Nov 74, U1; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21-26 Nov 74; LC Science Policy Research Div, interview, 9 Sept 75)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 18 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with an 891-km apogee, 863-km perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite would photograph clouds and their underlying surface and study the distribution of precipitation and ice zones and the influence of corpuscular flows on upper layers of the atmosphere for rapid weather data supply, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 3-10 July 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 11 July 74, U1; SF, 1 Jan 75,35)
The Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) Memorandum of Understanding was signed in Paris hy Acting Director General Roy Gibson of the European Space Research Organization and Canadian Ambassador Leo Cadieux. U.S. Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield had signed the Memorandum 9 May. The joint Aerosat program would test, evaluate, and demonstrate the system in preparation for a worldwide operational system of air traffic control in the mid-1980s. The first of two geostationary satellites over the Atlantic Ocean was to be launched in 1977. (esro Release, 1 Aug 74; FAA Satellite Div, interview, 21 July 75) ... .
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya I—S—the first Molniya communications satellite in synchronous orbit—from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into transfer orbit and then into synchronous orbit with a 35 790-km apogee, 35 787-km perigee, 23-hr 56-min period, and 0.0° inclination. Molniya I—S was the second Soviet satellite in synchronous orbit. The first, Cosmos 637, was launched 29 March. Tass announced the purpose of the satellite as “further perfection of communication systems with the use of artificial earth satellites.” (gsfc SSR, 31 Aug 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 31 July 74, Ul; SF, 1 Jan 75, 35; SBD, 5 Aug 74,100)
The congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy issued the panel report Transportation of Radioactive Material by Passenger Aircraft. The panel recommended that the transport index (the level of radiation in millirem per hour one meter from the surface of packages of radioactive material) be reduced from 10 to 1 and that the maximum permissible radiation at the package surface be lowered by one fourth to one half. Total maximum permissible quantities of curies of radionuclides per package should be at least 10 times lower. Improved packaging, installation of high-level radiation monitors in baggage compartments, and Federal monitoring of packages in transit from supplier to loading were also recommended. (Joint Com Print) Three HEAO satellites were scheduled for launch into earth orbit 1977-1979 Jo study celestial x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. (NASA Release 74—271; msfc proj off, interview, 12 Nov 75)
NASA reactivated the main telemetry system on Explorer 46 Meteoroid Technology Satellite (launched 13 Aug. 1972), to gain additional data on the impact flux of small meteoroids. The telemetry system had been shut down 22 Aug. 1972 after the spacecraft battery had overheated, and a solar-powered backup had since transmitted only primary experiment data. Data received before shutdown had indicated that sensors flown on previous missions had overestimated the micrometeoroid population, but variation in the impact flux necessitated additional data. Data transmission would continue through February 1975. (nasa Release 74-321; NASA oast pio, interview, 3 Sept 75)
Indonesia would build a domestic communications satellite system including two satellites and 50 earth stations, the Indonesian Post and Telecommunications Directorate General announced to the press. Each satellite could serve as backup for the other and would have 12 transponders. Each transponder would be able to serve 12 telephone lines or 1 color TV channel. The press later reported that Malaysia and the Philippines were planning to join the Indonesian system. The satellites would be put into orbits that would allow point-to-point telephohe connections within each country and among the three countries. Construction of the system was expected to cost $90 million and take two years. (Jakarta Domestic Service and Hong Kong AFP, FBIS-Indonesia, 18 April 74, Nl-2)
NASA adjudged the mission of Skynet IIA communications satellite, launched 18 Jan. for the United Kingdom, unsuccessful. NASA’s primary objective of launching the comsat into orbit for transfer into a synchronous equatorial orbit permitting the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission had not been achieved. Skynet 11A had been placed in an extremely eccentric orbit when the Thor-Delta launch vehicle’s 2nd-stage attitude control system failed; preliminary analysis had isolated the problem to a failure in the regulator board of the DC-to-DC converter in the 2nd-stage electronics package, (nasa mor, 4 Sept 74)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 20 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with an 896-km apogee, 841-km perigee, 102.3-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite carried instruments to photograph clouds and snow cover on the day and night sides of the earth and collect data on thermal energy reflected and emitted by the earth and its atmosphere, for day-to-day weather service, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 12-18 Dec 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 19 Dec 74, U1; SBD, 19 Dec 74,270)
McDonnell Douglas Corp. had been awarded a $13-million contract by Alyeska Pipeline Service Go. to produce 100 000 heat pipes for the trans-Alaska pipeline, the Seattle Journal of Commerce and Northwest Construction Record reported. The heat pipes, called cryo-anchor soil stabilizers, were developed by McDonnell Douglas for thermal control of Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched 15 May 1973) and unmanned satellites. They would prevent thawing of permafrost around the pipe supports of elevated portions of the 1285-km pipeline by removing heat from the ground and transmitting it to an above-ground radiator, where it would be dispersed into the atmosphere. (Seattle Journ Commerce & NW Constr Record, 15 July 74)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 17 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 892-km apogee, 863-km perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite carried equipment to obtain cloud- and snow-cover images on the sunward and shadow sides of the globe as well as data on thermal energy reflected and emitted by the earth and the atmosphere, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 18-24 April 74; Tass, fbis— Sov, 25 April 74, U1; SF, Sept 74,395)
Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified on the proposed Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) in FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology: tdrss essentially would be two tracking network stations in synchronous orbit to support all low-earth-orbit satellites, giving real-time control and data with a significant increase in reliability. The system would provide close to six times the coverage given by ground networks because supported satellites would be visible to the orbital stations during 85% of the orbits rather than the 15% from ground stations. Close to continuous visibility would also provide greater flexibility in programming satellite use and would simplify operations. Number of ground tracking stations could be reduced from the 1974 total of 18, plus one ship and two aircraft, to 8 by 1981. (Transcript)
The second Meeting of Signatories of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (intelsat) was held in Acapulco, Mexico. The delegates determined that a 1.106226% investment share would entitle a signatory or group of signatories to representation on the Board of Governors, (intelsat Release 74-17; intelsat pao, interview)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) introduced S. 3175 to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to authorize NASA to contract for tracking and data reply satellite services. (CR, 13 March 74, S3548; nasa LAR, VIII[XIII]/30)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization marked its 10th anniversary. Membership, originally at 14, had grown to 86 countries, which j ointly owned the four Intelsat IV satellites and three spare Intelsat III satellites in the global communications system. The system provided more than 5000 international telephone circuits plus telegraph, telex, data, and TV services; charges had progressively dropped from the initial $32 000 per year for a half circuit to $9000. The permanent intelsat Organization had come into being 12 Feb 1973, replacing the interim Consortium that had operated since 20 Aug. 1964. (intelsat Release 74-2)
Ninety-three research teams in the U.S. and foreign countries had been selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, NASA announced. The studies, selected from 669 proposals, included work in agriculture, forestry, environment, interpretive techniques, land use, marine resources, meteorology, mineral resources, oil, civil works, hazards, and water resources. The investigators would use data from Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, and Erts-B, scheduled for early 1975 launch. NASA would fund the domestic studies at a cost of nearly $5.9 million. (NASA Release 74—193)
The Federal Communications Commission authorized Western Union Telegraph Co. to launch its second domestic communications satellite. Western Union had requested that Westar-B be assigned a 119° west longitude position [see 2 May], a position the fcc reserved for systems authorized to serve Alaska and Hawaii. However, the fcc took into account petitions filed by Western Union’s competitors, also requesting the location, and assigned the satellite a temporary station at 90° west longitude. The satellite was to be moved to 91° within 30 days after NASA’s Ats 6 was moved from 94°. If Western Union was later authorized to serve Alaska and Hawaii, the FCC could authorize a move to a more appropriate location. (FCC Memorandum Opinion,- Order and Authorization, FCC 74^-584)
NASA announced it had awarded RCA Astro Electronics Div. a fixed-price $15 282 143 NASA contract, with an additional incentive amount of $692 638 for performance in orbit, to provide two operational meteorological spacecraft—Improved Tiros Operational Satellite H and I—and parts for itos-J. The work, to be performed in Hightstown, N.J., would extend through 15 Feb. 1977. The satellites would support the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s National Operational Meteorological Satellite System through 1978. The noncompetitive procurement was a follow-on to an existing contract. (NASA Release 74-218)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) introduced H.R. 13961 to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to authorize NASA to contract for Tracking and Data Relay Satellite services. (CR, 3 April 74, H2584; nasa LAR, XIII/43)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May, transmitted the first instructional TV course broadcast directly by satellite. The course, on career education for elementary school children, originated at the Univ. of Kentucky and traveled by land wires to NASA’s Rosman, N.C., antenna for transmittal to the satellite. The spacecraft rebroadcast the program to more than 300 graduate education students throughout eight Appalachian states. Signals came through strongly in all the receiving areas. Students would receive university credit for successful completion of the course, which included taped lessons, programmed instruction, laboratory sessions, and live seminars. Seminars would use Ats 3, launched 5 Nov. 1967. The course was part of the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare’s Health Education Telecommunications (het) experiment to determine the effectiveness of satellite-transmitted educational TV. (nasa Release 74-172; McElheny, NYT, 3 July 74, 37)
The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences held hearings on S. 3542, a bill introduced 29 May to authorize $41 700 000 for NASA to launch a seventh Applications Technology Satellite. Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) said experimenters using Ats 6, launched 30 May, had urged another launch because more than the planned one year of operation over the U.S. was needed to complete experiments. Two satellites in orbit at the same time would “greatly improve the experimental information necessary for further decisions on the use of advanced communications satellites.” Sen. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said that ats satellites held “the promise of improved health care at reduced costs” for people in remote regions of the U.S. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified that Ats 6 was in excellent condition and had a life expectancy of three additional years over the U.S. following its return from the planned year of operation over India. In addition, use of the U.S.-Canada Communications Technology Satellite scheduled for a mid-December launch could provide experimenters additional experiment time and continuity. Dr. Fletcher expressed NASA opposition to the bill, saying it would cost $4 million more than the bill provided, to cover the cost of the Titan IIIC launch vehicle. To avoid further costs, a decision to launch another spacecraft would have to be made by September, when the NASA and industry ATS team were to be disbanded. A seventh ats satellite could be considered a potential operational vehicle and the user community might consider bearing the costs. (Transcript)
Satellite observations had been used by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists to map the fading—or “recovery phase”—of the mammoth, layered ring of hot charged particles that encircled the earth during magnetic storms and temporarily canceled the earth’s magnetic field, noaa announced. Explorer 45, launched 15 Nov. 1971 into an elliptical orbit with a good view of the ring current, had measured the distribution of protons before, during, and after a major magnetic storm 17 Dec. 1971. The noaa study found that interactions of hot and cold plasmas in the ring changed the pitch angle of the protons in relation to the magnetic lines of force, permitting some to escape. By mapping distributions of proton pitch angles, researchers could predict what would happen during the recovery phase of a magnetic storm, (noaa Release 74-86)
The experimental satellite was scheduled for launch in early 1977. {Broadcasting, 9 Sept 74, 68) The review, attended by 11 000 persons, included presentations on technology for safer aircraft, supersonic and hypersonic aircraft, energy-efficient flight, low-speed aircraft, quieter airport communities, protection of the marine environment, preservation of the earth’s atmosphere, exploration of the planetary environment, and energy sources and use. (NASA Tech Brief B73-10463; LeRC pio, interviews, 24 June, 24 July 75; Biggins, Newport News, Va, Times-Herald, 11 Sept 74; NASA Activities, Oct 74,11-12)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 19 weather satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 904-km apogee, 842-km perigee, 102.4-min period, and 81.2° inclination. Tass reported that the spacecraft carried meteorological equipment to photograph cloud formations and snow cover and to obtain data on the thermal energy reflected and radiated by the earth and the atmosphere, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, Ul; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74,13)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—27 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 705-km apogee, 623-km perigee, 12-hr 17.6-min period, and 62.9° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of" long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (csfc Wkly SSR, 18-24 April 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 22 April 74, U1; SF, Sept 74,394)
The U.S.S.R. launched Intercosmos 12 from Plesetsk into an orbit with 697-km apogee, 241-km perigee, 94.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Tass reported that the satellite, intended to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere and the flow of micrometeorites, carried equipment made by specialists from Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Romania, and Czechoslovakia, as well as the U.S.S.R. The spacecraft reentered 11 July 1975. (LC Science Policy Research Div., interview, 6 Aug 75; gsfc Wkly SSR, 31 Oct-6 Nov 74, 10-16 July 75; Tass, fbis-Sov, 1 Nov 74, Ul) During October: The Space Shuttle Operational Management Assessment Team was formed to make “an appraisal of the technical aspects of the program and an assessment of the ability of management to complete the development of the shuttle within the cost and performance targets.” Composed primarily of industry representatives and named for its chairman, Willis M. Hawkins of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., the Hawkins Committee was to prepare a formal briefing no later than 1 Nov. Inflation levels of 8—9%, well over the 5% on which FY 1975 funding was based, had increased costs throughout the shuttle program and compromised the ability of NASA and the prime contractors to reach their program milestones. (Team charter; Covault, Av Wk, 23 Sept 74, 20-2)
Communications Satellite Corp. Laboratories and Telesat Canada had recently completed j oint field tests of the transmission of digital data through Canada’s Anik 1 communications satellite (launched 9 Nov. 1972), ComSatCorp announced. Data were transmitted at 67.2 megabits per sec, believed to be the highest rate ever transmitted by satellite. The high rate allowed two digital TV communications system color channels to be carried through a single transponder. The tests confirmed previous system analyses and proved the ability of satellites to transmit the equivalent of 100 newspaper pages in one minute. (ComSatCorp Release 74-22)
Communications Satellite Corp. reported 1973 earnings of $36 299 000, equal to $3.63 per share, an increase from $24 967 000, or $2.50 per share, for 1972. Net operating income for 1973 totaled $29 424 000 and revenues $119 291 000, up from income of $21 428 000 and revenues of $105 965 000 for 1972. Leased full-time half circuits had totaled 3583 on 31 Dec. 1973, 21% more than the 2971 at the end of 1972. (Com-SatCorp Release 74-11) 19 February-1 March: The U.S.S.R. launched a series of test missiles into the north Pacific Ocean, the tests coinciding with resumption of the - Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in Geneva. Pentagon spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim said an SSX-18 carrying several multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (mirvs) was launched from Tyuratam 19 Feb., and the press reported 5550-km flight tests of the SSX-19 and SSX-16 missiles were made before the conclusion of the tests. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 19 Feb 74, VI; 1 March 74, V7; Hoffman, W Post, 21 Feb 74 A3)
Operational utility of satellite communications for maritime service had been demonstrated with Ats 1 and 3 (Applications Technology Satellites launched 6 Dec. 1966 and 5 Nov. 1967), Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Tests had been made by Exxon Corp. in cooperation with NASA from mid-1973 to early 1974 from an Exxon tanker, using a small General Electric Co. ship terminal and GE earth station Exxon had reported at a Minneapolis communications conference that the satellites had transmitted voice, teletypewriter, facsimile, and slow-scan TV rapidly, without the delay often caused on high-frequency radio by spectrum congestion. (Klass, Av Wk, 12 Aug 74, 56-8)
Images sensed 1 Jan. 1973 by nasa’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched 23 July 1972, had dramatically recorded a Santa Ana wind condition in Southern California, Univ. of California scientists reported in Science. The Santa Ana, rarely recorded by satellite, increased the danger of brush fires, crop and structural damage, and wind erosion in the open desert. The Erts 1 images provided scientists their first view of the entire dynamics in progress at one time. Monitoring such environmental conditions might aid resource management decisions. (Bowder et al., Science, 7 June 74, 1077-8)
Detection of a “plasma mantle” by the European Space Research Organization’s Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite (launched by NASA 31 Jan 1972) was announced by West German space scientists at the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Munich. Scientists had become aware of the new belt of electrically charged particles circling the earth while assessing data collected by a specially developed “plasma ana-lysator” in the satellite. The belt of particles emitted from the sun and trapped in the earth’s magnetic field was said to be between 10 060 and 20100 km thick. (B Sun, 24 Oct 74, A3; A & A 1972)
U.S. officials were increasingly concerned by strong pressure from developing countries, backed by the U.S.S.R., to restrict the use of satellites to broadcast TV programs from one country directly to the home sets of another, the Washington Post reported. Old cultures were afraid of being “irremediably debased by the hard sell’ techniques so commercially lucrative in the ‘advanced’ societies.” As the world’s technological giant, the U.S. was the most suspect and the trend among the developing countries was “to tie up . . . the use of satellites by the ‘space-faring’ nations . . . before they gain too great a head start.” (Welles, W Post, 16 March 74, A18)
The European Space Research Organization was investigating systems for all-weather earth resources observations, Aviation Weqjc & Space Technology reported. Thomson-CSF and British Aircraft Corp. had completed a nine-month study of a synthetic-aperture radar satellite with a 50-m-resolution imaging sensor. (Av Wk, 15 April 74, 11)
An Erts 1 photo map of the contiguous 48 states of the U.S., the first ever assembled from satellite images, had been completed for NASA by the Dept, of Agriculture’s Soil Cartographic Division, NASA announced. The three- by five-meter map was composed from 595 cloud-free black and white images taken 25 July-31 Oct 1972 from an altitude of 912 km by the multispectral scanner on Erts 1 (launched by NASA 23 July 1972). The mosaic would provide a base for regional compilation of investigation results, provide the first synoptic look at the U.S. for scientists examining subcontinental lineaments and faults, permit construction of a national surface water inventory, provide a base for a national-vegetation-cover and continuous-land-classification inventory, provide an accurate assessment of the national water drainage network, and document 1972 national land use. The mosaic would be displayed publicly for the first time in ceremonies at nasa Hq. 26 April, (nasa Release 74-91)
A photograph of the U.S.S.R.’s space launching complex at Baykonur Cosmodrome taken by NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) from 900 km altitude was published in the Washington newsletter Defense/Space Business Daily. The photo, taken 16 March 1973, showed that the complex stretched 60 km east and west, 24 km north of Tyuratam. The newsletter published a closer, 5 Oct. 1972 photo on 17 Jan. (SBD, 9,10,17 Jan 74, 41—42, 49—50, 89; NASA photos 74-H-6,74-H-ll, 74-H-12,74r-H-13)
Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1 (launched 13 April) made America’s first mail delivery via satellite, sending a “mailgram,” combination telegram and letter, from New York to Los Angeles. A 60-word mailgram to the West Coast cost $1.35, rather than the $6.00 for a telegram. Regular, one-business-day transmission of mailgrams by satellite from New York to Los Angeles would begin in late September, with mailgram traffic from the East Coast to Texas and parts of the West Coast beginning late in the year. (NASA Hq WB, 7 Oct 74; AP, B Sun, 6 Sept 74, A3)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May) and Sms 1 Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (launched 17 May) had caused substantial interference for radio telescopes in the U.S., Canada, and Great Britain, the Washington Post reported. Stars in the southwest sky with radio frequencies near those of the satellites could not be studied. Dr. Frank Kerr, spokesman for the National Academy of Sciences Committee on Radio Frequencies, described failed communications between NASA and radio astronomers. The astronomers had learned that Ats 6 would interfere with study of the sun, pulsars, and quasars only when it was too late to change the satellite’s transmitter and that Sms 1 would overlap radio telescope signals only after the satellite had begun sending back weather pictures 17 May. (O’Toole, W Post, 27 Sept 74)
Stratospheric contamination from supersonic aircraft engines such as those fitted to the Anglo-French Concorde and the Soviet Tu-144 might lower the earth’s mean temperatures, with a catastrophic effect on agriculture, and increase the incidence of skin cancer from overexposure to ultraviolet radiation, according to a Dept, of Transportation study cited by the Washington Post. In a telephone interview with the Post Dr. Alan Grobecker, manager of dot’s climatic impact assessment program, confirmed the existence of the study, which was based on data collected by satellites, balloons, and instrumented aircraft. He emphasized that the pollution by the emission of nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide would have a worldwide impact because of the capacity of the stratosphere to retain the pollutants for nearly a year. A separate Agricultural Research Service study showed that stratospheric contamination could cut temperate climate crops by 60%. The DOT paper would be considered by committees of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering at a special meeting in July. (Wilson, WPost, 14 April 74, A8)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications Leonard Jaffe—U.S. Representative to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Working Group and Task Force on Remote Sensing— reviewed U.S. environmental and earth resources programs before the Working Group and Task Force. The U.S. had designed tape recorders and studies on Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) for foreign use of the data, but the “extent and vigor of foreign interest was perhaps greater than we expected.” Brazil and Canada had built ground stations to receive data directly and, by agreement with the U.S., were disseminating data. Italy also would establish a ground station, and nine other countries had expressed interest. Erts 1 performance had shown that data collection with a spatial resolution of 100 m was economical and adequate for a wide range of significant applications. Although total discontinuance of photographic imagery was not planned, the speed, reliability, and flexibility found in computer analysis indicated that future systems would increasingly use automated methods. The mapping accuracy of the satellite’s instruments was adequate for 1:1 000 000 and even 1:250 000 scale when system errors were removed by computer processing. Processing and disseminating data was a key factor in the cost of an earth observation program. No one data-processing and dissemination facility would ever be able to meet the needs of the world efficiently. Estimates put the cost of an additional system similar to the Erts 1 data-collection system—aside from spacecraft costs—at $11 million for the facility and $9.9 million for five years of data processing. A minimal system with only multispectral scanner and real-time observations would cost $2.5 million for the facility and $3.6 million for five years of data processing. (Text; NASA OA, interview)
Communications Satellite Corp. reported a net income of $21 013 000, or $2.10 a share, for the first six months of 1974—up from $15 223 000, or $1.52 a share, for the same period in 1973. Operating revenues for the period were $63 322 000, up from $55 902 000 in 1973. The increased revenues had resulted from a gain in the number of half-circuits leased by ComSatCorp to its carrier customers for overseas satellite communications. (ComSatCorp Release 74-41)
Explorer 46 Meteoroid Technolpgy Satellite, launched 13 Aug. 1972, was officially adjudged a success. The primary objective of measuring meteoroid penetration rates on a bumper-protected target in the near-earth environment was achieved despite the failure of half of the bumper panels to deploy fully. Because of die anomaly, the spacecraft batteries had overheated and data collection from the main telemetry system had been discontinued; since 22 Aug. 1972, data from the primary experiment had been transmitted through the backup system, which operated on solar cells only. Flight data showed that the bumper concept was six times more effective than a single-wall structure, twice the anticipated effectiveness. Because the secondary experiments had been powered only by the spacecraft batteries, no data were received from these experiments after 22 Aug. 1972. One secondary experiment—to measure impact flux of small mass meteoroids—had recorded 1850 penetrations, however, enough to show conclusively that the microphone meteoroid sensors flown on early Explorer and Discoverer satellites had greatly overestimated the population of small meteoroids. (NASA mor, 11 March 74)
The number of Federal scientists and engineers had increased to 166 700 by October 1972, an increase of 6% from 1967 and 1% from 1971, the National Science Foundation reported. The Depts. of Defense and Agriculture had continued to employ the largest number, although both agencies had. decreased since October 1971, by less than 0.05% and by 2%. NASA’s scientists and engineers decreased 3% from 1971. Nonprofessional scientific and technical personnel grew 1% Government-wide from 1967 to 1972. The yearly rate of salary increase for Federal scientists and engineers decreased from 9% for 1967-1970 to 5% for 1970-1972. (NSF Highlights, 28 Feb 74) During February: The European Space Research Organization awarded study and advance procurement contracts totaling $2.8 million for its maritime satellite marots. GEc/Marconi of the United Kingdom received a six-month $1.16-million contract for Phase B detailed design and definition work on the communications payload. Thomson-csF of France was awarded $100 000 to continue critical development of an L-band transistor amplifier. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., also of U.K., was awarded a six-month $1.13-million contract for a Phase B detailed design study to adapt the Orbital Test Satellite platform to a maritime mission and for associated advance procurement. MAROTS would be launched into geostationary orbit in August 1977 to acquire experimental data and preoperational experience, (esro Newsletter, June 74, 4) March 1974
The U.S.S.R. was believed to have orbited between 8 and 10 radar-carrying satellites in the last four years that could monitor surface shin traffic around the globe, Thomas O’Toole said in a Washington Post article. Intelligence sources believed the satellites were still experimental and part of an effort to monitor submerged Polaris submarines. One radar satellite, Cosmos 626, launched 27 Dec. 1973 into an orbit 264-km high, separated into two parts 11 Feb. One part moved to a higher 382-km orbit and was thought to be the power supply for the orbital radar, using polonium 210, a “hot” source of radioactive heat that could generate as much as 2000 kw of electricity by thermoelectricity. (W Post, 26 April 74, Al) 27 April-5 May: Two full-scale models of the Spacelab manned orbital laboratory, to be developed by the European Space Research Organization for use with the shuttle, were shown to the international press and public for the first time at the 1974 German Aerospace Show in Hanover, West Germany. Visitors were able to see interior as well as the exterior equipment of the pallet and pressurized laboratory. A 1:50 scale model of the-space shuttle was also on display, (esro Release, 22 April 74)
The U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 16 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk to collect information for weather forecasts. Orbital parameters were 892-km apogee, 830-km perigee, 102.2-min period, and 81.2° inclination. The satellite carried instruments to photograph the clouds and snow cover on day and night sides of the globe and to collect data on the heat reflected by the earth and its atmosphere, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 28 Feb-6 March 74; Tass. fbis-Sov, 6 March 74, Ul; SF, Sept 74, 355)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization announced it had contracted with Hughes Aircraft Co. for three Intelsat IVA satellites in addition to three ordered in 1973. The amendment to the 1973 contract totaled more than $40 million, including launch support services but not possible performance incentive payments. The -first of the additional satellites, with twice the communications capability of the Intelsat IV series, was to be delivered in 1977. (intelsat Release 74-67)
The U.S.S.R. had requested permission, during the February visit of a Soviet science delegation to Australia, to establish a jointly controlled satellite tracking station in Australia, the New York Times reported. The U.S. had expressed concern that the Soviet Union might use the scientific station to monitor U.S. messages to bases Li Australia and reportedly believed the proposal would be rejected. (NYT, 2 April 74, 4)
The Federal Plan for Meteorological Services and Supporting Research— Fiscal Year 1975, published for presentation to Congress, called for programs totaling $576.7 million, an increase of $5.7 million over 1974. Published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and including proposed activities of all Federal agencies with meteorological programs, the 1975 plan proposed an improved noaa severe weather warning system; use of new technology for more efficient observation, recording, analysis, and warning in the Dept, of Defense and other agencies; and expanded Federal Aviation Administration weather services to aviation. NASA proposed increases for research with the Nimbus satellite series, (noaa Release 74-128)
The European Space Research Organization announced the award of three contracts totaling nearly $66 million for design and development of two spacecraft and one satellite communications payload: $25.2 million to GEC-Marconi (United Kingdom) as the prime contractor for the marots maritime communications satellite payload to be launched in 1977; $20.76 million plus launch and postlaunch support to Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd. (U.K.) as prime contractor for the MESH consortium, for the marots spacecraft platform and satellite integration and support; and $19.56 million to Dornier-System GMBh (Germany) as prime contractor for the star consortium, for the isee-b International Sun-Earth Explorer, to be launched with isee-a in 1977 in a cooperative nasa-esro program. Norway, the first nonmember country to participate in an ESRO project, had agreed to contribute 1.5% to the marots development budget of about $97 million and to share in fixed common costs, (esro Release, 3 Dec 74; Av Wk, 2 Dec 74,38)
President Nixon transmitted World Weather Program, Plan for Fiscal Year 1975 to Congress. The plan outlined 1975 U.S. participation in the program seeking to give man “the understanding, tools and techniques necessary to cope with his atmosphere.” Goals were to extend the time, range, and scope of weather predictions; assess the impact of atmospheric pollution on environment; study the feasibility and consequences of weather modification; and encourage international cooperation in meeting meteorological needs. He said the U.S. would soon begin continuous viewing of storms over much of the earth’s surface with two geostationary satellites and that five more such satellites would he made operational in cooperation with other nations. (PD, 5 Aug 74, 1001)
International Business Machines Corp. and Communications Satellite Corp. announced plans to enter the domestic satellite communications field. Subject to Federal Communicatitons Commission approval, IBM and ComSatCorp subsidiary COMSAT General Corp. would acquire two-thirds interest in CML Satellite Corp. from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and MCI Communications Corp. for $5 million, comsat General already owned the remaining one third. IBM would own 55% of the joint organization and comsat General 45%; shares would be offered to the public, cml— developing plans for a domestic satellite system to relay specialized voice, image, and data communications—was expected to operate its first satellite system in the late 1970s. (ibm & ComSatCorp Release, 3 July 74)
A Soviet earth station to provide U.S.—U.S.S.R. Hot Line communications via Intelsat and Molniya satellites went into operation. The comsat station, near Moscow, was constructed under a bilateral agreement signed in Washington 30 Sept. 1971 to improve the Washington-Moscow direct communications link in an effort to reduce risk of war. (ComSatCorp Off Internat’l Affairs, interview, 23 Jan 75; A&A 1971, 1972) .
Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield signed in London a Memorandum of Understanding for a joint program to test, evaluate, and demonstrate the Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) system, for improved communications and air traffic services over the North Atlantic. Other participants included Canada and European Space Research Organization members Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Great Britain, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. The space segment would include two synchronous-orbit satellites to be launched in late 1977 or early 1978 and would be jointly owned by ESRO, Canada, and a U.S. private sector coowner to be named later. FAA would lease use of the satellites from the U.S. coowner, (faa Release 74-70)
Communications Satellite Corp. filed proposed rates with the Federal Communications Commission for a new medium-speed digital-data satellite service called digisat, to provide digital data channels between the U.S. mainland and Hawaii. The proposed monthly rate to international common carriers would be $2700 for 2.4 kilobits per sec, $3000 for 4.8 kbps, and $3900 for 9.6 kbps. Expansion to European points was expected later in the year. (ComSatCorp Release 74-21; ComSatCorp pao, interview)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched 23 July 1972, stopped transmitting useful stored global data, following continued degradation of its tape recorder. After two years of operation, Erts 1 was providing only real-time imagery, making world-wide coverage no longer possible. Good continuous U.S. coverage was being maintained by ground stations in Canada, Alaska, California, Maryland, and Brazil. The satellite * had been designed for one-year operational lifetime, (gsfc proj off, interview, 30 July 75; Av Wk, 19 Aug 74, 17; NASA Release 73-62; NASA, ERTS-A Fact Sheet, 12 July 72)
A spherical object from Cosmos 654 satellite was reported recovered in Ohio. Cosmos 654, launched 17 May 1974, had been reported by the press as a Soviet ocean surveillance satellite. The debris was believed to have been a portion of the staging system used to move the craft from its initial low, near-circular orbit into a higher, longer life orbit with a 1022-km apogee and 915-km perigee. There the nuclear systems required for ocean surveillance radar equipment and sensors could decay naturally before the orbit decayed years in the future. (.SBD, 3 Oct 74,164-5; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 74) 3, 4, 9 October: The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications held hearings on H.R. 14978 and H.R. 15781, bills to establish offices in the Dept, of the Interior and NASA to operate an Earth Resources Survey System. Hugh T. Loweth, Deputy Associate Director for Energy and Science of the Office of Management and Budget, testified that more experimentation was needed before the Earth Resources Technology Satellite program entered the operational phase, but witnesses from industry and other agencies of Government recommended accelerating the program immediately. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Associate Administrator, and Charles A. Mathews, Associate Administrator for Applications, opposed adoption of the bills, stressing NASA’s desire for “an evolutionary approach” that minimized an artifical distinction between experimental and operational satellites and concentrated instead on immediate dissemination of data and simultaneous improvement of the system [see 6, 8, 9 Aug. and 18 Sept.]. (Testimony)
The U.S.S.R. was continuing plans to build an earth station in the Ukraine to operate with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organiza-ion’s comsat system. The project—the second planned Soviet Intelsat link—had been unofficially reported by Russians in discussions with U.S. Government and private representatives over the past few months. (The first station, near Moscow, had been initiated to provide a bilateral communications capability for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Hot Line, via a Molniya and an Intelsat satellite). U.S.S.R. participation in the Intelsat system as a commercial user would fill in a major link in the U.S. goal of a single global comsat system, as stated in the 1962 Communications Satellite Act, Aviation Week & Space Technology commented. (Off US Rep to Intelsat, ComSatCorp, interview, 23 Jan 75; Johnsen, Av Wk, 8 April 74, 24)
Westinghouse Corp. subsidiary TCom 'Inc. (for Tethered Communications) was testing the aerostat, an inexpensive alternative to earthorbiting satellites, Time reported. Developed from signal-relay balloons used for reaching isolated U.S. outposts in Vietnam, the aerostat was a helium-filled balloon anchored at altitudes of 3000-5000 m. In the Bahamas, an aerostat at a 3500-m altitude picked up signals from Miami 180 km away, trebling the range of Florida stations. With its 1800 kg of electronic equipment, the aerostat could receive and broadcast up to 4 TV channels, 2 command radio stations, and data from 5000 to 10 000 microwave circuits. (Time, 23 Sept 74)
Available geosynchronous orbit “parking space” for communications satellites to serve the continental U.S. was fast approaching saturation with authorized and applied-for comsat systems operating in the 4- to 6-gigacycle band, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. This saturation was expected to provide added incentive for second-generation domestic comsats to shift to the new 11- to 14-gc band, permitting spacecraft to orbit closer to the existing comsats. (Av Wk, 1 April 74, 59)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya II-9 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 700-km apogee, 599-km perigee, 12-hr 17.0-min period, and 62.9° inclination. The satellite would help provide a system of long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in the U.S.S.R. and would transmit Soviet central TV programs to the Orbita network, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 25 April-1 May 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 30 April 74; U1; SF, Sept. 74,395)
The channeled scabland of eastern Washington had been formed 20 000 yrs ago by the greatest flood known to have occurred, the New York Times quoted U.S. Geological Survey as reporting. From ground scars and photographs from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972), scientists had traced the flood for 885 km. An ice dam blocking drainage of western Montana into Idaho had collapsed, pouring 2000 cubic km of water down the valley of the Spokane River. Scars visible in satellite photographs were formed by erosion of surface soil and underlying basalt. As water drained, gravel ridges 6 to 9 m high and 3 km long had been formed. The largest channel was the Grand Coulee, 80 km long and 270 m deep. (Sullivan, NYT, 17 Sept. 74; uses pio, interview, 12 June 75)
Iran signed an agreement to build a ground station to receive data directly from nasa’s experimental earth resources satellites. Under the Memorandum of Understanding signed with NASA in Tehran, the new site would join six others already in the system—three in the U.S. and" one each in Canada, Brazil, and Italy, Iran would bear the full cost of building the facility and would make its data and tapes available to NASA in return for free access to the first two Earth Resources Technology Satellites. Thereafter, NASA had the option to establish a cost-sharing arrangement, (nasa Release 74-289)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) introduced an amendment to S. 2350 that would continue experimentation with earth resources remote-sensing satellite systems through 1 Jan. 1980 unless a permanent system was established before that date. The amendment was a substitute for S. 2350, the earth resources survey bill to develop an operational erts system and to establish an Office of Earth Resources Survey Systems within NASA and an Earth Resources Observation Administration within the Dept, of the Interior [see 18 Sept.]. Other provisions of the amendment would require the President, through nasa and doi, to ensure continuity of satellite data during the experimental period and furnish Congress with any necessary budget amendments. (CR, 25 Nov 74, SI9948)
Evidence of a possible second black hole, from observations by x-ray astronomy satellite TJhuru (Explorer 42, launched 12 Dec. 1970) between January 1971 and February 1973, was reported by Center for Astrophysics astronomers in the Astrophysical Journal. Black holes were believed to be superdense collapsed stars with gravity so great that even light could not escape. Uhuru had detected radiation from the x-ray source Circinus X-l with characteristics similar to those detected in 1972 by TJhuru and in 1973 by Oao 3 for the suspected black hole Cygnus X-l. Varying periods of x-ray intensity had indicated that Circinus X-l was possibly binary; the x-ray energy spectrum had showed changes from 2 to 20 kev. No optical counterpart for the x-ray-source had been found. Black holes might be an answer to two basic problems in cosmology, Walter S. Sullivan had written in the New York Times Magazine 14 July. All visible material accounted for only 2% of the matter necessary to prevent the universe from flying apart in a continuing expansion; some scientists thought black holes might well make up the deficit. Also, black holes might provide the “glue,” the necessary gravity, to keep clusters of galaxies from flying apart. Not all scientists were convinced of the existence of black holes, but the holes’ strange effects—such as the slowing of time, the tight curvature of space, and the influence of gravity on light—had been anticipated by Einstein’s theory of relativity. One major dilemma was what happened within a black hole. Some scientists had proposed that a star drawn into a black hole by its gravity might emerge in some other time and place as a quasar and that quasars—■ exceptionally bright objects of relatively small volume and high density—might be “white holes” into which energy was pouring from somewhere else, perhaps even another universe. (Jones et al., Astro Journ, 15 July 74, L71-4; NYT Magazine, 14 July 74,11-35; A&A 1971,1972, 1973)
The U.S.S.R. proposed that the United Nations establish a center for collection and distribution of data from earth-orbiting satellites. The proposal was made in response to a U.S. offer to supply the U.N. with a master copy of all information obtained from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched 23 July 1972, if a facility would be available to process the data. The Soviet proposal suggested a single international center, under the U.N. or another international organization and financed by voluntary contributions. The U.S.S.R. previously had been unwilling to bring in any international authority. U.S. space experts later suggested the new proposal was a significant development in closer Soviet-U.S. cooperation, reached by the scientific exchanges between the two countries. Another view was that the U.S.S.R. was trying to head off a possibility that the U.S. might turn over its expertise to private enterprise. Brazil had earlier proposed a treaty that would obligate space powers to obtain consent of governments for remote-sensing activities over their countries and for release of the data obtained. (UN Doc A/AC.105/C.1/ WG.4/L.6/Add 3; NYT, 10 Feb 74,20)
The European Space Research Organization announced selection of Communications Satellite Corp. as its U.S. partner in the Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) program [see 9 May]. Aerosat was to deploy two satellites over the Atlantic Ocean for communications between aircraft in transatlantic flight and the ground, (esro Release, 5 Sept 74)
The Dept, of Defense announced award of a $29 509 671 cost-plus-award-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. Electronics Div. to develop, produce, and operate the Phase I control and user system segments of the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System [see During August], (dod Release 793-74) 22 October-12 November: The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 690 biological satellite from Plesetsk into an orbit with 366-km apogee, 216-km perigee, 90.3-min period, and 68.8° inclination. The satellite carried white laboratory rats, steppe tortoises, insects, and fungi in a test of the combined effects of weightlessness and radiation. A cesium-137 gamma radiation source within the spacecraft provided an average radiation dose of 32 rads per hr on command from the earth. Beginning on the 10th day of the flight, the rats were exposed to doses of gamma-quantums ranging between 200 and 1000 rads over 24 hrs. After return to the earth 12 Nov., the rats were found to be more pathological and less active than after corresponding control experiments. The change in the hemopoietic and lymphoid organs was more sharply pronounced than in the Cosmos 605 experiments (31 Oct.—22 Nov. 1973). While experiment results were processed, research was continuing on methods of antiradiation protection by deflecting particles with an electric field. Czechoslovak and Romanian specialists cooperated with the U.S.S.R. on the Cosmos 690 project as part of the Intercosmos program, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 17-23, Oct 74; Pravda, FBIS-Sov, 3 Jan 75, Ul-^4)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 11-10 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 724-km apogee, 603-km perigee, 12-hr 18min period, and 62.9° inclination. The comsat would help provide longdistance telephone and telegraph radio communications and transmit U.S.S.R. TV programs to stations of the Orbita network, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 18-24 July 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 23 July 74, Ul; SF, 1 Jan 75, 35)
Pages of the Wall Street Journal were being printed via satellite in a joint test program, Dow Jones & Co., Inc., and Communications Satellite Corp. announced. A Dow Jones composition plant in Massachusetts transmitted high-resolution facsimile pages to Intelsat-IV F—7 communications satellite in synchronous orbit 35 900 km above the Atlantic Ocean. The satellite relayed the data to the Dow Jones production facility in New Jersey for production of press plates. The test program was the first time the entire process from composition to printing had been conducted via satellite transmission. (Dow Jones-ComSatCorp Joint Release 74-45; ComSatCorp pio, interview, 1 Aug 75)
Plans for an Arab communications satellite network were presented by Arab League engineer Salah ’Amir during a meeting with League Secretary General Mahmud Riyad in Cairo. The plans—prepared -with the assistance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (unesco) and the International Communications Union—had been completed in 1972. The network would establish radio, TV, and news agency links among the Arab states to transmit standard educational, cultural, and development programs. Fifty ground stations would be established with the costs of each—between $500 000 and $1 000 000—defrayed by the country of its location. The costs of the satellites and launch facilities would be paid by member states. (Cairo MENA, FBis-Inter-Arab, 17 Jan 74, A6)
Italy would build a ground station to receive data from NASA’s Earth Resources Technology Satellites, NASA announced. Under a Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and Italy’s communications satellite organization Societa per Azioni per le Comunicazioni Spaziali (Tele-spazio), the station, at Fucino, would complement existing stations in Fairbanks, Alaska; Goldstone, Calif.; Greenbelt, Md.; Prince Albert, Canada; and Cuiaba, Brazil. NASA’s Erts 1 had been transmitting data since 23 July 1972 launch; erts-b was scheduled for spring 1975 launch. (nasa Release 74-142)
The U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—28 communications satellite from Plesetsk into orbit with 39 707-km apogee, 645-km perigee, 717.7min period, and 62.8° inclination. Tass reported that the satellite carried equipment to relay TV programs and to establish remote multichannel radio communications, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Av Wh, 4 Nov 74,13; Tass, fbis-Sov, 25 Oct 74, Ul)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 637 from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam, into orbit with 35 604-km apogee, 35 595-km perigee, 23-hr 46.6-min period, and 0.2° inclination—the first Soviet satellite in geosynchronous orbit. The press later quoted American analysts as suggesting that Cosmos 637, which was stationed above the Indian Ocean, might be an engineering test for a full-fledged stationary communications satellite long planned by the Soviets to improve communications with the southern part of the U.S.S.R. and the Warsaw Pact countries. (gsfc Wkly SSR, 21-27 March 74; Shabad, NYT, 28 March 74, 20; SBD, 28 March 74,153; Av Wk, 1 April 74)
Development of a new generation of communications satellites—such as Westar 1 (launched 13 April), Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May), and three others scheduled for launch in 1974 and 1975—would bring the fifth revolution in human communications, Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said in a New York Times article. The satellites would provide a “quantum jump in the capacity of Americans to talk to and see one another.” The most immediate effect would be to reduce cost of long-distance communications and increase number of words and pictures'exchanged. Overseas calls originating in the U.S. had jumped from about 10 million a year in 1965 to 60 million in 1973. Dr. Jastrow predicted that by 1982 the U.S. would originate 1 billion overseas calls and a call halfway around the world would cost the same as a call next door. Other consequences might be a world language and the ability of people to live where they pleased. With an inexpensive satellite-transmitted dial-up conversation by color TV, people would not have to live in cities; “every house can be transformed into an office, a theater, or a classroom by pressing a few buttons.” Long-term effects might knit mankind into a global society, enriched by freer exchange of ideas and reduced fear between nations. A unified global society, however, would be an organism of great collective power in which the individual would be restricted to one role. “The prospect is not pleasant. But the transformation . . . will take place slowly . . . and most of our descendants will be conditioned to accept their more restricted options.” (NYT, 9 June 74, 4:6)
ats-f Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled for a 30 May launch, was “a very unusual nasa satellite,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said at an ats-f press briefing in Washington, D.C. It was an advanced satellite with a huge transmitting antenna and “the first step towards ... a satellite that can broadcast TV directly to your homes.” Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Caspar W. Weinberger said that hew would be using the satellite for career counseling, teacher training, education of medical students, health eduoation, and transmission of medical records to remote areas of Alaska, Appalachia, and the Rocky Mountains. The practical civilian application “justifies fully a continuance of . . . both the space program in its inner-space aspects as well as . . . bringing it down to earth and using it in our own daily lives.” President Henry Loomis of the Corp. for Public Broadcasting said that, for the “first time, we will have current TV programming available in Alaska.” TV videotapes now were sent to Alaska by mail and reaching the most remote 10% of the people cost as much as reaching the remaining 90%. ats-f would greatly reduce that cost. NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications Leonard Jaffe said that the ats-f was “a major step forward” in the amount of radio frequency power that a satellite could generate to earth and focus very precisely on a small area. Because of this capability, very small, simple receiving stations would be adequate. (Transcript)
President Nixon established the Committee on Energy. The Cabinet-level advisory body would coordinate development of energy policy within the Executive Branch. (PD, 17 June 74,607-8) 15 June-23 September: The Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate) was conducted over a 51-million-sq-km area of tropical land and sea to collect data on the behavior of the tropical atmosphere and its ultimate effects on global weather. Sponsored by the United Nations’ World Meteorological Organization, more than 4000 scientists, technicians, and support personnel from 72 countries—including the U.S., Brazil, France, East and West Germany, Mexico, The Netherlands, United Kingdom, and U.S.S.R.—used 38 ships, 65 instrumented buoys, 13 aircraft, 6 kinds of satellites, and nearly 1000 land stations to observe and record phenomena from the top of the atmosphere to 1500 m below the sea surface. Objectives of gate were to extend the time range and scope of weather predictions, develop means to assess pollution, determine feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration coordinated U.S. participation, which included NASA, Dept, of Defense, Dept, of State, Dept, of Transportation, National Academy of Sciences, National Science Foundation, and National Center for Atmospheric Research, as well as the private sector of the scientific community. Instrumented aircraft, including NASA’s Convair 990, flew at altitudes between 90 and 9150 m to probe the cores of tropical cloud clusters and investigate the intertropical convergence zone, ocean waves and surface temperatures, radiation, tropical disturbances and dust layers moving off the African continent, and day-night weather changes in the coastal areas. Ships from 10 countries, including NASA’s Vanguard tracking ship and eight other U.S. vessels, investigated tropical cumulus cloud clusters, uppermost layers of ocean affected by local atmospheric conditions, and the broad systems of ocean currents near the equator. Satellites-—including Sms 1, Ats 3, Noaa 2 and 3, Nimbus 5, and dmsp Defense Meteorological Satellites from the U.S. and polar orbiting Meteor-class satellites from the U.S.S.R.—furnished day and night information on cloudtop heights and temperatures, cloud liquid-water content, wind speed and direction, temperature and moisture in the atmosphere, and sea surface temperatures. Land stations provided surface and upper-air data; instrumented buoys collected data from the sea surface to 10-m altitude. Each nation contributing vehicles would process and validate the collected data. By March 1976 all data would be sent to two World Data Centers, operated by the U.S. and U.S.S.R., where they would become available to scientists, (noaa, gate News Press Kit, 9 May 74; gate Release NI 74-45; FBis-Poland, 25 June 74, G6; noaa Release 74-1541
European Space Agency announced a postponement in the launch of COS-B, scheduled for a 6 Aug. 6:56 pm PDT launch from Western Test Range, because of hydraulic-valve failure in a telemetry aircraft needed to monitor third-stage ignition of the launch vehicle. The launch had been rescheduled to 8 Aug. at 6:48 pm PDT. COS-B would be ESA’s first satellite launch since the new agency’s establishment on 30 May. (ESA Release, 7 Aug 75)
Calculation of crop acreage from satellite images had proven “generally adequate” in NASA tests involving wheat acreage in nine Great Plains states during the past year, NASA Associate Administrator Charles W. Mathews told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Reporting on the 9.9% error rate in the LACIE (large area crop inventory experiment) test using Landsat data, Mathews said that the U.S. had demonstrated the feasibility of an operational global forecasting system for wheat. Mathews mentioned other Landsat data applications: The Geological Survey and NOAA had developed computer techniques for processing multispectral Landsat data that made oil slicks clearly visible. Other computer techniques using the data had detected subtle differences in surface soils and rocks that revealed mineralization and potential ore deposits. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 931, 938, 939)
Establishment of manufacturing facilities in space might be feasible within this century, Dr. Gerard K. O’Neill wrote in the December issue of Science magazine. Construction of satellite solar power stations (SSPSs) from lunar materials, for example, could be shown more economical than building such stations on earth and lifting them into orbit. The space manufacturing facility (SMF) that had been envisioned by Dr. O’Neill and others would be a self-sustaining habitat for a large number of people whose energy needs could be met by solar power used directly for agriculture, as process heat for industry when concentrated by mirrors, or indirectly as electricity. Dr. O’Neill had assembled tables and figures from the literature to accompany his argument for the SSPS as a means of meeting increased demands for electricity on earth in a time of shortage of fuels and concern about use of nuclear energy. (,Science, Vol 190, 4218)
The fierce rivalry between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was not confined to ground, air, and sea, but extended to space, the People’s Republic of China’s The People’s Daily said in an article entitled “Competition in Space and Hardship on Earth.” Both superpowers had invested huge amounts of money, manpower, and materials to turn cosmic space into an arena for arms expansion and war preparations as well as espionage. U.S. and U.S.S.R. military satellites, which accounted for most satellite launchings, were used mostly to spy on each other. In recent years their rivalry in space had become more and more acute, disturbing tranquillity in space. (Peking NCNA, FBIS-PRC, 21 July 75, Al)
The Communications Satellite Corporation filed with the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia a petition for review of the Federal Communications Commission decision of 4 Dec. on the allowed rate base, rate of return, and rate structure for ComSat’s international satellite services. ComSat intended to apply to the FCC—and to the court—for a stay of the FCC order that new tariffs be filed by 5 Jan. 1976. The corporation had prepared a letter to its stockholders on the FCC decision. (ComSat Release 75—61)
Launch of the Dual Air Density (DAD) spacecraft from the Western Test Range failed when a catastrophic event during third-stage burn caused loss of vehicle control and failure to achieve orbit. The destruct signal was transmitted 341 sec after ignition. The four-stage Scout-D launch was to have placed into orbit two satellites—a small rigid sphere of aluminum and a large inflatable sphere of mylar—similarly instrumented with a mass spectrometer and associated electronics. The satellites were to have been in 9(F polar orbits intersecting periodically, to measure atmospheric densities at two differing altitudes but at the same latitudes at the same local-hour angle of the sun. The measurements would show effects on upper atmosphere readings of changes in solar heat input and the relationships between upper and lower atmospheres. The launch, scheduled for 3 Dec., had been delayed because of a malfunction in the ignition system of the Scout launch vehicle. (NASA Release 75—300; MOR S—863—75—05, 6 Jan 76; HQ memo, Goozh, 9 Dec 75; SBD, 5 Dec 75, 186)
Cosmos 775, believed to be third of a series in the Soviet Union’s Statsionar communications-satellite program, was launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome into a very low near-circular earth orbit. Its predecessors, Cosmos 637 and Molniya IS, had been launched 26 March and 29 July 1974. The satellites were to supply communications, including telephone, telegraph, TV, and phototelegraph transmissions, between the Soviet Union and Europe and between the capital and extreme eastern portions of the U.S.S.R. Once the Statsionar communications system was established, the U.S.S.R. was expected to undertake implementation of a synchronous meteorological satellite system as early as the 1976—77 period. (SBD, 16 Oct 75, 232)
A Baltimore Sun editorial discussed “Distorted Priorities in the R&D Budget.” The President’s R&D budget for FY 1976 had little chance of passage in its existing form because of the hostility of much of the 98th Congress to some of its proposals. Defense-related R&D would be reduced, the energy proposals would be juggled to give more to solar and geothermal energy, and the proposed large cuts in biomedical research would be restored. Congress might be more sympathetic to NASA. Once seen by congressional critics as a quasi-military organization or at least “a space circus that siphoned dollars away from more pressing needs,” NASA was “beginning to prove itself a valuable scientific tool” in such valuable areas as environmental monitoring. That the Office of Management and Budget had not, as once threatened, scrapped funds for the Landsat— C satellite “may reflect an effort to make NASA more attractive by further pushing the agency into the areas that have gained humanist and environmentalist approval.” (BSure, 1 March 75, A18)
Satcom 1, first of three domestic communications satellites to be placed in geostationary orbit around the equator for RCA Corp. to transmit long-distance telephone calls and service data, had Been launched at 8:56 pm EST from Cape Canaveral on a Delta vehicle into a parking orbit with 35 980-km apogee and 182-km perigee. A kick motor was to be fired at 5:41 pm EST 15 Dec. to put the satellite into a synchronous orbit. The RCA Satcom was the second domestic communications satellite to be launched by communications companies; the Western Union Corporation’s Westar system became operational earlier this year. Each Satcom would receive and transmit data on 24 channels. Westar—a two-satellite system—had only 12 message channels per satellite. Each Satcom channel was built to transmit 1000 telephone calls at a time, or one color TV channel, or 64 million bits per sec of computer data. Satcom 1 would be stationed at 119°W, and the two subsequent Satcoms would be located at 99°W and 129°W over the equator to handle television, voice channels, and high-speed data between the contiguous U.S., Hawaii, and Alaska. (NASA Release 75— 302;NYT, 13 Dec 75,37;SBD, 16 Dec 75, 242; KSC Releases 289-75, 295-75)
Photographs from Landsat 1 (launched 23 July 1972 as Erts 1, Earth Resources Technology Satellite) indicated that a continental collision had been in progress between India and Eurasia, pushing China eastward at the rate of 2.54 centimeters a year, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientists reported in Science. This eastward movement could account for China’s unusual pattern of earthquakes—widespread instead of along narrow fault lines, the MIT geologists suggested. Despite the current theory that the Indian subcontinent was sliding under Eurasia, the MIT scientists had concluded that rigid Indian plates of rock were causing China to be pushed into the Pacific. (Molnar et al., Science, 8 Aug 75, 419 —425; NYT, 10 Aug 75, 49)
The first successful air drop of data-collection platforms for use by the Nimbus 6 polar-orbiting weather satellite would lead to another first: successful day-to-day tracking of ice-pack movement in the Arctic Sea north of Alaska’s oil-rich Prudhoe Bay area. Knowledge about the interaction between the winter sea ice and the continental shelf would be important to government and to oil companies; government would use the information in allocating drilling areas and overseeing their use by private industry. Oil companies would need to know whether to locate drilling rigs on the ice or sink them into the sea bed; whether to bury pipelines under the ocean floor, lay them along the bottom, or run them over the ice to loading areas. The exterior sphere of the platforms, built to be dropped on the ice from small aircraft, had been constructed of a tough material to foil the hunger and curiosity of polar bears, which reportedly would attempt to chew on anything appearing different from the usual surroundings. The tracking and data-relay experiment aboard Nimbus 6 had successfully completed its share of a transmission test that sent sensor, telemetry, and ranging signals from its near-polar 1110-km orbit to NASA’s Ats 6 in geostationary orbit 35 900 km above India. The signals, relayed to NASA’s Madrid receiving station, were immediately retransmitted to GSFC. Information gathered in the test would be used to design the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) planned for late 1979. The system would use two geostationary satellites to relay tracking data, commands, and communications between a central ground terminal and a number of spacecraft in low earth orbit; this would increase low-orbit spacecraft access to ground stations from 15 to 85%, reducing NASA requirements for ground-station networks. General Electric’s Space Div., reporting on the success of the test, said the quality of all data received was excellent. (Marshall Star, 26 Nov 75, 4; San Diego Union, 9 Nov 75, 1 ;Aero Daily, 26 Nov 75, 140; SBD, 26 Nov 75, 143)
The Space and Missile Systems Organization had announced award of a $2 059 000 contract to Raytheon Co. Equipment Div. for a selfrepairing onboard satellite computer system. The 11-kg computer would carry two or more spares for each of its basic subunits, and a configuration-control unit (CCU) to monitor the computer’s operating subunits and diagnose problems; if a subunit failed, the CCU would diagnose the problem and switch to a spare. The computer would also perform satellite housekeeping including power control, antenna positioning, temperature control, attitude control, and navigation, jobs normally performed by a computer on the ground. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75)
Funding in the FY 1976 budget for a third Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS) was in doubt, Walter Sullivan said in a New York Times article. Despite worldwide enthusiasm for continuing the program, which was developing remote-sensing techniques for monitoring and managing earth’s resources, doubts about funding approval were appearing within the Office of Management and Budget. Factors that would influence OMB’s decision included the reported existence of far more detailed information from secretly launched intelligence satellites. Although scientists would probably prefer a system free from intelligence links, some argued that the information needed by agencies such as the Bureau of Census and Dept, of Agriculture could be extracted from imagery from these satellites. Another reason to delay immediate funding was that a more effective system would eventually become feasible. Scientists argued against this reasoning, saying that the lack of fine detail in ERTS images was not a serious impediment but that lack of continuity would be. (Sullivan, NYT, 4 Jan 75, 17)
Under a decision of the Federal Communications Commission, the Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) had been making too much money and would have to reduce its rates on international communications services by up to 35%. The order followed a 10-yr FCC investigation of the entire range of ComSat services. Essentially a wholesaler of communications, ComSat had been selling satellite circuits to telephone and telegraph firms that retailed the services to consumers. The FCC order could substantially reduce overseas telephone and telegraph charges; an accompanying order required the international firms that had been dealing with ComSat to pass the reduced rates on to their customers. FCC ruled that ComSat was entitled to a return ranging from 10.8 to 11.8%, but ComSat’s rate of return in 1974 was about 34.6%. (IF Star, 27 Nov 75, A2)
Western Union Telegraph Co. announced that after Westar 1 and 2 (launched 13 April 1974 and 10 Oct. 1974) began video transmission, users would save up to 66% of the cost of land-based transmissions. Rates of the new system, filed with the Federal Communications Commission, were scheduled to go into effect 14 July. The multipoint reception capability of the Westar system would attract a variety of broadcast applications, including independent networks and links to cable systems. Savings by users of the satellite system would depend on the type of service and the route selected: Westar offpeak video service between Los Angeles and New York would cost $715 for the first hour, a savings of 61% over the $1832 charged for a landline transmission. For each additional hour the Westar rate drops to $620, a reduction of 66% over landline transmissions. Initially, cities with earth stations—New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Dallas—would receive the service, which could be extended beyond those cities via connecting carrier. (WU release, 16 June 75)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency and NASA signed a contract for launch of three Japanese geosynchronous satellites in 1977 and 1978. NASA would launch the satellites on a Delta launch vehicle on a cost-reimbursable basis. The satellites—GMS, a meteorological satellite; CS, an experimental medium-capacity comsat; and BS, an experimental medium-scale broadcast satellite—would participate in the worldwide Global Atmospheric Research Project (GARP) sponsored by the United Nations World Meteorological Organization. (Kyodo, FBIS—Japan, 22 July 75, C3; NASAMOR M-492-101-77-01, 12 July 77)
Western Union Corp.’s Westar satellite system, which included Westar 1 and 2 (launched 13 Apr. 74 and 10 Oct. 74), began commercial video service with the transmission of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission coverage from Houston to Chicago. TVN Independent Newservice, the first customer, used a transponder on Westar 1 to transmit coverage for 75 clients in the U.S. and Canada. The two satellites, in synchronous orbit; were linked to earth stations near major cities. (WU Release, 15 July 75)
Kuwait’s Communications Minister Sulayman Hammud alKhalid signed a contract with Siemens AG, a West German company, to import and install Kuwait’s second ground station for satellite communications. (AR-RA’Y AL-’AMM, FBIS—Arabian Peninsula, 18 July 75, Cl) . .
The U.S.S.R. was planning to flight-test the SLX—14, a launch vehicle larger than the Saturn 5, from Tyuratam during the summer of 1975, Kenneth W. Gatland reported in the Christian Science Monitor. Launch preparations, observed by the Air Force’s Big Bird reconnaissance satellites, had been under way since 1974. Gatland reported that the project had been delayed for more than 5 yr when a previous prototype caught fire and exploded during a 1969 fueling test. Two others had failed in flight, in 1971 and 1972. After considering cancellation of the project, Soviet officials ordered a drastic design review and the program continued with increased emphasis on systems reliability and ground testing. (Gatland, CSM, 16 April 75,1)
The Soviet Union launched a communications satellite called Raduga (Rainbow) into a stationary circular orbit at 35 000 km, with a 23 hr 54 min period and a 0.3°inclination. The satellite had been instrumented to provide continuous round-the-clock telephone and telegraph radio communications with simultaneous transmission of color and black-and-white central- TV programs to the network of Orbita stations. (Tass, on FBIS No. 248, 23 Dec 75)
The communications satellite business was becoming one of the fastest growing businesses on earth, Thomas O’Toole said in a Washington Post article. The huge dish-shaped antennas used as telephone and television links between earth and the dozen or so orbiting comsats had sprouted up in the suburbs of Moscow and Peking, in Brazilian jungles, in the mountains of Iran, and in the deserts of Algeria. In addition, Algeria was building 14 antennas; Indonesia, 60; and Brazil, 2000. More than 90 countries were currently communicating by satellite, most using the seven Intelsat satellites orbited by the 89-country consortium, the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Worldwide Intelsat traffic was growing by 20% a year. In addition to the Intelsat comsats, the Soviet Union, Canada, France, and West Germany, and Western Union already owned their own comsats. Japan would have one by 1977, and Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Indonesia were each planning to orbit their own. Besides making it easier to communicate around the world, satellites were responsible for cutting the cost of overseas conversations. In 1947, a 3-min phone call from New York to London cost $12. The same call in 1975 cost $5.40. (O’Toole, W Post, 12 Jan 75, 1)
Westar communications satellites would soon be used for communications to and from offshore oil drilling platforms and exploratory vessels in waters adjacent to the continental U.S., Western Union Telegraph Co. announced. The offshore facilities previously had depended for communication on microwave relay networks and cabling, methods that had become increasingly expensive and impractical as the facilities were moved farther and farther off shore. (Westar news release, 4 Aug 75)
DOD announced the award of a $3.6-million contract to Aerojet Electrosystems Co. for design, development, and delivery of one prototype and one flight microwave temperature sounder to be used on military meteorological satellites between 1977—1980. Under the contract, Aerojet would build and test one mechanical-thermal simulator and associated ground equipment for calibration and testing, and would develop a software data package to convert satellite data to temperature profiles. The microwave sounder would be designed to measure atmospheric temperature from the surface of the earth to altitudes above 30 km without regard to cloudcover. (AFSC Release OIP 028.75)
The Soviet Union for the first time had discovered atoms of “natrium”— sodium, as it is known in the U.S.—at an altitude of nearly 100 km, in the lower ionosphere. The experiment was difficult, said Tass, because at that altitude only 1 atom of natrium exists per 1000 million molecules of nitrogen and oxygen. A laser unit had established a relationship between natrium content in the upper atmosphere and meteor showers; the announcement said the discovery would be significant because of the effect of natrium on longdistance television and radio communications. (Tass, in FBIS No. 248, 18 Dec 75) 22 December. A new domestic communications-satellite partnership named Satellite Business Systems filed applications with the Federal Communications Commission seeking authorization to establish an all-digital system to serve large industrial, government, and other users beginning in 1979. The new partnership had been formed by subsidiaries of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General, and IBM, each of which intended to own one-third. The proposed system, using higher frequencies at 12 and 14 gigahertz and advanced technology, would permit customers in geographically dispersed locations to combine voice, data, and image communications into a single integrated private-line network; small automated ground stations would be located at customers’ premises and connected where possible to existing terminals to minimize terrestrial communications costs. The system would use two satellites in geostationary orbit at about 36 000 km altitude, one serving as a backup, to provide coverage of the 48 contiguous states. (Comsat Release 75 —63)
Didier Ratsiraka, President of the Supreme Council of Revolution of the Malagasy Republic, said in a radio broadcast to Malagasy citizens that his government would ask the U.S. to close its satellite tracking station there if the U.S. did not “raise concrete and satisfactory proposals before July 14.” Ratsiraka said that “To avoid possible maneuvers of sabotage, the government has taken necessary measures to place the station under control of the armed forces from this day.” People’s Republic of China’s Hsinhua news agency quoted Ratsiraka as saying that the U.S. was reluctant to fulfill its obligations under the agreement signed in October 1963 by the U.S. and Malagasy governments, being in “flagrant violation of the written engagements.” (FBIS-PRC, 15 July 75, A3)
Aetna Life and Casualty would become the third partner with Comsat General Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. in a venture to establish a domestic satellite system, the three companies jointly announced. In a letter to the Federal Communications Commission, the three companies had proposed a corporate structure of the jointly owned CML Satellite Corp. under which each of the three companies would own a part of the organization. IBM would purchase 42.5% and Aetna would purchase 15% of CML stock, with Comsat holding the remaining 42.5%. Aetna would also purchase a convertible note, bringing its investment to the same level as Comsat and IBM; the three partners would have equal representation on the board of directors. The arrangement would comply with FCC’s requirement that no partner own less than 10% nor more than 49% of CML’s stock [see 23 Jan.]. After FCC approval, the three partners would each invest up to $55 million with additional funding obtained fropi outside financing. CML had been formed in 1972, with other stockholders, to enter the U.S. domestic communications satellite business; Comsat had owned all the stock of CML since July 1975 and, with IBM, had been seeking a third partner.. Both Comsat and IBM had been providing the interim financing. (Aetna-Comsat-IBM Release, 26 Sept 75)
NASA’s Small Astronomy Satellite (Sas 2, launched as Explorer 48 16 Nov. 1972) had observed a pulsar in the Vela constellation that generated two bursts of gamma rays for each burst of radio waves, theAstrophysical Journal reported. No other pulsar had been found to exhibit such properties. The new observation indicated that pulsars— small, dense, rapidly spinning stars thought to be remains of a huge stellar explosion or supernova—were much more complex than had been believed. Detection of gamma rays from Vela meant that pulsars were a likely source of cosmic rays. Many astrophysicists had believed that only very young pulsars could produce cosmic energies, but the Sas 2 observations cast doubt on this conclusion: Scientists believed that the Vela pulsar was more than 10 000 yrs old. (D.J. Thompson et al., Astrophysical Journal, 1 Sept 75; GSFC Release G—75—20)
Some “very heavy” influential politicians had been rallying around NASA’s “little known and unglamorous” Earth Resources Technology Satellite [renamed Landsat 14 Jan.] program, inducing President Ford to overrule his budget advisers and provide money for a third spacecraft in 1977, Arlen J. Large said in the Wall Street Journal. It wasn’t only NASA but “the ERTS community—geographers, foresters, pollution fighters and land-use planners” that lobbied for a third satellite to continue the work of Landsat 1 and 2 (launched 23 July 1972 and 22 Jan. 1975). The Office of Management and Budget had wanted to delay funding until NASA developed cameras with better resolution, but the “lobbying blitz” convinced President Ford to overrule OMB; money for the satellite was included in the FY 1976 budget. (Large, WSJ, 20 Feb 75, 44)
The Bangui Anomaly—a massive magnetic disturbance in the earth along the equator in Africa, suggesting rich deposits of heavy metals like iron and uranium—had been accidentally discovered by Ogo 1, launched in 1964 with magnetometers that were still measuring the earth’s magnetic field in 1970 when the Geological Survey decided to use them for other purposes. Attempting to measure the ionosphere for traces of a jetstream above the equator, Survey scientists noticed a “kink” in the data and had checked their findings by scanning the region with magnetometers in aircraft. Results showed a magnetic difference so great that it could be caused only by an ore body larger than the Mesabi range in Minn., largest in the U.S. Scientists had deemed the find so important that NASA had suggested putting a satellite in orbit to do nothing but chart the earth’s magnetic field. The anomaly was named for the capital of the Central African Republic, an extremely poor nation almost as big as Texas with a population of about 2 million. The deposits had been localized in hilly regions away from the Ubangi River, so that a railroad or highway would be needed to carry ores to the river for shipping. State Dept, sources said that interest in the region among foreign mineral-extraction companies had risen. (O’Toole, LA Times, 15 Nov 75, 1)
The Soviet Union launched Intercosmos 14 into an orbit with 1707-km apogee, 345-km perigee, 105.3-min period, and 74° inclination. The satellite had been equipped to study low-frequency electromagnetic fluctuations in the magnetosphere, the structure of the ionosphere, and the intensity of micrometeorite fluxes. Tass reported that flags of nine socialist countries had waved over “one of the Soviet cosmodromes” where the launching took place; mentioned as participating in this particular mission were scientists from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary, as well as the U.S.S.R. Satellites of the Intercosmos series were considered “closest to purely earth problems” in that they had been connected with specific orders placed by geophysicists, physicians, meteorologists, and radiocommunications experts. Academician Boris Petrov, head of the Soviet Intercosmos, said the launch ended the first decade of cooperation between scientists and engineers of the socialist countries, who had made significant discoveries regarding sun and earth climate, influence of solar activity on magnetic weather, and dispersal of radio waves. Collectives of experts in all nine member countries of Intercosmos would take part “as usual” in processing information received from the satellite, working at the scientific flight headquarters near Norilsk, beyond the polar circle, where parallel ground observations would be conducted. (Tass, in FBIS 240 and 243, 12 Dec 75)
Communications Satellite Corp. had received initial orders to lease terminals on tankers and other commercial vessels for communications via the Marisat maritime-satellite system. Exxon International Corp. had ordered five shipboard terminals to provide communications with Exxon tankers at sea. The U.S. Maritime Administration had ordered terminals for six U.S.-flag ships as part of a cooperative cost-sharing program between USMA and the vessel owners. The Marisat system, scheduled for commercial service later this year, would provide high-quality telex, data, and telephone communications 24 hrs a day to ships and offshore facilities. (ComSatCorp Release 75—48)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) awarded a $145 000 contract to RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div. for a first-phase design study of the Tiros-N data-acquisition and control system (DACS). DACS would provide operational control of Tiros-N in orbit, and would collect and transmit telemetry and weather information to NOAA facilities in Md. RCA’s Astro-Electronics Div., which had been developing the new generation of weather satellites for NASA had scheduled the first flight for 1978. As part of the design study, RCA would provide descriptions of materials and procedures needed to implement the DACS, a network of ground stations including the Md. center and the command and data-acquisition stations (CDA) in Alaska and Va. (Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 149)
The Indonesian government concluded a $120.6-million (4.6 billion Belgian francs) agreement with the General Bank of Belgium to finance construction of two communications satellites, a satellite control station in Jakarta, and 39 comsat network stations throughout the Indonesian islands. (Jakarta Domestic Service, FBIS—Indonesia, 19 Feb 75, Nl)
Preparatory work was nearing completion on the Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE), a joint India— NASA program to broadcast educational TV via the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974. Installation of 400 TV sets had been completed, and the buildings to house them had been wired for electricity. (Delhi Domestic Service, FBIS—India, 18 July 75, U2)
Heos 1, Europe’s longest-living satellite, reentered the earth’s atmosphere as predicted after exceeding its nominal lifetime by nearly 6 years. Launched 5 Dec. 1968 by the European Space Agency, Heos 1 was third of eight scientific satellites launched by ESRO/ESA between 1968 and 1975. Its full payload of 7 experiments gave excellent results 4 months longer than the nominal lifetime; the experiment to study the interplanetary magnetic field worked until reentry, providing invaluable data on the field for almost 7 of the 11 yr of a solar cycle. Experiments were: interplanetary magnetic field, high-energy galactic cosmic rays, and solar protons (Imperial College, London); solar wind (Universities of Florence, Rome, and Brussels); low-energy cosmic rays (Centre d’Etudes Nucleaires); high-energy electrons (CEN/University of Milan); barium cloud (Max Planck Institut). (ESA Release 29 Oct 75)
The Knights of Columbus, a U.S. Catholic fraternal organization, had agreed to pay for worldwide satellite coverage of three live 90-min Vatican events, the Washington Post reported. Four Intelsat satellites would telecast the midnight mass at Christmas, the Stations of the Cross from the Roman Colosseum on Good Friday, and the Pope’s Easter Sunday message. Each broadcast would cost an estimated $25 000. (W Post, 21 Aug 75)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization announced the award of a $99 894 15-mo contract to the Research Foundation of the State Univ. of New York for a study of radiation-induced defects in solar cells. The Foundation would develop an information base for predicting electron damage to silicon solar cells over a wide range of parameters for the materials from which the cells were made. (INTELSAT Release 75—32)
Landsat 2, launched 22 Jan. 1975, developed a noise problem with one of its two image tape recorders, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The satellite’s mission was not in danger because the backup recorder was functioning properly. (Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 13)
NASA had awarded a $45.8-million contract to Radio Corporation of America Astro-Electronics Div. to design and build eight Tiros-N third generation meteorological satellites. The 635-kg Tiros-N (Television InfraRed Operational Satellite) would have 4 times the payload capacity of the previous generation of metsats, and was expected to be able to forecast weather 2 days in advance with accuracy equal to the 1-day predictions. In addition to providing day and night imagery, the Tiros-N spacecraft would take atmospheric and sea-surface temperature readings; measure proton, electron, and alpha-particle activity surrounding the earth; and collect data from weather platforms on balloons and from ocean buoys. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 1)
The 14-nation Arab League, joined by 6 other African and MidEastern states in a 20-nation satellite organization, had finished initial technical and economic feasibility studies for an Arab satellite-communications network and were beginning to define specific technical requirements for the system, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Program goals were to meet telecommunications requirements of Arabic-speaking states in North Africa and the Middle East for police work, weather broadcasting, civil aviation communications, and shipping, and to expand Arab technology into space. The Arab States Broadcasting Union estimated immediate need of 15 radio channels for direct broadcast of educational and cultural programs to remote areas, and 2 TV channels each for general and educational broadcasting. Estimated need of the Arab countries by 1976 would be as many as 1060 telephone, teletypewriter, and telegraph channels, and up to 6200 channels for this traffic by mid-1984. Av Wk reported that, although the first satellites and initial ground stations would be bought from Western countries, the long-term goal was to shift operation and control to Arab nationals after 6 mo. The system, which would provide communications and broadcast coverage for 95% of the Arab world, would include a main orbiting satellite, a standby orbiting satellite to replace the prime satellite in case of failure, and a reserve satellite kept on the ground ready for quick launch in case of satellite failure. (Ropelewski, Av Wk, 21 July 75, 56 -59)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s board of governors had authorized issuance of a request for firm fixed-price proposals for design, development, manufacture, and test of seven Intelsat V satellites, with options for up to eight additional satellites. In 1979 Intelsat V satellites would replace the Intelsat IV—A series to be deployed in September 1975. Intelsat V satellites would have increased capacity by a fourfold use of the 6/4 ghz frequency band, use of both antenna-beam separation and dual-polarization concepts; introduction of the 14/11 ghz band for limited coverage in high-traffic regions; and a maximum effective bandwidth of 2280 mhz. A single satellite design would be used in all three ocean regions of the Intelsat global systems. Intelsat V satellites were expected to have a capacity of 12 000 two-way voice circuits plus one color TV channel. (INTELSAT Release 75—8)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization—had awarded a 20-mo fixed-price contract for $220 000 to the Messerschmitt—Boelkow—Blohm Co. of Munich for design, fabrication, and test of a prototype lightweight deployable solar array for use in synchronous satellites. The new array would provide 30 to 33 watts per kg at the end of a 7- to 10-yr mission, compared to the current level of 10 to 15 watts per kg. (INTELSAT Release 75—20)
According to International Telecommunications Union figures, a satellite had been launched every 3 days in 1974. Of the total of 124 launched, 18 belonged wholly or partly to the U.S., and the Soviet Union accounted for 95. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 3) November 1975
NASA successfully launched Intelsat IV F—l for the Communications Satellite Corp., as agent for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, from Eastern Test Range at 6:04 pm EDT. The 1400-kg satellite entered the desired synchronous transfer orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 534-km perigee, 10-hr 40-min period, and 26? inclination. ComSatCorp successfully fired the apogee motor at 6:45 pm EDT on 24 May, placing the satellite in synchronous orbit over the Indian Ocean (36 184-km apogee, 35 704-km perigee, 24-hr 4-min period, and 0.5° inclination) with a final operational position to be at 61° east longitude. When it became operational in June, it would replace Intelsat IV F—5 as the primary operating satellite in the Indian Ocean area in the global 6-active-satellite Intelsat network; it would be able to transmit 3500 two-way telephone conversations or 12 TV channels. The launch was the second recent attempt to place an Intelsat IV satellite over the Indian Ocean; on 20 Feb., the first attempt failed and Intelsat IV F-6 had to be destroyed when the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle tumbled out ctf control. INTELSAT launched its first comsat, Intelsat I F—l {Early Bird), on 6 April 1965. Between 1967 and 1970 12 Intelsat II and III satellites were launched before the Intelsat IV launches began in 1971. (NASA MORs, 16 May 75, 25 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—125; NASA Audio News, 23 May 75; GSFC WklySSR, 25—28 May 75; Salmanson, Atlas mgr., NASA Hq., interview, 25 May 77)
Comsat General Corp. of the Communications Satellite Corp. announced its intent to pay MCI Communications Corp. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. $1.5 million each for their common stock in the CML Satellite Corp. Restructured in 1972 by Comsat General Corp. and with thirds owned by Comsat, Lockheed, and MCI, CML was to have entered the domestic-communications-satellite business but had stopped short because of the financial difficulties of MCI and Lockheed. On 3 July 1974, Comsat and International Business Machines Corp. had announced plans to buy out the shares in CML owned by Lockheed and MCI, subject to approval by the Federal Communications Commission. Restrictions imposed in a 23 January 1975 ruling by the FCC—concerned that the combination of the two companies would create a monopoly—required that no one partner own less than 10% or more than 49% of the stock. Under this “balanced CML” ruling, Comsat and IBM were seeking a third partner; to that end, Comsat was acquiring all of the stock so that it could be reapportioned in the proposed new structure. (Comsat General Release 75—45)
The Commerce Dept, had awarded Aeronutronic Ford, Inc., a contract for $5 581 824 to design and build a space environment monitor for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which had commissioned it to make constant measurements of energetic solar particles when Tiros-N would be launched in 1978. Tiros-N, a joint mission of NOAA and NASA, would be first of a new series of polar-orbiting satellites to be operated by the National Environmental Satellite Service as “a major improvement in our capability of monitoring environmental phenomena,” according to Dr. George H. Ludwig, director of NESS’s Office of Operations. Detecting changes in the space environment and learning how they affect conditions on earth would help scientists to predict and prepare for these effects. The NOAA space-environment monitor, the only set of sensors facing away from the earth, would provide much of the needed data. (DOC Release G 75—180)
The European Space Research Organization (ESRO) announced the award of a $4.4 million [3.5 million accounting units] contract to a European consortium to provide software for ESRO’s Meteosat meteorological satellite, scheduled for launch in April 1977. Under the terms of the contract the consortium, consisting of companies in France, United Kingdom, West Germany, Belgium, Italy, and Sweden, would provide data-acceptance capability, image processing, operational mission support, data archiving, analysis and dissemination of image data, and monitoring of the overall data-process-ing system. Meteosat, ESRO’s first applications satellite, would record and transmit data for more accurate weather forecasting. (ESRO Release, 7 April 75)
The People’s Republic of China had confirmed that its three satellites— China 1, launched 24 April 1970; China 2, launched 3 March 1971; and China 3, launched 26 July 1975—had earth-observation capability, Defense Space Business Daily reported. Although the PRC’s People’s Daily had published cloud photos taken by one of the satellites, and the implication was that the satellites were forerunners of meteorological satellites, their performance suggested the development of higher resolution observation-reconnaissance satellites. All three satellites had been placed into orbits with perigees at reconnaissance altitudes sufficient to cover all targets of interest to the PRC. (SBD, 25 Aug 75, 290]
The Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded a $36.3-million contract to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for building and testing in earth orbit a space laser communications system. The 5-yr contract would produce three synchronous satellites to relay high-data-rate messages by laser to aircraft, ground stations, or other satellites, with a capability of transmitting a billion pieces of data per sec—about 20 times the data volume possible with present commercial communications-satellite systems. The award includes development of the space and ground-station equipment. McDonnell would work on high-accuracy pointing of the laser beams, within 10 millionths of a degree. (St. Louis P-D, 20 Nov 75,13; LA Times, 9 Dec 75, 15C; SBD, 20 Nov 75, 107) 21 November-. Goddard'Space Flight Center awarded Boeing Co. a fixed-price incentive contract for $8 236 000 to provide modules for the first two Atmospheric Explorer missions: AEM—A (heat capacity satellite) and AEM—B (the stratospheric aerosol gas experiment—SAGE). AEM-A, scheduled for launch in 1978, would carry a heat-capacity mapping radiometer that NASA would acquire independently, to gather thermal-inertia data on rock types, location of mineral resources, soil moisture, and vegetation-cover temperature measurements. AEM—B’s SAGE would measure spatial distribution of stratospheric aerosol and ozone on a global basis. It had been scheduled for launch in 1979. (NASA Release 75—299; WSJ, 24 Nov 75, 28)
The People’s Republic of China successfully launched an earth-orbiting satellite into an orbit with 483 km apogee, 173 km perigee, 63° inclination, and 91-min period, the New China News Agency announced. (FBIS No. 230, 26 Nov 75; IF Star, 27 Nov 75, A2)
NASA’s flying laboratory Galileo II, an instrumented Convair 990, participated in a month-long cooperative investigation of the Arctic seas. Researchers from NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Army, U.S. Navy, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and several Canadian agencies hoped to find methods of measuring critical changes in the Arctic environment that would help environmentalists find out how best to manage Arctic resources. A major objective of the program was an experiment—called the AIDJEX, the Arctic Ice Dynamics Joint Experiment—to investigate the relationship among ice motion, weather, and ocean conditions. Combined data from aircraft- and ground-based investigations would be used to interpret satellite data obtained at the same time. BESMEX, the Bering Sea Marine Mammal Experiment, would study the migration patterns of marine mammals and the relationship between mammal population, migration, and sea-ice conditions. In a third experiment, scientists would measure microwave emission characteristics of polar ice, hoping to find a key to global monitoring of ice distribution by climate and size. This information would aid in predicting the survival rate of offshore drilling rigs. (ARC Release 75-11)
Fifteen years ago the launch of two U.S. satellites on the same day would have “blasted the top off of Page One,” Ernest B. Furguson said in a Washington Star article. But when it happened 7 May—Explorer 53 and Anik 3—it “drew less coverage than two swallows returning to Capistrano.” At a total cost of $44 million, to be shared by NASA and foreign friends, Explorer 53 Small Astronomy Satellite would study x-ray sources within and beyond the Milky Way, and Anik 3 would transmit communications back and forth across Canada. The NASA space budget for FY 1975 was nearly $3 billion. “Considering inflation, that seems a bargain.” The current space budget was “not quite 12 times what the President has asked to handle the Vietnamese refugee effort for each of two years. You are free to say for yourself where the two programs stand on the relative scale of things.” (Furguson, W Star, 14 May 75, A17)
NASA closed its tracking station on Madagascar after the agency was unable to reach agreement with the government of the Malagasy Republic for continued operation of the station. Functions of the station would be taken over by the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974. The Madagascar station had opened in 1964 under an agreement that called for station operation by NASA and Malagasy personnel. Data collected by the station were made available to the Malagasy Republic. The agreement had not called for an exchange of funds between the cooperating governments. The agreement expired in December 1973, and a new one could not be reached when Madagascar claimed rent for the station retroactive to 1964. (AP, NYT, 15 July 75; NASA Release 63— 279; NASA Contracts Div., Phillips, interview, 2 Aug 77) .
The U.S.S.R. launched Aryabhata, India’s first scientific satellite, from Kapustin Yar in the Soviet Union. The satellite entered orbit with a 611-km apogee, 568-km perigee, 96.5-min period, and 50.7° inclination. The Delhi Domestic News Service said that the 360-kg satellite, named for a fifth-century Indian astronomer and mathematician, carried instruments to measure x-rays from celestial sources, look for neutrons and gamma radiation from the sun, and measure ionospheric parameters. Ground tracking stations in India and the Soviet Union reported the instrumentation was functioning normally. Aryabhata, designed and built by scientists at India’s Space Research Organization with technical assistance from Soviet scientists and specialists, was completed under an agreement for joint Indian-Soviet collaboration signed on 10 May 1972. The press reported the estimated cost of the project to be $6 million. (Delhi Dom News Ser, FBIS—India, 22—24 April 75; Weintraub, ATT, 21 April 75, 49; GSFC Wkly SSR, 17—23 April 75; educ’l attache, Indian Embassy, Wash DC, interview, 18 Nov 76)
The Soviet Union launched Prognoz 4, a 905-kg automatic station to study corpuscular and electromagnetic emissions of the sun, flows of solar plasma, and near-earth magnetic fields, to determine solar influence on the earth’s magnetosphere. The satellite’s orbit would have a 40 836-km apogee, 451-km perigee, 12 hr 16 min period, and 62.8° inclination. (Tass, in FBIS No 247, 22 Dec 75)
NASA was inviting U.S. and foreign corporations, universities, and government organizations to propose experiments for the Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May 1974) after it completed its year of service to India [see 2 July]. After the Indian experiment, Ats 6 would be moved westward to the west coast of South America where it would operate within range of North and South America and adjacent ocean areas. NASA’s announcement of experiment opportunities for the comsat’s third year of operation invited proposals in the fields of societal, communications, or technological disciplines. (NASA Release 75 — 187)
When commercial communications via satellite began with the 6 April 1965 launch of Early Bird 1, the U.S. was expected to be the prime user of the new global communications system, a New York Times article said. Experts assumed the system would be used chiefly for occasional live events such as sports, state affairs, space missions, etc. However, these uses had actually accounted for only a fifth of transglobal comsat TV volume. A number of poor and developing countries had come to depend heavily on the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s seven Intelsat comsats. Although major events were still the subject of much global TV traffic, the most extensive and consistent use of commercial comsats was for daily news. News packages were sent from one country to another. U.S. networks used almost daily satellite news reports from correspondents in various parts of the world. Spain and Mexico were linked full time by satellite. Madrid also transmitted 15 min of daily news to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Venezuela. When events warranted, these countries transmitted news to Spanish TV. France transmitted daily news to Israel, Iran, Jordan, and Martinique as well as several North African countries. News from London was transmitted daily to Australia. The ATT quoted officials of Communications Satellite Corp., U.S. manager of the Intelsat system, as saying that in 1965 the comsats carried about six TV transmissions a month for a total of less than 6 hours of programming; in 1975, the Intelsat system was handling 400 transmissions a month, more than 200 hrs of programming not including the 200 hrs a month carried on the Spain—Mexico channel. (Brown, ATT, 28 June 75, 43)
Two Boeing Co. scientists had proposed construction of a 64-million-kg solar power satellite, with 57 sq km of mirrors, to collect and concentrate solar energy, together with thermal engines to convert solar power into electricity, the Christian Science Monitor reported. A microwave transmission system would convert the electricity to a form suitable for transmission to earth. CSM quoted Boeing as saying that within 2 decades “Powersat” could provide up to 10 000 mw of useful power, twice the hydroelectric capacity of Grand Coulee Dam. (AP, CSM, 6 Aug 75, 7)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunication Satellite Organization— awarded a 12-mo $22 000 fixed-price contract to the Republic of China’s Government Radio Administration for collection and study of ionospheric scintillation data at 4 ghz, to be used as a data base for studying satellite-signal fluctuations caused by ionospheric effects. (INTELSAT Release 76-5-M) During January: Using Landsat imagery of an 85 000-sq-km region from the western edge of the Nile to the border of Libya along the Mediterranean coast, the Egyptian Academy of Scientific Research and Technology at the request of President Anwar Sadat made a study of the region’s geology, drainage, and ground water. The study resulted from problems of a rising ground-water table and salinity on newly reclaimed areas west of the Nile Delta. A copy of the report, sent to NASA by the Egyptian academy’s remote-sensing research project, said in part, “The new maps prepared from Landsat satellite images are more detailed and much more elaborate as compared to previous maps prepared by the traditional methods ... It has been possible to construct on the Landsat images 14 geological and environmental units in the investigated area . . . This work helps to decipher the geological history of northern Egypt, the Mediterranean Sea and the Nile Delta ... It is emphasized that additional irrigation waters should not be introduced in the area of investigation until detailed geological and hydrogeological studies have been carried out.” (Wkly Briefs for Administrator, 12 Jan 76)
The French government had earmarked a preliminary budget of $3.6 million for development of a spy satellite that would survey the earth’s surface with infrared cameras, the N.Y, Daily News said. Weighing several hundred kg and orbiting at 500 to 600 km altitude, the satellite would use several lenses in visible and infrared light to detect details at sizes ranging from 10 to 100 m. The government’s representative for armaments, J.-L. Delpech, said that France had “no military space policy” because reconnaissance satellites were “not essential” to France’s “deterrent strategy.” (FBIS, in French, 13 Jan 76; NY News, 14 Jan 76, 58)
The European Space Agency announced choice of payloads for its Ariane launcher L02 and L03 qualification flights scheduled between June 1979 and October 1980. Principal passenger on the L02 flight would be the recently announced Geosari satellite, with a lateral passenger, Amsat, a 70-kg radio-amateur space communications satellite proposed by a German organization affiliated with the Inti. Radio Amateur Satellite Organization. Ariane L03 would carry the India comsat Apple (Ariane passenger payload experiment), a three-axis-stabilized spacecraft weighing 616 kg that would continue experiments in the 4- to 6-ghz frequency to be performed by India in the Satellite Telecommunications Experiments Project (STEP). Mounted in the lower central portion of the launcher, Apple would bear the load of a principal-passenger satellite to be chosen by the end of the year from among a second Meteosat prototype; a flight prototype of Symphonie, Franco-German comsat; an Italian Sirio microwave comsat with a payload different from the first model (see A & A75, 10 Mar); and a Canadian CTS spacecraft equipped with a European communications payload. Nominal orbit for the L02 and L03 flights would be 35 800-km apogee, 200-km perigee, and 17.7° inclination. (ESA release 13 Oct 76)
Western Union announced that it had signed a 7-yr contract with the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB) for transmission services via the Westar satellite. Duration of the contract was a possible 15 yr. Contingent upon approval by the Federal Communications Commission, Western Union would begin 31 December 1978 to provide CPB with service on 3 fulltime fully protected transponders for $800 000 per transponder per yr, or $2.4 million annually, permitting CPB to offer national distribution of programs to 165 public-television stations through its manager, the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). The contract would give CPB an option on a fourth Westar transponder and establish rates for both scheduled and unscheduled service, and anticipated satellite distribution of radio programs to about 170 public radio stations through National Public Radio (NPR). Use of a 3- or 4-channel satellite system would serve many of the Congress’s policy goals for public broadcasting, CPB officials said: autonomy of local public stations, increased flexibility in programming, and lower cost of expanding public broadcasting coverage. (Western Union release, 16 June 76)
NASA launched Marisat 3, third and last in a series of Comsat General maritime communications satellites, from ETR at 6:44 pm EDT on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit. At seventh apogee 8:11 pm EDT 16 Oct., the apogee boost motor was fired to maneuver the satellite to a position at 36 000 km altitude above the equator at about 182°E; final move to operation location at 73°E above the Indian Ocean would take place in Nov. The spin-stabilized active-repeater spacecraft, weighing about 700 kg in orbit, was a cylinder with a diameter of about 2 m and an overall length of 3.65 m. Built by Hughes Aircraft Corp., the comsat would act as a relay station to transmit and receive information between ships and submarines at sea and shore stations. It would join Marisat 1, operating at 15°W over the Atlantic Ocean since Feb. 1976, and Marisat 2, operating at 176.5°E over the Pacific since June. (The Marisat 3 mission was judged successful 3 Nov. 1976; the Marisat 2 mission [see 9 June] had been judged successful 6 Oct. 1976.) (NASA Release 76-156; MOR M-492-205-76-03 [prelaunch] 6 Oct 76, [postlaunch] 5 Nov. 76; WStar, 15 Oct 76, A-5; MOR M-492-205-76-02, 14 Oct 76)
The board of governors of INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization—announced award of a 14-mo $2.9 million contract to the Societe Des Telecommunications Internationales du Cameroun for additional tracking, telemetry, command, and monitoring services to be provided by a new antenna collocated at Zamengoe, Cameroon, with existing standard communications and antennas. The new facilities, to be operational by October 1977, would augment service as the global satellite system became more complex, providing redundant service especially in the Atlantic and Indian Ocean areas. The contract included an option for extended service for an additional 24 mo. The Cameroon facilities had monitored Intelsat IV-A satellites since 1 April 76. (INTELSAT Release 76-23-1)
Marisat 1—first satellite of a privately owned $ 100-million system to provide rapid high-quality communications between ships at sea and shore stations—was launched on a Delta for Comsat General Corp. from Cape Canaveral at 5:32 pm local time (1032 GMT). The 655-kg craft was headed for a stationary orbit 35 788 km above the Atlantic Ocean at 15°W, about 547 km southwest of the coast of Liberia. A second satellite, Marisat B, would be stationed over the Pacific later this year. Marisat 1 carried 2 channels each about 4 mhz wide, operating in the L and C bands; one would translate shore-to-ship signals from 6 to 1.5 ghz, the other would translate ship-to-shore signals from 1.6 to 4 ghz. Ground stations at Southbury, Conn., and Santa Paula, Calif., would provide earth-satellite communications links, using 12.8-m-dia. antennas to relay tracking, telemetry, and command information between the satellites and the Comsat General control center in Washington, D.C. The U.S. government would use three UHF channels on the satellite, completely separate from the L- and C-band channels, through its own terminal facilities. The satellite system, owned and operated by a consortium headed by the Comsat General Corp., would he used by commercial shipping lines, as well as by the U.S. Navy pending completion of its own Fleet Satellite Communications System. By early April, commercial telephone, telex, and data communications would be available to link ships and offshore facilities with shore stations connected into domestic and international communications networks worldwide. Marisat mobile terminals had been purchased or leased from ComSat and installed on ships of a number of nations. (NASA Release 76-22; MOR M-492-205-76-01 [prelaunch] 26 Jan 76, [postlaunch] 13 Apr 76; ComSat Release CG 76-107; W Star, 20 Feb 76, A-6)
A vacuum test facility built near Philadelphia in 1962 by General Electric to test satellites would be used to freeze-dry most of New York City’s air-pollution control records, damaged in a 16th-floor records office on Wall Street by flooding from a ruptured check valve in the 17th-floor airconditioning system, the New York Times reported. Hundreds of thousands of cards and pages had been shipped in a refrigerator truck to Pa. to be dried before mold could form and consume the cellulose fibers in the paper. After placement in the chamber, the records would undergo a vacuum so that the water would turn into vapor, move to a condenser, and turn to ice; after being frozen and dehydrated, the papers would be rewarmed. Use of the facility would save “hundreds of thousands of dollars” and untold time in attempting to duplicate the records, the Commissioner of Air Resources said. (NYT, 29 Jan 76, 35)
The first satellite in the 2-ocean Marisat system inaugurated communications services to U.S. Navy ships. However, the scheduled 1 Apr. start of service to commercial shipping was canceled because of malfunctions in C- and L-band transmissions, involving random variations in signal strength. The Navy operations used UHF frequencies. Marisat 1 was launched 19 Feb. into synchronous orbit over the Atlantic; Comsat General Corp.—86% owner and manager of the Marisat system—said tests indicated that the problems could be solved “with respect to the [second] spacecraft” awaiting launch at ETR, in time to permit its scheduled launch 27 May for service in the Pacific Ocean. The difficulty appeared to be associated with a despun C-band triplexer, arising from loose metal particles. (Av Wk & Space Tech, 29 Mar 76, 14; Comsat 1975 rept. to stockholders, 9)
INTELSAT announced award to the British Aircraft Corp. of a 15-mo fixed-price contract for design, fabrication, test, and delivery of a model onboard processor programmable to perform a variety of tasks, including monitoring and control of satellite electronic functions. A standardized system based on microprocessors, rather than hard-wired logic, for each individual function or system would reduce weight and power consumption and increase satellite reliability and efficiency. Value of the contract was $121 600 in U.S, dollars. (INTELSAT Release 76-27-M)
Noaa 5, launched by NASA 29 July for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) into a sun-synchronous polar orbit at 1505 km, was turned over to NOAA after checkout and would become the primary operational satellite providing weather forecasters with a wide variety of environmental data. Noaa 5 would replace an earlier version, Noaa 4, which would become the backup spacecraft; an older polar orbiter launched in 1973 would be deactivated. NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service operates 2 satellite systems: one polar-orbiting, the other consisting of 2 geostationary satellites remaining in the same relative position to earth’s surface at all times. The polar-orbiting craft would scan any spot on earth twice every 24 hr and return visual and infrared imagery of cloudcover, sea-surface temperature, and other environmental indicators. (NOAA Release 76-199; MOR E-601-76-17 [postlaunch] 1 Oct 76; telcon, NOAA PAO, 5 Oct 76)
A Titan III-C rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center at 2:55 am local time (0755 GMT) carried into stationary orbit at about 36 000 km 2 experimental nuclear-powered comsats for the U.S. Air Force; 23 min later, the Navy’s Solrad 11-A and 11-B riding piggyback on the same rocket were sent toward an orbit more than 120 000 km up and at opposite sides of the earth, where they would monitor solar flares that disrupt communications and navigation systems on earth. The Air Force’s Les—8 and Les—9 were designed to guard against space jamming of U.S. military communications; spokesmen said the satellites were “right on the money” but would undergo various tests before they began their experimental message traffic. (NYT, 17 Mar 76, 39)
NASA launched Palapa 1, first of a series of Indonesian comsats, into a synchronous transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 7:31 pm EDT on a Delta vehicle. Orbital elements were 36 504-km apogee, 231-km perigee, and 24.6° inclination. At the 10th apogee, the boost motor was fired (4:30 pm EDT on 11 July) and the spacecraft was maneuvered into a position above the equator at about 83°E. Satellite status was reported satisfactory. The satellite’s name came from a 14th-century prime minister, Gaja Mada, who vowed not to eat a popular delicacy called palapa until Indonesia was united. The 8 July launch date was selected to ensure that the satellite would be operational on 17 Aug., when Indonesia celebrated its 31st anniversary of independence. Produced by Hughes Aircraft, the Palapa satellites would be identical to the Telesat Canada and Westar satellites except for antenna modifications; each satellite could relay 12 color TV channels or up to 4000 telephone circuits. A second Palapa was scheduled for launch in 1977. (NASA Release 76-117; MOR M-492-208-76-01, [prelaunch] 24 June 76, [postlaunch] 14 Oct 76)
U.S, failure to renew the Indian government’s access to the ATS satellite relaying birth-control and agricultural information to 2400 villages might intensify tensions between Washington and New Delhi, the Baltimore Sun said in an editorial. An alliance of U.S. scientists and environmentalists had already protested the sale to India of uranium for a power station near Bombay; the group had asked the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to require India to demonstrate that the substance would not be used to make bombs, as India had done in 1974 with plutonium derived from Canadian material supplied for a joint atomic-energy project. Combined with Ford Administration efforts to use development aid to force India into a more friendly posture, the Sun said that withholding advanced technology used by India for humanitarian purposes would create “an unnecessary blur” between humanitarian and development aid and would exacerbate rather than relax existing tensions. (B Sun, 6 Mar 76, A-12)
Comsat General Corp. announced an agreement with ARCO—the Atlantic Richfield Co.—to install a Marisat terminal on the S/S Arco Prudhoe Bay, a tanker commissioned in Baltimore in 1971, to evaluate satellite communications with an eye to equipping other Arco ships if the new medium should prove reliable. The tanker would transport crude oil from Alaska to U.S. west-coast ports, and communications via satellite would be valuable during periods when the aurora borealis (northern lights) made high-frequency communication difficult. Comsat facilities had been installed previously on 15 commercial vessels; the Marisat system would be the 16th, and would begin operations in commercial service about 1 April. (Comsat Release 76-105)
NASA launched Marisat 2, second in a series of ComSat maritime communications satellites, at 8:09 pm EDT from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle, into a transfer orbit with apogee of 36 924 km, perigee of 185 km, and 26° inclination. The apogee boost motor fired 11 June would put the spacecraft into a 36 000-km-altitude synchronous orbit at 176°E over the Pacific. Marisat was designed to transmit voice, data, facsimile, and telex messages to and from ships at sea, through special stations in Conn, and Calif, interconnected with existing domestic land networks; initially, the system would be used by the U.S. Navy, until its requirements terminated in the late 1970s. The cylindrical satellite, weighing 655 kg at liftoff and 317 kg in orbit, measured 2.1 m in diameter and was 3.6 m long. Like Marisat 1, which had been operating over the Atlantic since its launch 19 February, it carried 3 UHF channels for government use, activated or deactivated by ground command, and 2 4-hz channels operating in the L- and C-bands respectively to carry ship-to-shore and shore-to-ship signals; the full ship-to-shore capacity would always be available independent of government use of the UHF channels, which would use separate receiving facilities. (NASA Release 76-83; MOR 492-205-76-02 [prelaunch] 7 June 76, [postlaunch] 14 Oct 76)
The European Space Agency announced that its exhibit at the Famborough International Aerospace Exhibition in Sept, would include a full-scale model of the Spacelab, to be exhibited for the first time in Rritain to give the British public a better idea of Europe’s space activities and to extend contacts with science and industry. ESA’s exhibit would also include full-size models of Meteosat and the OTS comsat, plus a tenth-scale model of the Ariane launcher. British firms were prime contractors for the OTS (orbiting test satellite) scheduled for launch in 1977 and for the maritime satellite Marots to be launched early in 1978. (ESA release 19 Aug 76)
A simple device to reorient an orbiting satellite toward the earth stations with which it would communicate had been used successfully on Satcom 1, RCA-owned comsat launched by NASA in December 1975. Patented by two engineers at the RCA Electronics Div. in N.J., the new equipment took advantage of the gyroscopic effect of a wheel normally rotated to stabilize a satellite in synchronous orbit; only a simple start signal from the earth could activate it. Previous systems needed precision controls involving delicate sensors and thrust motors manipulated from the ground. Satcom 1, in synchronous orbit at about 35 000-km altitude, had been rotated 90° by the new system to point its instrumentation at the earth; it would begin regular transmission in March. (ATT, 21 Feb 76, 31)
The Communications Research Centre (CRC) of the Canadian government’s Communications Department in Ottawa announced successful demonstration of a new satellite-aided search-and-rescue concept that could reduce time, fuel-dollar, and other costs associated with conventional ways of finding downed aircraft. The demonstration was funded by the Canadian Department of National Defence. The project, begun in May 1975, used the Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation’s Oscar 6 satellite with simulated distress signals to show that crash sites in Canada—and elsewhere in the world—could be pinpointed with accuracies as good as 1.6 km, generally within 3 km, in as little as 15 to 20 min after the spacecraft first heard the signal. The conventional emergency locator transmitter (ELT) mandatory for aircraft in Canada and the U.S. would automatically signal on crash impact, as designed, providing a signal on the international distress frequency of 121.5 hz for at least 100 hr for search-and-rescue aircraft to home into. The search range until now had been within 50 km of a crash site, flying crisscross patterns involving many planes and dozens of costly as well as risky flying hours. The satellite system would depend on two things: highly precise orbit predictions (knowledge of the satellite’s exact position at any instant) and sophisticated computer processing of distress signals relayed to a ground station. The system works by measuring the Doppler shift in the ELT signal frequency as the satellite at about 1100 km altitude passes over the crash site; locations of about 60 “crashes” simulated by transmitters as far away as Winnipeg had been fixed by processing Oscar 6 signals with increasing degrees of accuracy. An operational system would include 3 satellites with a design lifetime of 7 to 10 yr, with total spacecraft and launch costs about $30 million. When the satellite nearest to a crash site appeared over the visible horizon, it would alert ground stations that it had received an alarm; 15 min later, at the conclusion of its pass, an immediate fix accurate within 112 km would be possible, and a position fixing the site within 3 km would be delivered within 2 to 15 min depending on the capacity of the computer. A $3 million annual cost over 10 yr would be only a small part of what Canada was now spending on aerial searches. (CDC release 8 June 76)
The 26-m “Venus dish” at NASA’s Coldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calif., normally used to communicate with interplanetary spacecraft, was serving as a research tool to study conversion of solar energy from satellites to electricity for use on earth, Goldstone researchers reported. In the tests, the big antenna represented an energy satellite collecting and converting sun energy into microwaves; more than a km and a half away, a set of receiver panels called a “rectenna” played the part of a ground station. The 7.6-m-high receiver panels contained more than 4500 aluminum T-shaped rectenna elements about 100 mm high, working like a TV antenna to gather and filter the microwave energy, converting it to AC or DC that could be fed directly into a utility. Results had been promising, with collection and conversion of mierowave beams to usable electricity at an efficiency of 82%. (NASA PAO, 76-H-685, caption)
The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) reported 1975 net income of slightly more than $46 million, compared to nearly 145 million for 197 4, attributing the increase to additional leasing of circuits to the corporation’s customers—3833 at the end of 1975, compared to 3510 in 1974. The report noted the FCC decision of 4 Dec. 1975 ordering lower rates for services provided through ComSat’s global system, and warned that the decision would have “a substantial adverse impact” on future earnings unless modified by judicial review. ComSat had appealed the ruling and delayed filing a schedule of lower rates. (ComSat Release 76-3)
NASA-funded studies conducted in Fla. and Tex. using infrared images from NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service had provided fruit and vegetable growers with timely information on ground temperatures during periods of crop-killing freezes, NOAA announced. The images, provided every half hour by Goes 1 from its equatorial station over South America at 35 800-km altitude, were transmitted from heat-radiation sensors to ground stations for conversion to visual imagery. The Fla. study used a computer to display the temperature variations in shades of gray, verified by ground readings taken in the area by Univ. of Fla. personnel. The Texas study converted the satellite data to typewriter characters that produced a remarkably similar printout, transmissible over teletypewriter machines, more widely available than photofax equipment. Both studies aimed at helping growers decide whether to undertake expensive steps to keep crops from being damaged by frost; heating orchards in Florida might cost up to $5 million per night. (NOAA Release 76-257)
The official Manila radio announced an agreement between Domestic Satellite Philippines and the Nippon Electric Co. of Japan for acquisition, installation, and construction of 11 earth-satellite stations in a $26 million satellite communications system, to be operational by 1978. The system would provide long-distance service in the national communications network. (FBIS, Manila FEBC in English, 5 Oct 76)
India’s second artificial earth satellite would be launched in 1978 from a USSR cosmodrome, Tass announced. The agreement had been made at a Moscow meeting of a working group of Soviet and Indian specialists. (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 Apr 76)
Two Landsats, launched in 1972 and 1975 to monitor earth resources, had been tested for the job of census taker by NASA and the Bureau of the Census, NASA announced. Public Law 521, signed by President Ford 18 Oct. 76, required a complete U.S. census every 5 yr instead of once every 10 yr; the satellites, if their performance in 1980 in regional readouts and verifications should prove satisfactory, would permit significant savings in manpower, the Bureau said. Landsat images, although not detailed enough to count people or houses, could serve to identify geological, agricultural, and societal features, especially residential patterns of growth. Satellite images of areas of Md. and Tex. had been processed in 1975 to identify land cover typical of transition from rural to urban use; conventional census boundaries overlaid on the images enabled a computer to identify urban fringe zones in the test areas, verified by actual census statistics, the Bureau said. (NASA Release 76-176)
San Marco C-2, launched from the San Marco platform 18 Feb. 1974 into an elliptical orbit to record day-by-day variations in the equatorial atmosphere’s density, composition, and temperature, was declared a success after 2 3 mo in orbit during which it obtained more than 17 diurnal cycles of data. The data had been correlated with data from Explorer 51 (AE-C) in studying the physics and dynamics of the thermosphere, and these studies would continue as more data from the two satellites were processed and analyzed. Two U.S. scientific instruments were still operating normally, but the Italian air-drag balance instrument (which malfunctioned shortly after launch) had not performed properly. (MOR S-894-74-04, 30 Jan. 76)
NASA launched ITOS-H, fifth operational spacecraft of the second-generation improved Tiros operational satellite (ITOS) series, from the Western Test Range at 1:07 pm EDT (10:07 am PDT, local time) on a 2-stage Delta vehicle into a synchronous polar orbit with 1523.6-km apogee, 1512.5-km perigee, 102.1° inclination, and 116.2-min period. After successful injection into orbit, the satellite was redesignated Noaa 5; upon completion of in-orbit checkout, spacecraft control would be transferred to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) as part of that agency’s National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (NOMSS). Of 4 previous Noaa polar-orbiting spacecraft, 2 still provided limited information but had deteriorated after 2.5 and 1.5 yr in orbit respectively because of harsh environmental conditions in space. ITOS spacecraft were designed to provide complete global coverage of earth’s cloudcover and atmospheric structure on a daily basis, using both daytime and nighttime instrumentation. The 345-kg boxlike spacecraft measured roughly 1 x 1 x 1.25 m and carried 3 winglike panels covered with solar cells, as well as earth-orientation devices and 4 communications antennas. Sensor systems included 2 vertical-temperature profile radiometers, 2 very high-resolution radiometers, and 2 solar-proton monitoring systems, as well as a scanning radiometer system to provide both stored picture coverage for transmission on demand and direct transmission of images to receiving stations within range. Visible-channel resolution was 3.7 km, infrared resolution 7.4 km. (NASA Release 76-130; MOR E-601-76-17 [prelaunch] 28 July 76, [postlaunch] 30 July 76, 1 Oct 76; NOAA Releases 76-143, 76-152)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) reported net income for the third quarter of 1976 of $7 607 000, down from last yr’s third-quarter net of $11 837 000. The decrease was the result of amounts placed in escrow under an FCC accounting and refund order of 16 June 1976; if the order had not been in effect, the quarter’s net would have been $14 603 000. Although operating income dropped as a result of the escrow requirement, the wholly owned Comsat General Corp. for the first time had realized revenues for the entire period from both Marisat and Comstar programs; in the third quarter a yr ago, the subsidiary had reduced ComSat’s net operating income by a penny per share. Operating expenses, including taxes, were $30 223 000 for the quarter, up from $24 997 000 for the third quarter of 1975; the increase was due to costs of the launches of Intelsat IV-A, Marisat, and Comstar satellites. ComSat’s gross operating revenues for the third quarter of 1976 totaled $36 260 000, an increase over last yr’s third quarter total of $35 116 000; the escrow requirement had prevented the gross revenues from increasing more than $ 15 million over last yr’s third quarter with the beginning of Marisat and Comstar services and continued growth in the number of circuits leased to customers of the Intelsat global communications system. Half circuits leased at the end of Sept. 1976 numbered 4129, a 16% increase over the 3547 leased at the end of Sept. 1975. Money put in escrow under the FCC order represented the difference between customer payments to ComSat under present rates, and the amounts based on lower rates that would be required under an FCC rate decision of 4 Dec. 1975. The rate decision was still under judicial review. (ComSat Release 76-16)
INTELSAT (International Telecommunications Satellite Organization) announced that its board of governors, meeting in Washington 21-28 July, had approved the loan of a cesium ion thruster to NASA under a 1-yr no-cost arrangement, for use in research on inert gases (argon and xenon) as propellants for auxiliary propulsion in spacecraft and ground-based applications. Like the nickel-hydrogen battery for the Navy’s navigation-technology satellite to be launched later this year and an echo canceller to be licensed for use in satellite communications, the INTELSAT thruster was developed under a series of contracts managed by COMSAT Laboratories at Clarksburg, Md. It had exhibited higher electrical and propellant efficiency than other thrusters of comparable size. (INTELSAT Release 76-22-M)
The Communications Satellite Corp. reported net income of $11 041 000 for the first quarter of 1976, compared with $12 692 000 for the same period of 1975. Although total income of $37 276 000 for the first quarter was 2% higher than that for the same period in 1975, higher depreciation charges associated with the launch of additional satellites— Intelsat IV-A F-l and F-2, and the first Marisat—and higher operating costs, together with expenses of operating Satellite Business Systems—a partnership formed by subsidiaries of ComSat, IBM, and Aetna— accounted for the reduction in income. ComSat had appealed the FCC decision of 4 Dec. 75 reducing its rates, and FCC had delayed the effective date of the lower rates until the court had ruled on the appeal. (ComSat Release 76-7)
Photographs from U.S. remote-sensing satellites had revealed the existence of water, oil, uranium, and other minerals in the Egyptian Sahara and the Sinai peninsula, the Washington Post reported. Egyptian scientist Ahmed Abdel Hady, head of an Egyptian-American scientific team in charge of a remote-sensing project that had been receiving data from satellites since 1972, said in an AP interview that the satellites revealed enough water in the Sinai desert “to turn most of it green.” (Most of Sinai was still occupied by the Israelis, who seized it in 1967.) The Egyptian government, working in cooperation with Okla. State Univ. and the Univ. of Mich., had an annual budget of $1.2 million for study of the untapped resources, Abdel Hady said. Although the satellite data had shown that highlands in northern Sinai and the coastal strip of Wadi el Arish, totaling more than 770 km“, concealed a huge water potential, he declined to go into details because “I don’t want to make it difficult for Egypt when it negotiates the next Israeli pullout.” However, he described photographs of an area about 1350 km" in Sinai that showed three different areas rich in petroleum and natural gas: the Gulf of Suez, with oil reserves already proven; the Mediterranean offshore area in northern Sinai, not yet explored; and a large area in southern Sinai marked by sedimentary rocks carrying natural gas. Uranium was also detected in northwest and southern Sinai, and west central Sinai contained huge amounts of silica that could lead to a glass industry, Abdel Hady said. Besides the desert potential, he added, the images also showed significant food-growing potential in a previously unnoted fertile area measuring about 965 km~ near the Nile basin; the images were also used to study the Qattara Depression in the desert west of the Nile, site of a huge proposed hydroelectric project. (W Post, 13 June 76, G-2)
Leadership of Europe’s comsat programs had gravitated toward the U.K.—“more by accident” than by design, said an ESA official—since prime contractorship for those programs had fallen to Britain’s Hawker Siddeley Dynamics within the European consortium known as MESH (Matra of France, ERNO of W. Germany, Saab-Scania of Sweden, Aeri-talia of Italy, and Fokker-VFW of Holland). Current programs included OTS, the orbital test satellite scheduled for launch in 1977 to evaluate items for an operational European telecommunications system; Marots, to be launched in 1978, an experimental maritime comsat; and ECS, the European comsat that ESA hoped to fly in the early 1980s. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that potential markets worldwide for prime-contractor capability had become so numerous that MESH had divided marketing responsibilities among its members according to their influence in various regions, HSD being strongest in Arab League areas and in Africa. An HSD official noted that Europe was ahead of the U.S. in three-axis stabilization and in higher frequencies for satellite communications; demonstration of effective project leadership would assure future success in the world market. (Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 96) Japan’s Natl. Police Agency announced that Belenko was the 15th Soviet national to seek protection in Japan with a view to taking political asylum in some other country; of the previous 14, 11 went to the U.S. and 1 each to Italy, Israel, and West Germany. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFB in English, 6, 7 Sept; Tokyo Kyodo in English, 6, 7 Sept; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 25; W Post, 7 Sept 76, A-l)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization— announced award of an $8840 contract to the Univ. of Oulu, Finland, for measurements of low-elevation-angle scintillation. The 1 -yr contract covered investigation of the slow fluctuation in received-signal strength from a satellite to earth stations in humid localities, at elevation angles of 5° above the horizon. Water vapor in the lower atmosphere could cause fluctuations in signal strength, intensified where the look-angle from station to satellite is as low as 5 °, causing the signal to pass through more of earth’s atmosphere than if the elevation angle were greater. (INTELSAT Release 76-21-M)
A radio sensing system deployed by the federal government in remote areas of the U.S. since the spring of 1975 to warn of impending natural disasters had already passed one test, reported David S. Johnson, director of the National Environmental Satellite Service. An impending flood upstream from the town of Deming, Wash., had been detected by the sensors, and the river had crested an inch above its flood stage as predicted. The radio sensors, attached to transmitters, collected and relayed data from NOAA geostationary satellites (Goes 1, watching the East Coast, and Sms 2 watching the Pacific Coast); the satellites relayed the information to NOAA computers in the World Weather Building at Suitland, Md. Initial work on the system began in the 1960s, and it was already operational. By summer of 1976, 150 to 200 sensor stations would be in place; a total of about 10 000 would eventually be situated to warn of floods, earthquakes, forest fires, or tidal waves that began in unfrequented areas. The system could also be used for keeping track of ships at sea or of trucks on the highway. (B Sun, 26 Feb 76, A—1; NOAA Release 76-32)
Scientists at Mass. Institute of Technology, using NASA’s Sas 3 x-ray astronomy satellite, found a stellar object unlike any other and were unable to say what it was. The discovery, located by Dutch astronomers in the center of the galaxy in the constellation Sagittarius, gave off x-ray bursts that were unevenly spaced, although pulse after pulse proved to be identical. The object might be a single new source or a combination of old ones, but its distance was millions of light years and the source might be nonexistent now, the investigators said. (W Star, 1 Feb 76, A-6)
The Aerosat Space Segment Board, representing the European Space Agency, Comsat General Corp., and the government of Canada, decided to issue requests for proposals for a supply of Aerosat spacecraft beginning 1 Mar., with target date for award of contract 15 Nov. The Aerosat program, to be carried out by ESA, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, and the government of Canada, would set up an experimental satellite-communications system between transoceanic aircraft and the ground to tesffunctions and timing of an operational system for the International Civil Aviation Organization. Two satellites designed for 7-yr lifetime would be launched into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean, probably in 1979-80. (ESA release 23 Jan 76; Comsat General Release 76-103)
At the request of the Soviet Union, U.S. satellites took pictures of the predicted bumper crop of grain in the USSR and turned the pictures over to that country to confirm the predictions, said presidential science adviser Dr. H. Guyford Stever at a White House briefing. The Russians had announced 5 Nov. that more than 220 million metric tons of grain had been harvested; U.S. Dept, of Agriculture officials said the final figures would probably exceed 1973’s record Soviet harvest of 222.5 million tons. (NYT17 Dec 76, A-4)
The Brazilian Telecommunications Company received bids from international firms to supply space tracking equipment to the Brazilian satellite communications system, according to a broadcast from the Brasilia Domestic Service. The announcement said the first stage of the domestic satellite system, to be concluded in 1979, would consist of 17 receiving and transmitting stations primarily in the Amazon region, and two space satellites; a third would be used for replacement. During a second phase ending in 1981, 19 more stations would be added. The system would consist of 44 stations in all, the last eight to be added later. (FBIS, Brasilia Domestic Service in Portuguese, 6 Oct 76)
Ithaco Inc. of Ithaca, N.Y., a space-industry subcontractor specializing in low-orbital unmanned-satellite electronics, had discovered a lucrative and largely untapped agricultural market by turning its expertise on animal electronics: specifically, a new device first marketed 19 mo ago to help farmers determine whether their pigs were pregnant and to preview the quality of porkchops the hogs would produce. The device would let farmers determine pig-pregnancy status 50 to 60 days earlier than previously possible, meaning substantial savings for breeders, company officials said, adding that the market would not be attractive to a large company. Overseas farmers accounted for up to 40% of “Scan-oprobe” sales, which totaled $3.8 million for the 1976 fiscal year, best in the firm’s 14-yr history. Ithaco would not abandon its space contracts, the company said, but employees who worked on intricate satellite parts could be switched over to the “animal electronics” contracts. (ATT, 15 Dec 76, A 16)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organizationawarded an 18-mo $275 000 fixed-price contract to TRW Systems, Inc., for a skewed reaction-wheel thruster attitude-control and stabilization system. A system based on the reaction-wheel principle would offer a combination of fight weight, high reliability, and accurate performance for future comsats. External disturbances of satellite stability would be canceled by spinning up the reaction wheels to create offsetting torques, then stopping the spin by use of thrusters. (INTELSAT Release 76-4-M)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced opening of a new ground station near Michelstadt/Odenwald, West Germany, that would include two 15m-dia parabolic antennas that would be operational for the launches of ESA satellites Geos and Meteosat in 1977. Geos, first geostationary scientific satellite, and Meteosat, Europe’s first meteorological satellite, would remain in uninterrupted contact with the Odenwald station because of their geostationary orbits. The two antennas represented an innovation in the field of telecommunications, ESA said, because of a special construction: To avoid mutual interference with ground-to-ground links operated by the W. German post office, the special construction resulted in an exceptionally low sidelobe level heretofore unattained, without reducing the station’s telecommunications performance. The station would be inaugurated 14 Sept, by Hans Matthofer, German minister for research and technology, and Roy Gibson, ESA’s director general. (ESA release 13 Sept 76)
Tass reported from Moscow the launch of Intercosmos 16, carrying scientific apparatus developed in the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, and Sweden, as well as in the USSR. Orbital parameters were said to be 523-km apogee, 465-km perigee, 94.4-min period, and 50.6° inclination. The probe was to study ultraviolet and x-ray radiation from the sun and the effects of this radiation on upper-atmosphere structure. Observatories in Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR, and Czechoslovakia were making ground observations of the sun simultaneously with measurements taken aboard the satellite. (FBIS, Tass in English, 27 July 76)
Goes 1, a new geostationary environmental satellite launched in Oct. 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), became operational, replacing Sms 1 above the equator over northern Brazil to provide forecasters with visual and infrared pictures of the western hemisphere, to monitor solar-flare activity, and to relay information from data-collection stations in remote areas. Sms 1 would be moved to standby status over the eastern Pacific south of Mexico; a prototype satellite, some of whose systems have degraded, it could still provide full operational data on an emergency basis. Sms 2, launched in Feb. 1975, was moved in Dec. from 115°W to 135°W to provide improved imagery of the Pacific in the Hawaiian Islands area. (NOAA Release 76-1)
NASA announced establishment of a joint working group with the Agency for Inti. Development (AID) to explore further cooperative programs upon successful completion of the AIDSAT project. Final demonstration of AIDSAT came 30 Oct. in Haiti. NASA’s Ats 6 satellite showed people in 27 developing nations how space could improve their way of life, using small portable transmitter-receiver units to broadcast high-quality color TV directly to low-cost receivers in remote areas. Programs consisted of both filmed and live portions: on film, viewers saw a message from President Ford, followed by one of three films produced by NASA on communications technology, remote-sensing satellites (like Landsat), and prediction and relief in natural disasters. The live segment contained two half-hour programs; the first, originating in the host country, showed officials describing technological challenges and current efforts to meet them, and the second was a two-way question-and-answer session between senior officials in the host country and experts in Washington, D.C., discussing education, health, agriculture, and similar national concerns. Millions of viewers had seen what in many instances were the first color TV broadcasts in the host country. (NASA Release 76-189)
Comsat General Corp. signed an agreement with the Water Resources Division, U.S. Department of Interior’s Geological Survey, to conduct a 6-mo joint evaluation of the use of satellites to transmit data from remote hydrological sensors to a central facility. Comsat General would provide 11 small data-collection platforms to receive and transmit the data via satellite to a central receive facility. The DCPs would be located near Survey sensors in the continental U.S.: 5 in the Pacific Northwest, 5 in eastern Pa., and one near Survey headquarters at Reston, Va. Central receiving station would be the ComSat station at Southbury, Conn., where the data would be stored on magnetic tape and accessed by the Survey on interconnecting terrestrial lines. The program would provide a chance to evaluate collection of environmental data by satellite under operational conditions; it would begin later in 1976 and conclude within 6 mo, subject to FCC approval. (ComSat Release CG 76-112)
Symphonie 2, the Franco-German telecommunications satellite that drifted out of its normal geostationary orbit late last month, was gradually repositioned by using its cold-gas stabilization system, Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported. French and German space technicians determined that the malfunction was caused by a still unidentified defect in one of 4 valves feeding the exhaust nozzles of the satellite’s hot-gas stabilization system. Transmissions normally handled by Symphonie 2 were shifted to Symphonie 1 while the repositioning went on; both satellites were reported working normally again. (Av Wk, 28 June 76, 11)
Interavia magazine printed a photograph of Dora, a solar, generator being manufactured by AEG-Telefunken under contract to the German Institute for Space Research to provide power for 1980s communications satellites. Dora was designed as a “variably deployable array,” meaning that it could begin its service life partially deployed; unfurled gradually at intervals, it could maintain a constant output over the years. It could also be folded down and brought back to earth at the end of a Spacelab mission. It consisted of two 22- by 2.8-m array panels carrying 46 000 solar cells. (Interavia, June 26, 504)
Communications via satellite was a science-fiction writer’s dream 30 yr ago, but within 2 decades after Arthur C. Clarke predicted it, the first comsat—Early Bird, launched 6 Apr. 1965 into synchronous orbit— began Operations 28 June 1965 and opened a new chapter in communications history. In an article in the Telecommunications Journal, Santiago Astrain, secretary general of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), viewed the past 10 yr, up to the new Intelsat IV-A, largest operational comsat to date. The brief history of INTELSAT summarized the organization’s development from 1960, when President Eisenhower called for the creation of a global communications system; after the United Nations passed a resolution supporting the concept, the U.S. Congress passed the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 that brought the Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) into being. On 20 Aug. 1964, 11 countries (representing 85% of the world’s telecommunications traffic) created an international consortium to be managed by ComSat on an interim basis. On 12 Feb. 73, the Definitive Agreements were signed; by the time they took effect, the number of member nations had increased to 80. Membership was open to all countries that were members of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU); any country, whether or not a member of INTELSAT, could have access to the system on a nondiscriminatory basis. Current planning was geared to meet a traffic demand for capacity to handle about 70 000 telephone channels by 1984; this would represent a 6-fold increase within 10 yr. Intelsat V satellites due to enter service in 1979 would provide more than 23 000 channels. As INTELSAT had the object of providing high-quality communications service, its policy had been to maintain a “spare” comsat in each ocean to make additional capacity always available; this had enabled the organization to provide domestic services at a reasonable cost. Since operations began in 1965, the number of countries actually participating in operations had increased from 5 to 64; the number of earth stations, from 5 to 90; and the number of antennas, from 5 to 115. (Telecommunications Jl, vol42, 672-677)
The Soviet Union would use artificial satellites and manned orbital stations to investigate dynamic processes in the ocean during the new 5-yr plan period, Tass reported. Soviet oceanologist Leonid Brekhovskikh in an interview forecast a growing number of experiments conducted jointly with other countries, among them a “polymode” experiment with the II .S. to study the nature of huge vertical formations in the ocean discovered by Soviet scientists in 1970. The USSR also planned a global satellite experiment called “pigap” for concurrent study of dynamic processes in the atmosphere and the ocean. (FBIS, Moscow Tass, U 1, 29 Jan 76)
The USSR launched Intercosmos 15 on 19 June, a Tass broadcast announced, as an example of “socialist countries’ cooperation” in space research. The spacecraft orbital parameters were 521-km apogee, 487-km perigee, 74° inclination, and 94.6-min period. Intercosmos 15 was designed to “test new systems and units,” including a telemetry system developed and manufactured with the participation of specialists from Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the German Democratic Republic, as well as the USSR. Satellite data would be transmitted to receiving stations in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and the GDR. (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 June 76)
INTELSAT—the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization— awarded a 9-mo $75 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for development of improved vibration-test techniques for testing future Intelsat spacecraft, leading to reduced spacecraft weight and a lessening of spacecraft fatigue. (INTELSAT Release 76-1-M)
NASA announced that LeRC, the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Navy, and the Natl. Weather Service had successfully completed in Alaska a 3—wk demonstration of an all-weather ice-information system developed in response to a Congressional request to see if the Great Lakes could be kept open for shipping all year. Cargoes reshipped because their barges had been iced in or turned back by weather had incurred additional transportation costs estimated at between $30 and $50 million in 1975 alone. The demonstration—performed along the western and northern coasts of Alaska, a region having serious shipping problems caused by thick ice 60% of the time-—used a Coast Guard plane equipped with NASA’s side-looking airborne radar to obtain daily microwave imagery similar to black-and-white photography, that revealed the type and distribution of ice in any kind of weather regardless of dense cloudcover. The data on coastal shipping were relayed through a Goes satellite by way of Wallops Island to LeRC; after processing, the images were sent back through Canada’s CTS satellite to Alaska for the Navy’s ice interpreters to use in making navigation charts for vessels moving in offshore ice. The system had been used in the Arctic to aid the Coast Guard icebreaker Glacier in operating through ice in zero-visibility conditions. Use of the system had helped to keep the Great Lakes open for shipping for two full seasons for the first time in history, at an estimated saving of hundreds of millions of dollars each year; the 1976-77 shipping would be the third and final year of demonstration. (NASA Release 76-165)
Switzerland and the U.K. became the first 2 countries to sign a protocol authorizing the European Space Agency to “undertake the exploitation phase” of its meteorological satellite Meteosat. The agreement, signed in Paris, would remain open until 30 September for signature by the other participants (Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden) and for other countries to participate. Meteosat, being developed for ESA by the Cosmos consortium with Aerospatiale (France) as prime contractor, was one of four current ESA applications programs; it covered the design, development, construction, launch, management, and control of a preoperational satellite. ESA’s responsibility for checking out Meteosat in orbit for the first 6 mo after launch (scheduled for the third quarter of 1977) would be extended by the protocol to include the subsequent 2.5-yr “exploitation phase” of the satellite to be carried out with meteorological authorities in the participating countries. Other ESA applications programs were OTS (telecommunications), MAROTS (maritime communications), and Aerosat (air traffic control). (ESA release 23 June 76)
The USSR launched the second operational satellite in its Statsionar 1 series, also known as Raduga (Rainbow), into a circular orbit at 35 900-km altitude, 0.3° inclination, and 1436-min period, Tass announced. Carrying retransmitting equipment for continuous telephone and telegraph communications, Raduga would also transmit color and black-and-white TV programs to Central Asia and Siberia. (UPI in NYT, 14 Sept 76, 28; Sf Mar 1977, 117)
Geos 3, the geodynamics experimental ocean satellite launched 9 Apr. 1975, completed 9 mo in orbit and the project was judged successful with respect to the prelaunch mission objectives. Problems with orbit definition and revised criteria for data distribution had delayed the release of large quantities of data, said a report by Charles W. Mathews, Associate Administrator for Applications at NASA, but the first batches would be shipped 30 Jan. to principal investigators, and subsequent batches would be released monthly thereafter. (MOR E-855-75-01 [postlaunch], 25 Feb 76)
The USAF launched an early-warning satellite from Cape Canaveral at 11 am EOT on a Titan IIIC. The satellite—product of the TRW/Aerojet Defense Support Program—was reported to be a replacement for a satellite launched 14 Dec. 1975 that malfunctioned. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 35 600 km; perigee, 35 600 km; inclination, 0.5°; period, 1433 min. DOD, which had 10 launches in 1975, had launched 7 so far in 1976. (SBD, 29 June 76, 6-F)
The French government halted operations of sounding-rocket and scientific satellite launchings from its base at Kourou, French Guiana, after 7 yr of activity that included launches of 275 rockets or balloons, many of them under U.S. government or National Science Foundation programs. The base had become a victim of European economic problems that had led to the abandonment of ELDO—the European Launcher Development Organization formed by several countries in July 1966—when the first launching in 1971 failed. The head of the operations division at Kourou said there was a complete lack of coordination among the countries, although France and its partners had spent about $500 million on the site and support facilities at Kourou. Space research would resume in about 4 yr with the launch of a 3/4-ton telecommunications satellite sponsored by the French government, under a new system in which each project would be under the management of one country. Ten European governments would contribute money, and the funds would be allocated in the form of contracts for each project. (W Post, 11 Jan 76, E 7)
ESA announced acceptance of the first solid-propellant apogee boost motor produced in Europe—designed and made by SNIA-Viscosa of Italy in collaboration with SEP of France—for use in its Geos (geostationary scientific satellite). The motor, measuring 1.1 m long with maximum diameter of 0.7 m, weighed 305 kg, more than the remainder of the spacecraft, and would serve to inject the satellite into geostationary orbit from the elliptical transfer orbit provided by a Thor-Delta launch vehicle. The satellite was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral in April 1977. (ESA release 9 Nov 76)
ESA announced that its council meeting in Paris 16 and 17 Dec. had approved a new program, Earthnet, in which ESA would centralize and coordinate European activities in reception, processing, distribution, and archiving of earth-resources satellite data. Earthnet would give European users access to data from NASA programs such as Landsat, Seasat, Nimbus-G, and the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission, to provide a basis for defining European requirements for future remote-sensing satellite programs. Earthnet would be integrated into existing data-reception and processing facilities at Fucino, Italy, and would use ESA’s computerized data center at Frascati, Italy, with an information-retrieval network RECON to disseminate information on the data available. (ESA release 21 Dec 76)
Cloud-brightness images from orbiting satellites would enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to predict the difference between relatively “dry” hurricanes and destructively wet ones such as Agnes (1972), Fifi (1974), and Eloise (1975), said Dr. Neil Frank of the Dept, of Commerce’s National Hurricane Center. For years, said Dr. Frank, meteorologists had known that some hurricanes were wetter than others, with those having highest potential rainfall also highest in damage over land. A new technique would estimate hurricane-rainfall potential from cloud images calibrated with computer models of river-basin flooding; the technique would be “a predictive tool” for inclusion in hurricane warnings. Heavy rains from Fifi in 1974 caused one of the worst natural disasters of the Western Hemisphere when heavy rains brought unexpected flash flooding that killed thousands in and around Honduras. Besides killing 118 people, Agnes caused an estimated $2.1 billion in property damage from torrential rains and flooding; Eloise caused an estimated $200 million in property damage, again mainly from rain-caused flooding. The satellite technique was used retrospectively to estimate the rainfall from 7 hurricanes for which radar and rain-gauge measurements were available; results disclosed little or no relationship between the volume or intensity of a storm and its rainfall. However, the rainfall potential calculated by the new procedure for the 7 hurricanes in the study agreed well with actual experience. Although estimates obtained through the new technique were relative, not absolute, the NOAA scientists viewed the procedure as a valuable tool for developing nations, an inexpensive system to monitor rainfall and improve the meteorological basis of agricultural and water-management planning. (NOAA Release 76-158)
Intelsat IV-A F-2, second in a series of improved commercial comsats, was launched from Cape Kennedy on an Atlas-Centaur at 6:56 pm EST (2356 GMT) into a transfer orbit at about 31 000-km apogee, aimed at a station over the Atlantic Ocean at 29.5°W which it should reach by April. Working as a backup to Intelsat IV-A F-l, the newly launched spacecraft would provide almost two thirds more communications capability than previous Intelsats, by increasing the number of transponders from 12 to 20 and by using an improved antenna system that permitted frequency reuse by beam separation. The east-pointed am used for transatlantic service would illuminate Europe and Africa; the same 320-mhz bandwidth would be reused in the west beam aimed at North and South America, doubling the usability of the frequency and the satellite’s capacity. The cylindrical spacecraft was about 7 m high and 2.38 m in diameter, with a solar panel about 2.8 m long; liftoff weight was 1515 kg, and in-orbit weight 825.5 kg. (NASA Release 76-8; MOR E-491-63 3-7 6-02, 12 Feb 76 [prelaunch], 25 Feb 76 [postlaunch])
NASA announced plans to launch a second maritime satellite (Marisat) for the Comsat General Corp. later this month, as part of a system to provide communications to the U.S. Navy, commercial shipping, and offshore industries. The first satellite of the system, Marisat 1, was successfully launched 19 Feb. into an orbit over the Atlantic at 15°W longitude, where it had provided UHF service to the Navy since 25 Mar. NASA hoped to inaugurate fulltime commercial voice and data communications, using both Marisats, by 1 July. A third satellite had been constructed as a spare. (NASA Release 76-83)
Three satellites making simultaneous investigations of earth’s magnetic field had confirmed that long low-frequency waves spreading the disruptive effects of magnetic storms on earth had been generated far out in space by energetic particles from the sun, NOAA announced. Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, Calif., earlier in Dec., Dr. Joseph N. Barfield of NOAA, R.L. McPherron of UCLA, and W.J. Hughes of London’s Imperial College reported the waves might have practical uses in exploring for oil and minerals, and in aiding undersea communication with submarines, which now had to surface to make contact. Environmental satellites Sms 1 and Sms 2, with research satellite Ats 6, in geosynchronous orbit on a line along the earth’s equator, had carried magnetometers used to detect the low-frequency waves passing each satellite in a predicted order, the first use of multiple spacecraft to make such measurements simultaneously. Confirmation of the theory also identified the point of origin as the magnetosphere and the existence of a “resonance region” that amplified the wave frequency. The region was described as about 1200 km thick. (NOAA Release 76-281)
JSC announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Co. for negotiations leading to award of a contract, valued at about $970 000, funded by NASA and ERDA for the study of space-based solar-power systems. The 12-mo two-phase study would provide specific data on the most effective way to convert solar to electrical energy using satellites, and would determine where in space the various phases of a solar-power satellite should be constructed and assembled; the second phase would define weights and costs of a satellite system. The project would aim at providing uninterrupted energy beamed to earth from large satellites in fixed orbits at altitudes above 35 000 km. (JSC Release 76-69)
Aeronutronic Ford Corp. would probably win a $250-million contract to build Intelsat V, the next generation of seven global comsats owned by INTELSAT (the 94-nation Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization), said the New York Times. Scheduled for launch starting in 1979 to expand message-handling capacity of the INTELSAT network, particularly across the North Atlantic, Intelsat V would be first to use both a spatial separation technique used on Intelsat IV and a cross-polarization technique used on two ComSat domestic satellites leased to American Telephone & Telegraph and the General Telephone and Electronics Corp. INTELSAT’s board at its July meeting chose Aeronutronic for final negotiations over Hughes Aircraft, which had build all but one of the preceding generations of Intelsat spacecraft; other competitors eliminated earlier were TRW Systems (which had built one previous generation of the Intelsats) and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. All the competitors had selected West European or Japanese subcontractors. Unlike previous Intelsats, which were cylinders coated with solar cells, Intelsat V’s would be boxlike containers with flat solar-cell panels stretching from each side like windmills; weighing nearly a metric ton apiece, the spacecraft would be stabilized by a 3-axis system similar to those used on the Franco-German Symphonie satellites over the Atlantic Ocean, and on the U.S. domestic satellites built and operated by RCA. Each Intelsat V would carry 27 signal-transmitting transponders with capacity of 12 000 two-way telephone conversations, compared to 6000 through Intelsat IVA and 4000 through Intelsat IV; each satellite would also transmit color TV. Intelsat V would replace Intelsat IVA which had replaced the Intelsat IV, seven of which were in orbit above the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans. (NYT, 10 Aug 76, 37)
The 1976 summer Olympic games at Montreal 17 July-1 Aug. were the most widely telecast event in history, INTELSAT announced, having been viewed by more than 1 billion persons according to press estimates. Record use of the global system for satellite coverage included more than 930 transmissions during the games, more than 70 telecasts on some days. During peak periods satellites transmitted as many as 5 programs simultaneously across the Atlantic Ocean. The global television coverage used 2 Intelsats over the Atlantic, 1 over the Pacific, and 1 over the Indian Ocean; the 4 satellites sent 2585 half-channel hours of Olympic and related transmissions, more than twice the number of hours of the 1972 Olympics at Munich. Teleglobe Canada, the Canadian communications authority that arranged for the global services, used earth stations at Lake Cowichan, B.C., and Mill Village, N.S., as well as a transportable station at Montreal; other transmissions went through ComSatCorp’s Andover, Me., ground station. (INTELSAT Release 76-24-1)
The council of Intersputnik—the International Organization for Cosmic Telecommunications—ended its fifth meeting in Berlin after 4 days of deliberations. Attending were delegations from Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR; also attending were observers from the Inti. Organization for Radio and Television (OIRT), Intercosmos, and the Standing Commission for Post and Telecommunications (CEMA). The meeting adopted documents on the use of technical installations for transmitting TV, radio, telephone, telegraph, pictures, and data by satellite. (FBIS, ADN Inti. Service in German, 20 Sept 76)
NASA announced selection of Western Union Telegraph Co. and RCA Global Communications, Inc., for competitive negotiations leading to award of a single contract to provide tracking and data-relay satellite services (TDRSS) to support earth-orbiting spacecraft for 10 yr beginning in 1980. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage procurement of two relay satellites in synchronous earth orbit, plus groundterminal facilities to be located at White Sands, N.M. The system would support all of NASA’s scientific, applications, and manned spacecraft missions in earth orbit up to 5000-km altitude, including Space Shuttle, Spacelab, and the automated spacecraft which the Shuttle would insert into orbit in the 1980s. TDRSS, when fully operational, would provide coverage over 85 to 100% of each orbit as compared to a present average of 15%, and permit closing down many government-owned ground stations and leased communications circuits now needed to support earth-orbiting satellites in the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN); portions of the latter system would be retained only for synchronous satellites and those in higher altitude elliptical earth orbits. (NASA Release 76-158)
NASA announced that its Nimbus 6 weather satellite would be monitoring the cross-country progress of a 1914 Dodge participating in the Bicentennial world antique auto race that began 15 June in Istanbul, Turkey, and wound through 11 countries in Europe. Having crossed the Atlantic by ship, the four entrants—all American—were scheduled to rally
ESA announced award to European industry of two study contracts, one to define a large (about 900 kg) technological and experimental satellite in geostationary orbit, the other to define the communications payload for such a satellite. The 4-mo contracts, each valued at about $450 000 U.S., went to groups headed by Engins Matra and SNIAS of France for the spacecraft, and to a group headed by Germany’s AEG-Telefunken for the payload. The new satellite would be designed for launch by ESA’s Ariane, possibly on the fourth development flight scheduled for Oct. 1980; it would flight-test equipment and techniques as forerunner of a large platform carrying various communications payloads for direct and semidirect television and sound broadcasting and for propagation experiments in the 20- to 30-ghz range. The new system would differ from ESA’s OTS in offering new services required by countries without elaborate ground communications and broadcasting installations; it would carry four or more high-power TV channels for direct home reception, besides providing low-cost facilities for national telecommunications through small “thin route” terminals. (ESA release 1 Dec 76)
The European Space Agency announced selection of General Electric Co. to produce and launch two satellites for the Aerosat program [see 8 Sept.], saying that the GE bid was “significantly below” that of the other two contenders, the RCA Corp. and TRW Inc. A GE spokesman estimated the value of the contract at $60 million, half to be spent in the U.S. and half to go to a consortium of foreign companies known as the Cosmos Group, which had formed a bidding team with GE. (NYT, 11 Sept 76, 33)
Information from space satellites orbiting more than 900 km above the earth was being regularly evaluated in U.S. attempts to measure crops in the Soviet Union, the Peoples Republic of China, and other countries, officials of the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture said. The information had been incorporated with other data in a project known as the Large-Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) that had been going on since 1974 and would be completed by mid-1978. The disclosure of crop-watching appeared in a weekly issue of Foreign Agriculture published by the department’s Foreign Agricultural Service. {W Star, 30 Aug 76, A-5)
The Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that the Assembly of Parties meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, had confirmed the appointment of Santiago Astrain of Chile, since 1973 the secretary general of INTELSAT, as the first Director General of the international organization. The board of governors had appointed Astrain in July to serve a 6-yr term as Director General, beginning 31 Dec. 1976. The Director General would be responsible for implementing permanent management arrangements and for tasks such as implementing a new high-capacity satellite system to be known as Intelsat V in the late 1970s and early 1980s. About 200 delegates, representing 69 of INTELSAT’s 95 member countries, attended the Nairobi meeting. Elected were a chairman, Isaac Omolo Okero of Kenya, and a deputy chairman, Fernando Gaviria of Colombia. Vice chairmen elected to represent the five world regions were Romulo Villar Furtado of Brazil (The Americas); Joachim Jaenicke of the Federal Republic of Germany (W. Europe); Zika Ra-dojlovic of Yugoslavia (E. Europe and N. Asia); and Sribhumi Sukhanetr of Thailand (Asia and Australasia). The meeting also recognized the People’s Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of China, and welcomed the PRC to join INTELSAT. (INTELSAT Releases 76-28-1, 76-29-1; Satellite Pathways, ComSat, vol. 1 no. 7, Sept-Oct 76)
NASA announced plans for a 3-mo demonstration this summer of using Ats 6—known as the “teacher in the sky”—to help some of the world’s poorest people boost food production, improve health and nutrition, expand family planning, and raise income levels, through applications of remote sensing, space communications, and high-resolution aerial photography. The program, a joint effort of NASA and the Agency for International Development, would consist of both filmed and live portions broadcast to as many as 30 countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. AID would provide $3 million to finance the demonstration. At a UN conference in Nairobi 6 May on trade and development, Secretary of State Kissinger emphasized the use of satellite technology to improve cooperation between industrialized and developing nations; depending upon the response to the broadcasts, AID would be prepared to propose to Congress a long-range follow-up technology program. Ats-6 was completing a year-long program of instructional television for India; upon completion of this mission 31 July, NASA would move the satellite to a location over the Western Hemisphere where it would beam audio or audiovisual presentations in black and white or in color to special receivers on the ground. AID officials and NASA specialists would set up one transmitter-receiver unit in the capital of each participating country, and up to 5 receivers in outlying locations; each receiver terminal would be equipped with color-television monitors. The live portion of the demonstration would feature 2-way discussions between U.S. personalities and representatives of the recipient countries; a local program would be developed in the host country to demonstrate the communications abilities of the ATS. NASA would be responsible for moving the equipment from country to country and for operation of the satellite and associated equipment. (NASA Release 76—101)
An environmental satellite operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had used its capability of measuring ocean temperatures to help fishermen on the Calif, coast find tuna and salmon. A pilot project using satellite imagery to locate areas of “upwelling” off the coast—areas where cold nutrient-rich water would rise from the bottom to the surface—had shown that these areas were favored by the fish, and the fishermen could save time and fuel by using the data to locate them. NOAA’s polar-orbiting satellite passing over the coast twice daily would use visual and infrared sensors to relay data including sea-surface temperatures to earth, where images of thermal fronts indicated upwelling areas. The fronts transferred to navigation charts would be available to fishermen at northern Calif, ports. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service conducted the research through a NOAA-supported sea grant program at Humboldt State Univ.; the technique would be applicable to fishing industry in many parts of the world. (NOAA Release 76-10)
India and the Soviet Union had reached agreement on coordinating their satellite systems, said the Indian news agency Samachar, as reported by the Foreign Broadcast Information Service. The agreement resulted from a recent visit to Moscow by a team of experts from India’s Ministry of Communications and Department of Space. The problem arose because of possible interference between the proposed India domestic comsat Insat, to be placed in geostationary orbit over the Indian Ocean, and existing or proposed satellite systems of the USSR. The aim of the talks was to ensure avoidance of satellite interference through discussion of the technical aspects of the systems, including the distance between satellites. Satellites already in operation in that area included those of the Inti. Telecommunications Satellite Organization, Indonesia, and others. (FBIS, Delhi Patriot, Dec 26/76, 1)
The NY Times reported an announcement by Hughes Aircraft Company that Telesat Canada had chosen it to negotiate a contract for a new generation of Anik comsats operating at frequencies of 12 and 14 billion cycles per second, to replace in the 1980s the 4- and 6-billion-cps now the standard for national and international communications systems. The higher frequencies would ease radiocommunications crowding in 22 300 mile altitude equatorial orbits, and would expand the number of satellite-communications channels to approach the number available on terrestrial microwave and cable links. Telesat Canada, which had operated that country’s domestic comsat system since 1972, said that two rival companies—RCA’s Astroelectronics Div. and GE’s Space Division—remained in the running with Hughes for award of the contract, which could go as high as $50 million. RCA had built the Satcoms used by the U.S., and GE had built a direct-broadcast comsat for Japan. The NYT said the electronics industry had been watching the competition closely because the same three companies had been vying to build 3 data-transmission satellites for Satellite Business Systems in the U.S. (NYT, Aug 17/77, 49)
A NASA earth resources monitoring satellite, Landsat 1, had experienced a malfunction in band 1 of its multispectral scanner on Mar. 3, AvWk reported. Although the malfunction affected only band 1 (a green spectral band identifying sunlight reflected from green plants), NASA had shut down the entire scanner pending a safety investigation by controllers. Landsat 1 had performed satisfactorily since its 1973 launch. (AvWk, Mar 14/77, 16)
NASA launched from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle the second in a series of three communications satellites for use by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, into an orbit with 35,797km preliminary apogee, 35 777km perigee, 1436.2min period, and 2.6° orbital inclination. The cylindrical Nato IIIB spacecraft had a covering of solar cells for power generation and was gyrostabilized, providing stability for the antenna system which would counter-rotate to point to the earth at all times. All active communications components were redundant, having an identical backup part on board. After fifth apogee, about 48hr after launch, firing of an apogee motor would put Nato IIIB into a circular synchronous orbit at about 35 900km altitude, where its onboard reaction-control system would take it to a predetermined location. The U.S. Air Force’s satellite-control facility would operate these activities on behalf of NATO, which had funded three Phase III comsats built by Ford Aerospace to replace the Nato II satellites in the NATO integrated communications systems. (NASA Release 77-5; Spacewarn SPX-280; Sf Satellite Digest, July-Aug 77, 298)
INTELSAT reported that the Peoples Republic of China on Aug. 16 had become the 98th member of the organization. Peking’s Administration of Long Distance Telecommunications had signed the operating agreement, making the PRC the 28th Asian nation to join INTELSAT. China, which had used INTELSAT since 1972, currently had 3 ground stations, 2 near Peking and 1 near Shanghai. It currently operated 23 full-time satellite circuits on the INTELSAT system and was using TV capacity on an as-needed basis. (INTELSAT Release 77-20-1)
The Pentagon had been working on an interceptor spacecraft capable of knocking Soviet satellites out of orbit, DOD officials told Congress. The Washington Post reported that the program, begun under President Ford, had aimed at producing weapons to protect U.S. space systems from attacks by foreign satellites. (WPost, Mar 30/77, A-8)
NASA launched Palapa 2 (formerly Palapa-B), an Indonesian telecommunications satellite, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral on a Delta at 2316 GMT, into a transfer orbit with 36 499km apogee, 231.2km perigee, and inclination of 24.6°. Palapa 2, second Indonesian domestic comsat, would use its apogee kick motor Mar. 12 to move into synchronous orbit above the Indian Ocean. Forty ground stations throughout the archipelago would link the islands with the 2 satellites, each capable of handling 4000 phone calls or 12 simultaneous color TV channels. (MORs M-492-208-77-02, [prelaunch] Feb 2/77, [postlaunch] Apr 12/77; NASA Release 77-23; FBIS, Jakarta Domestic Service in Indonesia, Mar 11/77)
ESA and Canada’s Centre for Remote Sensing (CCRS) announced they had signed an agreement to cooperate in studying remote-sensing applications, developing microwave remote sensing, and improving ground stations for processing satellite data. (ESA release, Mar 21/77)
NASA announced that GSFC and Marshall Space Flight Center would join the USAF in solving a yrs old problem of comsat makers and users: flying in a synchronous orbit at about 34 500km (22 OOOmi) altitude, the comsats routinely encountered electrically charged particles from the magnetosphere that built up static electricity on the spacecraft surface, causing arcing that could damage solar-power cells and thermal insulation, interfere with signal transmission, and switch spacecraft functions erroneously. The joint project called SCATHA (satellite charging at high altitudes) would obtain specific data on the phenomenon. The USAF planned to launch a satellite in Jan. 1979 to study electrostatics at geostationary orbit. MSFC would provide 3 light ion-mass spectrometers to measure speed, temperature, and density of low-energy ions and detect their points of origin. GSFC would provide two instruments, one to measure space electric fields, the other to measure space magnetic fields. (NASA Release 77-183; MSFC Release 77-164)
NASA announced it had used Landsat, the earth resources monitoring satellite, to inventory irrigation systems in Nebraska. The 12 000 central-pivot irrigation systems proved easily recognizable by their circular shape in photos from Landsat’s 1480km-altitude orbit. Annual inventory of the irrigation systems had become necessary when the number of central-pivot sites increased by 40 to 60% each yr, affecting property values, land use, and fuel and water allocation. Landsat had proved the cheapest way to acquire an accurate and timely inventory. (NASA Release 77-38)
NASA announced it had agreed with the St. Regis Paper Co. in N.Y. to use the Landsat for monitoring from 900km (560mi) commercial timberlands owned by the company over a 5-state area in Fla., Ga., Ala., Miss., and La. St. Regis would use the satellite data to manage its timberland. JSC would manage development of an automatic system for classifying forested areas, to identify kinds of trees, estimate timber volume, and detect changes in health or growth of the forests, combining the new system with existing data from aerial photography and ground surveys. Software and techniques from this first major undertaking between NASA and a private company would be in the public domain, to benefit other forest-resource managers. Past cooperative uses of Landsat had been between NASA and other U.S. or foreign government agencies. (NASA Release 77-226; JSC Release 77-73)
GSFC controllers and Navy meteorologists at the U.S. Navy Fleet Weather Facility in Suitland, Md., had used since 1971 a microwave radiometer on weather satellite Nimbus 5 to track an Antarctic iceberg the size of Rhode Island, NASA reported. Satellite tracking had allowed Navy forecasters to minimize ice damage to ships in polar ice fields. (NASA Release 77-68)
NASA announced that Det Norske Meteorological Institute in Oslo, Norway, had asked that the Nimbus 6 satellite help it track a huge oil slick resulting from an oil well blowout in the North Sea. By May 16 the Norwegians would put 5 random-access measurement-system (RAMS) buoys into the oil slick to send environmental information to the spacecraft. Goddard Space Flight Center engineer William W. Conant, noting that similar buoys earlier this year had helped the U.S. Coast Guard track an oil slick off Nantucket Sound, said NASA would support the Norwegian effort by transmitting locations of all the buoys twice daily for 30 days, adding “We don’t normally provide daily teletype information.” For more than a yr, the Norwegians had been tracking ice drift in the Spitzbergen region north of Norway, using a RAMS system as an accurate method of tracking in all weather. (NASA Release 77-30)
NASA announced it would join EPA and the Univ. of Md. in sponsoring a conference on the use of remote sensing to solve Chesapeake Bay ecological problems. The 80 participants would discuss use of satellites (particularly NASA’s earth resources monitoring satellite Landsat) to obtain information on land use, resources exploitation, and pollution. (NASA Release 77-70)
NASA might undertake a Cosmic Background Explorer satellite program, AvWk reported. The satellite would examine the character of cosmic background radiation claimed by many scientists to prove the big-bang theory of the universe’s formation. (A v Wk, Mar 7/77, 11)
Reductions made by the House subcommittee on defense appropriations in funding for the defense satellite communications system (DSCS) and the USAF/Navy Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) program would force the DOD to lease its communications channels from commercial carriers, AvWk charged. The subcommittee had eliminated the DOD’s entire $60-million request for R&D funds to proceed with a contract awarded in Feb. to General Electric for a qualification model and two flight-demonstration DSCS-3 satellites. It also had denied money for a fourth and fifth FltSatCom satellite to be built under a contract awarded to TRW in 1972; the Navy had been leasing capacity since March 1976 on the Marisat system managed by Comsat General. The subcommittee, headed by Rep. George Mahon (D-Tex), had advocated continued leasing despite DOD testimony that leasing would be more expensive, and had refused the funds requested for two other DOD satellite systems: it had rejected outright DOD’s international global-positioning system to be built by Rockwell, and had reduced the $83.2 million requested by the USAF for a Hughes-built satellite data system by more than half, postponing procurement of a fifth spacecraft. (AvWk, June 6/77, 60)
A yr-long (Dec. 1978-Nov. 1979) international program of global atmospheric research using Soviet and U.S. satellites would attempt to construct a model of the atmosphere, Tass reported. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 29/77)
The Dept, of Commerce announced that 2 oceanographic research ships and 4 aircraft had scanned the Gulf of Mexico during Oct. to demonstrate measurement of ocean properties using satellite-borne instrumentation. Dr. Warren Hovis, director of NOAA’s satellite experiment laboratory, said the program was a preliminary to launch in 1978 of the Nimbus-G with a coastal-zone color scanner. The joint NASA-NOAA tests had used aircraft equipped with models of the scanner to record data that could be confirmed by surface measurements taken on the ships. (NOAA Release 77-265)
Dr. Albert Rango of GSFC and Dr. K.I. Itten of the Univ. of Zurich announced that orbiting earth satellites could monitor winter snowpacks and their runoff as accurately as ground-based or airborne observations, NASA reported. Their findings appeared in the journal Nordic Hydrology. Comparing costs and relative accuracy of ground, airborne, and satellite measurements, the two scientists decided that the use of NASA’s Landsat earth resources monitoring satellite and the Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s environmental satellite Noaa 2 would provide timely and accurate information at lower cost than the alternatives. (NASA Release 77-52)
Strategic arms limitation might suffer another blow, the Washington Post said in a column by Victor Zorza, from the USSR’s test of a killer satellite viewed by the U.S. as a new weapon intended to deactivate U.S. observation satellites if and when the Soviets decided to launch a first strike. Zorza noted that current agreements did not cover hunter-killer satellites; by the time a new agreement was reached, both powers might have passed another point of no return in the arms race. (W Post, May 11/77, A21)
The Netherlands had “finally decided” at the end of 1976 to join the U.S. and ESA in financing a second astronomy satellite (IRAS, the infrared astronomy satellite), but not all its citizens were enthusiastic over the anticipated expense, said a report in Nature magazine. Starting with a preliminary definition study in Jan. 1975, followed by 13 proposals for experiments in response to a NASA announcement, a U.S. study team of 11 astronomers had begun discussion with Dutch colleagues on the scientific program and had reached agreement at the beginning of 1976. NASA had expected signing of a memorandum of understanding between the U.S. and the Netherlands by July 1976; the Dutch government had agreed in principle in July, but it had taken 6mo to find the money for the project. The U.S. and the Netherlands would each pay about 110 million guilders, and the United Kingdom Science Research Council, which had taken active part in the U.S.-Dutch negotiations, would contribute 10 million guilders. Plans were to launch IRAS from the Western Test Range in the spring of 1981, to trace and map about 10 million infrared sources. Dutch associations of scientific workers had protested in 1974 against further space activity, especially in behalf of underdeveloped countries lacking means to take advantage of such effort. (Nature, Jan 20/77, 202)
The Communications Satellite Corporation announced that its earth stations in Andover, Maine; Etam, W.Va.; and Jamesburg, Calif., had operated with two TV channels in each of four Intelsat satellites to transmit coverage of President Jimmy Carter’s inauguration to about 70 countries around the world. Total transmit-receive time for the satellite TV coverage was 61-1/6 half-channel hr. The European Broadcasting Union (EBU), the U.S. Information Agency (USIA), the Armed Forces Radio and TV Service, and other organizations had reached audiences in both western and eastern Europe through the ComSat network. Countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia, and Australia had seen inaugural events transmitted either live or on film and videotape news services transmitted by the satellites. (ComSat Release 77-8)
NOAA reported that airline passengers between Miami and Latin America could enjoy smoother flights because of satellite weather images. Lineas Aereos Nicaragua (LANICA) and 8 other carriers were sharing Goes 2 weather photos of the area from the southeastern U.S. into South America, including all of the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea. A LANICA official said that, until now, the airlines had little idea of the location of storms; now they could avoid them, or use the windflow to save time and fuel. (NOAA Release 77-247)
Comsat General Corp. announced that the U.S. Navy had agreed to extend its use of three Marisat satellites for an additional 2.5yr, ending in 1981, at a cost of about $138 million [see During June]. The Navy had begun using the Atlantic Marisat in March 1976, the Pacific satellite in June 1976, and the Indian Ocean satellite in Jan. 1977. Each of the three Marisats had a design life of 5yr and could operate in three frequencies: UHF (ultrahigh frequency) for Navy service, and the L-band and CJband for commercial maritime users. The Navy had leased all UHF capacity in all three Marisats for communications between its own fixed and mobile terminals. The Marisat system was owned and operated by four companies under a joint-venture arrangement approved by the Federal Communications Commission: Comsat General, which acted as system manager, with nearly 87% ownership; RCA Global Communications; Western Union Inti.; and ITT World Communications. (Comsat General Release CG 77-3; WSJ, July 29/77, 6)
Telesat Canada expected to award contracts in Nov. 1977 for three commercial telecommunications satellites, the Wall Street Journal reported. The new comsats would use higher frequency bands than the three Telesat Canada satellites now providing television, telephone, and message communications throughout Canada. First of the high-frequency comsats would be delivered early in 1980 and launched later that yr. (WSJ, Feb 15/77, 3)
Pressures from inside and outside the scientific community might result in restricting the freedom of inquiry that had enabled science to flourish since the Renaissance, the annual meeting of the Am. Assn, for the Advancement of Science heard. Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times that a session on the role of science as the key to man’s political future had as discussion leaders George W. Ball, senior director of Lehman Bros, investment bankers; Lord Zuckerman, former chief science adviser to the British government; and Charles J. Hitch, president of Resources for the Future, Inc., of Washington, D.C. The panel cited controversies in the Cambridge, Mass., city council over regulating use of genetic material in that city’s research laboratories; the Calif, legislature’s proposal to regulate research on genetic hybrids; and other attempts to control the directions of research. The panel expressed the feeling that checks and balances within the scientific community should be able to deal with such problems, and said that misgivings about “too much knowledge” harked back to prehistoric and classical times when mankind feared probing into nature’s secrets. Although restraints on export of equipment and knowledge might delay the spread of nuclear weapons, Ball noted that the only real control would be “to create a climate where nations don’t find it [nuclear weaponry] useful.” (NYT, Feb 23/71, B-4) The satellite, a 1.41m-diameter cylinder 93cm long, carried a transmit-ter/receiver and five small rockets for attitude control, orbital shift, and speed adjustment. At about 6:45 pm local time, the satellite (called Kiku 2 in orbit) reached an elliptical transfer orbit with 191km perigee and apogee of about 36 000km, the altitude at which it would go into synchronous orbit within a few days. Its synchronous station would be at 130°E over Indonesia, the announcement said. This was the third satellite orbited by the agency and the tenth by Japan. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 23/77; NYT, Feb 25/77, A7; CSM, Feb 24/77, 2) NSDA officials announced Feb. 25 that Kiku 2 would change orbit a day early, on its seventh pass over the Indian Ocean, as data from tracking stations in Japan and on Christmas Is. had confirmed its success in elliptical orbit. The satellite would reach station by March 5 if all went well, the announcement said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 25/77) The NY Times carried a Feb. 26 item from Associated Press confirming that “Japan’s first experimental stationary satellite” had shifted to a circular orbit. (NYT, Feb 27/77, 7) NSDA announced Feb. 27 that Kiku 2’s apogee motor ignited at 2:32 pm local time on Feb. 26 to move the satellite from an elliptical to a circular orbit with apogee of 35 756km and perigee of 34 034km, close to preflight predictions and fast enough to permit drift to its permanent station over Indonesia at 35 800km altitude. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 27/77)
NASA announced it had reached an agreement with the Navajo Tribal Council in Ariz. for a 2-yr project to use Landsat data for an automated resource inventory of the 16-million-acre reservation in the southwest U.S. The tribe had asked NASA whether satellite and aerial remote sensing could help solve inventory and multiple-use management problems including range rehabilitation, timber, agriculture, harvest prediction, and wildlife counts. Phase one of the project would demonstrate how Land-sat data could apply to specific tribal needs and changes in resources; phase two would include training of tribal personnel and setting up an operational system at Navajo headquarters. The Navajo would assist other tribes to realize the benefits of satellite information systems. (NASA Release 77-223)
Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency planned to launch 2 satellites in 1978 to replace missions that failed during 1976, AvWk reported. Scheduled for Feb. 1978 was an ionospheric-research mission to replace an identical craft that malfunctioned in orbit in March 1976. An x-ray research satellite similar to a mission that failed during launch Feb. 4, 1976, might lift off in Aug. or Sept. 1978. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 26)
TROPEX, an international tropical weather experiment sponsored by the Soviet Union, would use USSR satellites with research vessels from some of the 70 participating countries to gather data on atmospheric conditions, the FBIS reported. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 22/77)
The Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced plans to use a new tool—satellite pictures—in establishing hunting regulations for Canada geese and other arctic-nesting game birds. Wildlife managers in Canada and the U.S. would use imagery from the Noaa 5 polar-orbiting satellite, showing snow and ice conditions in traditional nesting areas too remote for on-site inspection, to monitor habitat conditions. Identification of probable areas of castastrophic or outstanding goose production would enable managers to impose restrictions to prevent overkill of birds or to bring the populations to levels suitable for hunting. Factors affecting the nesting of arctic geese would include the timely disappearance of snow and ice, and availability of melt water to allow rearing of young; late seasons or adverse weather could prevent nesting or reduce clutch or brood sizes. (Dept, of Commerce/NOAA Release 77-13)
NASA launched the Navy’s Transat spacecraft at 9:52pm PDT from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle into an orbit with 600.7nmi apogee, 572.6nmi perigee, 89.9° inclination, and 106.9min period. The spacecraft, a modified Transit navigation satellite, would join 5 others in a system being used by U.S. Navy and other ships for global navigation, as the first to carry 2 modified transponders with a capability called Satrack to support Trident (fleet ballistic missile) development. Built by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, Transat would receive, translate, and relay NavStar global-positioning signals simulating a Trident missile in flight, to evaluate Satrack procedures before using them in Trident test flights and to check out Satrack processing at JHU/APL. NASA had agreed with DOD in Jan. 1970 to launch Scouts, carrying 15 Transit satellites and 3 Transit Improvement Program (TIP) satellites so far, the Navy to reimburse NASA for the launch vehicles, launch services, and mission support. The Transit system normally operated 5 satellites, with 2 on standby. (Langley Researcher, Nov 28/77, 2; MOR M-490-601-77-03 [prelaunch] Sept 30/77) NASA’s launch participation was judged successful as of Nov. 8-10. (MOR M-490-601-77-03 [postlaunch] Nov 15/77) •
The U.S. Dept, of Defense had begun development of plans to wage war in outer space, the Washington Post reported, and had contracted with six manufacturers to study ways of letting its satellites sound an alarm if approached, sound another alarm if attacked, and defend itself from an enemy satellite that approached too close. Quoting “knowledgeable sources . . . close to the Pentagon,” the Post said the USSR’s resumption last year of hunter-killer satellite testing after a 5yr hiatus had caused growing concern over the threat of war in space. The Pentagon presently had at least a dozen comsats in orbit linking U.S. military bases, ships, and aircraft around the world, and another dozen navigation satellites to guide Navy surface ships and submarines. A killer satellite launched by an enemy could knock out the entire U.S. defense communications system within a wk, according to the Post account, and the Pentagon had considered putting an entire array of comsats in orbit and turning off their radios until needed: “With their radios off,” said a source, “the opposition couldn’t track their radio beacons. And if they can’t track them they can’t find them.” No one had forecast a war in space within the next lOyr, the Post added, but the Pentagon planned to be prepared after that. Asked if the U.S. could fight a war on earth today if it had lost its satellites in space, a source replied: “Not successfully.” (W Post, Jan 10/77, A-26)
INTELSAT announced that Paraguay had become the 97th member of the organization on July 18, and the 22nd nation in the western hemisphere to join. Paraguay’s ANTELCO (Administracion National de Telecomunicaciones) had signed the operating agreement. Created in 1964, INTELSAT claimed to provide more than half the world’s transoceanic telecommunications and domestic communications for 9 countries through its global satellite system. (INTELSAT Release 77-19-1)
Earth-orbiting satellites had improved forecasts of water availability and warned of impending low water supply as a valuable tool to water management agencies in Arizona, California, Colorado, and Oregon, NASA announced. Other cooperating agencies included the U.S. Geological Survey, the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, and the Bonneville Power Administration. The 4 states had begun a combined 4yr operational program using NASA Landsat earth resources satellites and Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites to produce imagery of the snow lines along the Sierra Nevada that was faster and less expensive than conventional aerial surveys. Satellites also offered repeated mapping of the same snow cover area with a relatively constant perspective. A continuing drought in the western U.S. had resulted from below-normal snowfalls in the mountains, source of stream flow water supplies; ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 ORIGINAL PAGE [8 OF POOR QUALITY Landsat images of the same area of the Sierra Nevada show the difference in snowcover between Feb. 1975 and Feb. 1977. The 1977 snowline was 2000ft higher than in 1975, ayr of near-normal snowfall. Lake Tahoe is in the center of both pictures. (NASA 77-H-225, -226) reservoirs on the western slopes of the mountains had already dried up. Some areas had experienced drought for a longer period than others; Calif, had been hardest hit, with minimal snowfall in the Sierra Nevada for the second consecutive yr. (NASA Release 77-91) * ESA announced it had completed a revised program of switching on and testing the Geos satellite launched Apr, 20, since a malfunction of the launch vehicle had prevented the spacecraft from achieving its intended geostationary orbit. The 7 experiments were reported operational, and the two 20m booms had been extended to 2.5m without difficulty. Although the satellite could transmit 8hr of data a day, only half would be outside 5 earth radii (where the experiments had been designed to operate). The booms should deploy fully during the upcoming wk; the journal Nature called for prompt launch of the backup Geos. (ESA anno May 6/77; Nature, May 5/77, 8; May 12/77, 100)
NASA launched the ESA Meteosat at 8:35pm EST from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle into a synchronous transfer orbit with 37 001km apogee, 147km perigee, and 27.5° inclination. The apogee boost motor fired at 1:19 pm EST Nov. 23 to begin maneuvering it to a position on the Greenwich meridian at 0° longitude above the equator, where it would provide long-range forecasting coverage to Europe, the Near East, and Africa for at least 3yr. The cylindrical craft 3.2m long and 2.1m in diameter weighed 697kg at launch and 300kg in orbit; its payload was a telescope radiometer to observe earth and cloud formations, providing relay and transmission of meteorological data. The World Meteorological Organization had set up a chain of 5 such satellites, 1 European, 1 Soviet, 1 Japanese, and 2 U.S. Besides transmitting to user stations the data from a center at Darmstadt, West Germany, Meteosat would relay Atlantic Ocean images from the U.S. Goes. (NASA Release 77-230; MOR M-492-102-77-01 [prelaunch] Nov 16/77, [postlaunch] Feb 28/78; KSC Spaceport News Nov 11/77,1; ESA releases Nov 3/77, Nov 16/77, Nov 23/77)
NASA announced that, because of recent flight and checkout problems, it had revised the launch schedule of its Delta rockets: GOES-B, June 16; GMS (Japan’s meteorological satellite), July 14; Sirio (Italian comsat), Aug. 11; OTS/ESA (comsat), Sept. 8; ISEE-A/B, Oct. 13; Meteosat (ESA metesat), Nov. 3; and CS (Japanese comsat), Dec. 12. (NASA Release 77-123)
Av Wk reported the Inti. Telecommunications Union’s frequency board had distributed to its 100-plus member nations the technical details of a USSR plan to launch 7 geostationary Volna satellites for global maritime and air communications service. Members questioning possible interference with existing or projected systems had until Jan. 9 to respond. The 7 spacecraft would work in separate systems: numbers 2, 4, and 6 would each operate in 4 frequency bands, 2 allocated exclusively for mobile maritime service and 2 for mobile aeronautical service. Numbers 1, 3, 5, and 7 would also use these bands, plus a 240-400mc band now used by the US Navy for its maritime service which the Volnas would use for land-mobile service. The Volna proposal did not include fixed shore terminals, although USSR officials had said the system would be a national rather than international system. {AvWk, Nov 14/77, 20)
The quality of information from the Voyagers would greatly surpass that of earlier missions, said Philip Abelson in Science magazine. “A decade ago the level of knowledge concerning the planets and their satellites was such that almost any arm-waving explanation would fit the facts. This is no longer true.” Citing the potential of 5 of the 11 instruments, Abelson noted the Voyager cameras could “achieve a resolution and observing time at Jupiter better by a factor of 40 than those of the Pioneer spacecraft. . . . The radio infrared, visible, and ultraviolet instruments can all participate in a mutually reinforcing fashion.” (Science, Sept 9/77, 1858)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced it would award to a British company, AERE Hartwell, a 15mo $71 540 fixed-price contract to develop low-pressure, nickel-hydrogen power cells that would use a lanthanum-alloy member both as hydrogen reservoir and as negative electrode. Use of lanthanum would lower pressure in the cells, reduce the heat dissipated during discharge, and reduce the volume of cell density. If successfully developed, the cells would operate at a maximum pressure of about 6 atmospheres and would have a minimum life of 500 charge-discharge cycles when used in synchronous-satellite applications. (INTELSAT Release 77-1-M)
The W. Post reported that the latest test of a satellite-destruction weapon conducted by the USSR despite an appeal by President Carter had apparently ended in failure. In a test May 23, first by the USSR in about 5mo, the Soviet interceptor spacecraft had missed the target satellite by about 50mi, according to U.S. intelligence sources. The officials said that, without knowing the objectives of a test, it would be hard to assess results, but the consensus was that the operation had failed. Five USSR tests in the past 18mo had failed to destroy a target satellite; the attempts had not been aimed at any U.S. satellites but were confined to their own. Both nations had used observation satellites to monitor each other’s military activities, including strategic-weapons testing, missile-base construction, and similar indicators. Still in the research stage was a U.S. system to knock out Soviet satellites, with first flight tests at least 3yr away and first deployment estimated in about 5yr. (WPost, June 1/77, A-21)
NASA announced it would join the Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Land Management in using Landsat, the earth resources monitoring satellite, to inventory wild land resources (major streams, ground cover and vegetation types, reservoirs, and fire hazards) in south central Alaska, northwestern Arizona, and southwestern Idaho. The project would examine each of the 3 different regional ecologies for about lyr. During the 3yr project, the BLM and NASA would set up an automated inventory system to provide accurate and timely data on BLM land as another example of Landsat usefulness in solving public and private resource-oriented problems. (NASA Release 77-37)
Soviet satellites might help predict the cotton harvest in South Transcaucasia, Tass reported, through enhanced photographs of the regional cotton crop. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 29/77)
FBIS reported that the USSR had signed an agreement with Intersputnik, an international organization formed by 9 socialist countries in 1971, that the group would work out of Moscow and create favorable conditions for its activity in the USSR. Organizers of Intersputnik to use satellites and ground stations for international communications were Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, the USSR, and Czechoslovakia. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 16/77)
The Naval Research Reviews reported on satellite use in the oceanic biology program of the Office of Naval Research, covering biodeterioration (growth of fouling and boring organisms), sound in the ocean (marine mammals), dangerous marine organisms, and special projects. Sound in the sea, second major research area in the program, had centered on whales and seals, especially sounds produced by whales. Navy scientists had implanted radio transmitters in large whales such as blues, fins, and grays, to track them by boat, plane, or satellite. Knowledge of whale behavior and movements would be valuable to designers and operators of naval equipment. (NR Rev, Sept 77, 6) •
NOAA reported it had used two of its operational environmental satellites with NASA’s Landsat 2 to obtain imagery that could give early warning of river ice melts causing ice jams and flooding. David F. McGinnis, Jr., and Stanley R. Schneider of NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service (NESS) had studied the Ottawa River separating Quebec and Ontario provinces and joining the St. Lawrence River below Ottawa and Montreal over 12 days in April 1976 to find which sections were covered with ice. By the end of the period, all but three of the 14 sections studied had been free of obstructing ice. Disappearance of ice monitored by the team in the Chaudiere River of SW Quebec had resulted from hydraulic transport rather than melting, which had occurred in the Ottawa River because of the blocking effect of dams, islands, and sharp bends in the river. (NOAA Release 77-145)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) announced it would buy back 1.5 million shares of its common stock for $37 cash per share until Dec. 6. The organization had decided on the repurchase as a preliminary step in possible future acquisitions, and a restructuring of its accounts to show a substantial debt, as the FCC had indicated its rate making would be based on such a debt in the organization’s capital structure. ComSatCorp emphasized that it was currently debt free. (ComSatCorp Release 77-28)
RCA (formerly the Radio Corporation of America) observed the 17th anniversary of the first weather picture received from space through the first Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS), Today newspaper reported. The 26011b TIROS delivered “a pretty shabby product compared to today’s images from space,” RCA admitted. The company had since built a series of 24 other weather watchers that had taken 3.5 million pictures and logged more than 7 billion miles in orbit. Managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the spacecraft had gone from pinpointing major storms to predicting runoff from snowmelt, helping ships navigate through icefields, and assisting commercial fishermen to find promising areas for their efforts. RCA was currently developing a fourth-generation TIROS. (Today, May 1/77, 18A)
NASA announced it would join with Canada in a 3-day meeting Nov. 29-Dec. 1 to assess performance of Cts, world’s most powerful comsat, now in orbit for nearly 2yr. The meeting would hear experimenters discuss their results and the social, technical, and economic aspects of CTS-type comsats. Canada and the U.S. had shared time on Cts, which used a LeRC-developed transmitter tube to operate in a new frequency band at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than those of other comsats, making it possible to use smaller and less expensive ground receivers. Cts had permitted 2-way TV and voice contact experiments for health, education, business, and similar purposes. Besides managing all U.S. experiments on Cts. LeRC had also used a portable earth terminal in an over-the-road van resembling a TV studio to connect the satellite with local events to be broadcast. (NASA Release 77-237)
Two balloonists attempting a transatlantic crossing from Bar Harbor, Maine, on or about Sept. 19 would carry a lightweight satellite-tracking beacon like the one that helped save Maxie Anderson and Ben Abruzzo when their balloon ditched near Iceland on Sept. 12. The FAA had required Charles E. Reinhard and Charles A. Stephenson to carry the device as an air traffic control aid and in case of a need for search and rescue. This type of beacon had previously gone around the world on a polar flight, and another rode a 33ft sailboat on a 600mi trip through the Bermuda Triangle east of Fla., both successfully tracked by a Nimbus satellite. The balloonists would cover the cost of the beacon; NASA would take no part except for use of the satellite link and ground systems, which would operate 24hr anyway. (NASA Release 77-194)
The W. Post reported that the leader of a USSR expedition on the first surface ship to reach the North Pole had told a news conference that his major problem was deciding when the ship had reached its destination. Soviet Minister of Merchant Marine Timofey B. Guzhenko said that, as the ship neared the pole Aug. 17, fog had made sun readings impossible; the polar daylight obscured the stars; and magnetic compasses were worthless when they “began to jump at the pole.” The vessel’s officers had to spend several hr determining whether they had reached the pole. They finally relied on a satellite navigation system accurate within about 800yd, and made two passes through the ice floes to make sure they had reached their goal. The crew of the 13-day 3582mi expedition on the nuclear-powered icebreaker Arktika had planted a Soviet flag and capsule containing a copy of the USSR constitution to mark their accomplishment. (WPost, Aug 28/77, A24)
The Natl. Aeronautic and Atmospheric Administration announced it would conduct a pilot project this summer with the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture to improve accuracy of crop forecasting, based largely on the amount of solar radiation, available moisture, and air temperatures for a given area. Using devices on NOAA spacecraft to measure cloud cover and relate it to the amount of sunlight reaching ground-based pyranometers, NOAA and USDA investigators would compare hourly readings from the Goes 1 geostationary satellite with measurements from a network of pyranometers across the Great Plains, to determine the amount of solar energy available to crops in any given period. The researchers emphasized solar energy as a vital factor in plant photosynthesis and in evapotranspiration (loss of water directly from the soil by evaporation and from plants by transpiration). A Great Plains Agricultural Council representing land grant colleges in Texas, N.M., Okla., Colo., Kans., Nebr., S.D., N.D., Wyo., and Mont., and the USDA agencies serving those states had requested the pilot project as an aid in the production of corn, wheat, and sorghum. (NOAA Release 77-122)
Columnist Jack Anderson reported in Today that a Senate subcommittee had asked the Pentagon for military equipment, including planes, radar, sensors, and satellites, to be used in the “battle against drug abuse.” Senators Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) and Charles Percy (R-Ill.) had sent a private letter to Defense Secy. Harold Brown saying that drug abuse was costing the U.S. $17 billion a yr and that more than 5000 Americans were dying each yr from drug abuse. DOD alone had the vehicles needed to pursue and overtake the drug traffickers, the senators said, calling the fight against drugs a “war.” “When fighting a war,” they added, “you use the best resources available and make every effort to win. This is not being done.” A spokesman for the Pentagon said an answer was being prepared. {Today, Apr 21/77, 16A)
NASA announced it would launch on or about May 28 a new environmental monitoring satellite GOES-B, latest in a series to be operated by NOAA, to keep watch over the eastern half of the U.S. and the Atlantic Ocean, just in time for this yr’s hurricane season. Built like the first three in the series by Ford Aerospace Corp., GOES-B would replace Goes 1 as NOAA’s east coast satellite at about 75°W; Goes 1 would move to standby status at about 105°W. (NASA Release 77-88)
NASA announced it had ended an aerial survey of the Pacific Ocean along the west coast of the U.S. that was an operational prelude to the use of SeaSat-A, the oceanographic satellite scheduled for launch in May 1978. The survey had used high-flying NASA aircraft to test four sensors from SeaSat-A: a synthetic aperture imaging radar, a wind-field scatterometer, a scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer, and a radar altimeter. The mission was a rehearsal in research cooperation that scientists would need when SeaSat became operational. (NASA Release 77-62)
The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) reported it would proceed with its plan to buy back its common stock [see Nov. 11], noting that the FCC had authorized it to borrow $25 million to finance part of the cost of the repurchase. A letter to stockholders said the corporation would contest FCC’s attempt to make it put more money in an escrow fund for possible repayments to customers, because it said the FCC’s action was “neither lawful nor appropriate.” (ComSatCorp Releases 77-31, 77-32)
ESA and INTELSAT had prepared a joint offer of Marecs (formerly Marots) satellites, plus maritime packages on Intelsat V comsats, for an international joint-venture attempt to set up a pre-Inmarsat maritime-communications system for the early 1980s, Aerospace Daily reported. The joint venture of Europe’s 17-nation Eutelsat group and other countries, including Japan and the Soviet Union, had accounted for about 74% of Inmarsat shares. The U.S., with 17%, had not participated. At its July meeting, the joint group indicated preference for a space system consisting of three Marecs satellites dedicated to maritime communications, plus maritime packages to be added to the last three of the seven planned Intelsat Vs. If costs or other factors made the option unsatisfactory, the joint venture had two others: a four-Marecs system, or a combination of two dedicated Intelsat spacecraft and three Intelsat V maritime packages. (An option using four dedicated Intelsat satellites was no longer under consideration.) INTELSAT’s board of governors at its mid-Sept. meeting would decide on pricing and other details, and the joint venture would receive the ESA-INTELSAT proposals at its late-September meeting. (A/D, Aug 23/78, 234)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that the USAF had awarded Harris Corp.’s Electrical Systems Division, Melbourne, Fla., a $4.7 million contract to design and produce transportable weather-satellite receiving terminals. The company would build and deliver one operational prototype and three production units to support SAMSO’s Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP). The terminals (called Mark IV, a follow-on to the Mark III weather terminals currently in operation) would give military commanders precise weather information accumulated from DMSP spacecraft orbiting the earth every lOlmin. The terminals, half the size of present terminals, could fit on C-130 aircraft or M-55 trucks and be operational within 6hr, as opposed to the present 48hr, automatically tracking a satellite appearing over the horizon and receiving visual and infrared imagery in real time. An operator using magnification and other techniques could choose and enhance a specific area of coverage, or could process the entire 4500-nautical-mi-long 1600-nm-wide satellite image. The Mark IV project officer, Capt. James Fowler, said that the operator, after choosing the area most suitable for the mission, could produce a hard-copy print in 2min and transmit the photo to four remote laser-image processors lOmi from the terminal. “This capability, unique to the Mark IV system, will provide battlefield unit commanders with weather data within 20 minutes after the satellite’s pass,” he said. The prototype Mark IV terminal had been scheduled for delivery in Feb. 1979; production units were to be in the field by Oct. 1980. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug/78, 1)
NASA was proceeding cautiously toward its prospective 30/20GHz satellite communications demonstration program, with development starting in FY82 instead of the faster pace envisioned earlier, Aerospace Daily reported. Several questions of policy and organization remained unresolved, one of them being administration guidelines that appeared to contradict President Carter’s recently announced civilian space policy [see Oct. 11]. Major issues in the 30/20GHz program included whether a (dedicated satellite was to be flown and, if so, whether and how it should be used, apart from demonstrating NASA technology objectives. Another issue concerned the relationship between NASA and the Commerce Dept.’s National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), set up to take over support formerly provided by NASA to public service satellite-communications users. The 30/20 GHz program had been presented in May to the NASA Advisory Council as a prospective FY80 development program, leading to 1984 launch of a satellite using a Space Shuttle-compatible antenna less than 15ft in diameter, about 20 spot beams, and fast onboard switching. However, in November, an ad hoc satellite-communications subcommittee of the NAC learned that the current prospect was for multiple-contractor Phase B definition studies in FY80, with technology work to precede FY82 development and a 1985 launch. {A/D, Nov 17/78, 78)
ESA announced plans to launch its scientific satellite Geos-2 in mid-July from ETR/Cape Canaveral on a Delta. This satellite would carry out the mission originally planned for Geos 1, which a malfunctioning Delta injected into a transfer orbit too low to permit attaining its scheduled geostationary orbit. The European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) at Darmstadt, W. Germany, had fired Geos 7’s apogee boost motor to inject it into a 12-hr elliptic orbit; after a yr in this orbit, results showed Geos 1 had made a significant contribution to the International Magnetospheric Study (IMS). Main mission objective of Geos-2 would be to learn more about responses of the near-earth environment to processes occurring in outer space. The satellite’s geostationary orbit would be in a region of earth’s magnetosphere where many dynamic processes causing magnetic and ionospheric disturbances were believed to develop. Geos-2’s exceptionally high real-time transmission rate (over lOOkilobits per sec), combined with a continuous link with ESA’s Odenwald ground station in Germany, would allow it to transmit about 100 times as much data as any previous European scientific satellite. Built as a qualification model at the same time as Geos 1, the spacecraft had been converted into a high-quality flight model. Based on Geos 1 experience, only minor modifications were made in some Geos-2 subsystems. Geos-2’s very sensitive experiment payload had put severe constraints on spacecraft design in the areas of electromagnetic and chemical cleanliness: for example, a complex system of 8 booms deploying in orbit had to be designed to put the sensitive experiment detectors measuring minute variations in the magnetosphere as far as possible from any electrical interference generated by the satellite. Prime contractor for Geos-2 was British Aerospace Dynamics Group, under the direction of industries in 10 European countries. (ESA Release, June 22/78; ESA Newsletter, June 78, 4)
NASA announced that the United Nations would use the world’s most powerful comsat, the Cts communications technology satellite operated jointly by NASA and the Canadian Dept, of Communications, in a demonstration of remote simultaneous interpretation of a conference and of transmission by facsimile of conference documents for remote translation. Cooperating in the demonstration would be ComSatCorp and ENTEL, an Argentine state-owned telephone company. The UN Conference on Technical Cooperation Among Developing Countries currently meeting in Buenos Aires, Argentina, through Sept. 12 would be the demonstration subject. Pictures and voices of the conferees sent to a portable NASA terminal at UN Headquarters in New York would be interpreted, translated into five official UN languages, and returned through Cts to a portable ComSatCorp terminal in Buenos Aires, where conference attendees could select the language of their choice. The New York terminal, a NASA-developed portable earth terminal bus, was a mobile broadcast-receive studio with a 2.4m (8ft) dish antenna designed for use with Cts. Another phase of the experiment would be high-speed simultaneous transmission on other Cts channels of texts of speeches and other documents from Buenos Aires to UN. Hq for translation and return the next day. Cts earth terminals could transmit at a frequency of 14GHz and receive at 12GHz. (NASA Release 78-134)
The JSC Roundup printed a report by Dr. Thornton Page on his experiences during a friendship tour to China. Page, who had used the extreme-ultraviolet camera during Apollo missions, had asked for and received tours of Chinese astronomical facilities; in discussions with Chinese, Page learned most of their data were of western origin because of the limited quality and size of Chinese astronomical instruments. “They were delighted to have the books, reports, pamphlets, and photos I presented to them, particularly the NASA photos of Shuttle, Skylab in orbit, and ALSEP instruments deployed on the moon,” Page reported. “They spoke about the large telescope under construction in Nanking, and their own telescope planned for a mountain site some 30mi northeast of Peking. Drs. Pan How-Ren and Wu Jian-Cheng are calibrating x-ray and far-UV detectors for use on a satellite, but they could not tell me when it will fly.” The Chinese told Page that a major change in national policy on science had taken place during the past yr, since the “Gang of Four” had been removed from power. Chairman Hua had given high priority to science and technology and had set a goal of doubling by 1982 the number of scientists and technicians in China. “None of the scientists I met,” Page added, “was involved in teaching, and none of our other visits to universities and high schools in Manchuria or Shanghai revealed classroom instruction in these subjects.” (JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 1)
NASA had mounted a “new effort” to make space applications the “administration’s centerpiece,” starting with a reorganization of applications management that could double that office’s $283 million budget, AvWk reported. The new effort would include a major push for a “global information system” supported by all civilian earth-sensing spacecraft, to encompass all Landsat, Seasat, and environmental and meteorological satellite data, coordinated so that for any need an individual user could access all pertinent information available from space platforms. Theoretically, all space-derived information could some day come from a single distribution point. NASA’s effort would emphasize agency cooperation (NASA officials had met with representatives of the Depts. of Agriculture and Interior, EPA, and AID); management changes (a plan awaiting approval would remove flight projects from the traditional applications branches; the project offices would instead develop user-oriented sensor systems to be passed along to an applications-systems division, which would then reconfigure the sensors into the proper spacecraft format); center changes (instead of the previous lead-center approach to managing flight projects, NASA Hq would formulate programs as the main user liaison); applied sciences (greater emphasis by space applications on the phenomena its spacecraft would measure); ground systems (speedup of work on the end-to-end data system); an operational comsat system (solution of years-old Landsat operating problems); and communications research (industry would foster the research, while government agencies would concentrate on creating and sustaining a real market for public service communications). (Av Wk, Mar 13/78, 67)
ComSatCorp announced it had derived 57% of its 1978 operating revenues from services provided through Intelsat satellites; 37% from maritime and U.S. domestic services provided by Comsat General through the Marisat and Comstar satellite systems; and 6% from its investment share in INTELSAT and operational and technical services. ComSatCorp had been considering expansion into the growing environmental information services field in which satellite technology could play a significant, possibly essential, role. Comsat General, in cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey and Telesat Canada, had already demonstrated the ability of satellites and small unattended earth stations to collect water-resources data from remote areas of the U.S. and Canada. ComSatCorp would enter the field by acquiring at a price not to exceed $20 million Environmental Research & Technology, Inc. (ERT), currently engaged in a broad spectrum of environmental services. Adding ERT’s expertise in environmental data collection, monitoring, analysis, and prediction to ComSatCorp’s expertise in satellite communications and related technologies should make the organization better able to extend satellite-communications technology to the growing environmental-information services market. ComSatCorp had also been working to apply advanced technology in developing and manufacturing specialized products, including earth-station components, signal-processing systems equipment, and fiber-optics communications equipment. (COMSAT annl rept 78, 1-7)
ESA announced that since the end of March its Meteosat 1 had been transmitting daily meteorological data collected by special equipment aboard a French naval vessel in the North Atlantic. ESA had relayed the data to the European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) in West Germany. The satellite had transmitted messages every 3hr that included the ship’s position, and parameters such as wind characteristics, sea states, and air and sea temperatures. The experiment, carried out jointly by the French meteorological service and ESA, had been planned to demonstrate the reliability of automatic communications between ships and the Meteosat 1 satellite for regular production of meteorological reports. The experiment would last until July and would resume later with other European meteorological services. When operational, the system should include several hundred ships all over the world fitted with Meteosat equipment. (ESA Release, Apr 12/78)
The People’s Republic of China had announced an 8yr crash plan to catch up with the rest of the world in scientific research, Nature reported. Vice-Premier Fang Yi told 6000 delegates to the All-Nations Science Conference in Peking that China had lagged 15 to 20yr behind the West in many branches of science and still more in others; the program would narrow the gap in some areas to lOyr by 1985, and would help in overtaking the rest of the world in all branches of science by the end of the century. The article said that China had planned to begin production of fast-mainframe computers and to establish a strong computer network and data base by 1985, with extra attention to peripherals, software, and associated areas of applied mathematics. PRC would devote its efforts to basic space physics, cosmic rays, and technical problems of remote sensing, and planned to launch a series of Skylabs and deep-space and communications satellites within 8yr. (Nature, April 6/78, 482)
NASA announced it had rescheduled launches of the TIROS-N third-generation operational meteorological satellite and the Nimbus-G pollution-monitoring satellite, originally set for mid-Sept. to Oct. 14 and 23, respectively. NASA had postponed the WTR launches because of malfunction of an onboard computer in TIROS-N, and subsequent discovery of reworking required for tape recorders on both TIROS-N and Nimbus-G [see Sept. 18]. NASA had returned the tape recorders to the manufacturer for correction of the suspected problem (loose solder particles) and would reinstall the instruments in the spacecraft over the next 2wk. (NASA Release 78-149)
ESA reported that its council and communications satellites program board had unanimously approved at March and April meetings a first series of five operational Ariane launchers [see Apr. 24]; two operational satellites for intra-European telephone, telegraph, arid telex communications and television relay (ECS-1 and -2); and a second maritime-communications satellite (Marots-B). Three of the five Ariane launchers would be financed from ESA programs for the scientific satellite Exosat (to be launched in early 1981), Marots-B (mid-1981), and ESC-1 (end of 1981). One launcher had been earmarked for the French earth. observation satellite SPOT; the fifth launcher was a reserve. The council also had agreed that a preliminary phase of the H-sat program should revise the proposed satellite design to require only minor modifications (reducing the time scale) to go from an experimental “heavy” platform and payload to an operating direct-broadcast satellite. Other design modifications required to move from, a qualification to an operational Ariane had delayed the scheduled H-sat launch. (ESA newsletter, June 78, 2)
Pioneer Venus, scheduled for launch May 20, would carry a recently completed JPL instrument to obtain new weather information on Venus, JPL Universe reported. VORTEX (Venus orbiter radiometric temperature experiment), a $4.5 million co-effort of JPL and Oxford Univ., England, would collect close-up data on winds, cloud structures, water vapor, and temperatures of Venus. Using technologies developed for satellite monitoring of earth weather, VORTEX would report 3-dimensional measurements of the Venus atmosphere. The complex instrument, an 8-channel radiometer combining 4 different subexperiments (three separate radiometers and a spectrometer) would weigh only 12 lb, partly because of the special hybrid microelectronics used. Orbiting as close as 100km above the cloudtops, it could “see” weather conditions at 7 different levels or layers. For a full Venus year of 243 days, scientists would process VORTEX data into weather maps and infrared images and compare meteorological conditions on Venus with those on earth. (JPL Universe, Mar 17/78, 2)
INTELSAT announced award of an international research contract valued at $75 380 to Cable & Wireless, Ltd., London, to determine the effects of rain on comsat radio signals. C&W would obtain annual statistics for rain-caused depolarization at 4GHz frequencies by measuring the relative amplitude of the 2 orthogonal circular-polarized components of a satellite signal. INTELSAT would use results to develop transmission and reception techniques that could double the capacity of its international telecommunications satellites. (INTELSAT Release 77-8-M)
NASA announced that an experimental oceanographic satellite had achieved an unexpected technological breakthrough: for the first time, earth-contour measurements by a satellite microwave sensor had exhibited an accuracy comparable to that of conventional" ground and aerial surveys used for small-scale mapping. An experiment sponsored by WFC had produced terrain contouring from Geos 3 (geodynamics experimental ocean satellite) radar-altimeter measurements at a height of 840km (520mi) above earth. As Geos 3 circled the globe at 7km/sec (4mps), the radar altimeter pointed vertically down and measured the distance between the satellite and the earth’s surface with a precision of 50cm (20in). Nineteen Geos-3 passes over the San Joaquin valley of southern Calif, had recorded terrain elevations for 40 000km2(15 500mi2), and comparison of the satellite-derived contours with U.S. Geological Survey small-scale topographic maps showed agreement within lm (3 ft). Since the altimeter had been designed as an ocean-sensing system, the acquisition of meaningful land data was unexpected. The ocean-optimized design of the altimeter and the nature of radar backscatter was expected to limit measurement of terrain variations to smooth or gently rolling topography such as a coastal plain, interior plain, or valley. The Geos 3 overland results showed that satellite-borne altimeters could measure terrain elevations for more rugged areas with accuracy sufficient to satisfy many small-scale mapping requirements, at a cost competitive with conventional methods. This technique would be particularly useful in remote areas of the world, such as arctic and desert regions where conventional surveying was difficult and expensive. (NASA Release 78-183)
MSFC announced that NASA had instituted a NASA End-to-End Data Systems (NEEDS) project to ease the enormous burden of storing data collected by its satellites and aircraft. NASA’s public archives had been growing by 100 000 000 000 bits of data per day; during the 1980s and beyond, spacecraft like Spacelab, earth-orbiting satellites, and planetary probes would produce a staggering quantity of data, creating a major problem of storage and availability to users. NEEDS would decrease processing time and storage space, reduce maintenance costs, and provide better user access. Four field centers would participate in the project, MSFC being responsible for developing a medium to replace magnetic tape and microfilm. Working with Harris Corp. of Melbourne, Fla., MSFC had developed the optical mass memory system, using a dry-process film that could store as much data as on magnetic tapes or microfilm in 100 times less space, and could make access 100 times faster. The goal of NEEDS would be a tenfold reduction in the present $300-million-per-year storage/maintenance cost, and a thousandfold increase in information return to users. (Marshall Star, Jan 18/78, 4)
Launches of USSR military space missions continued a marked decline, with total flights in 1978 23% fewer than in 1977, a possible Soviet effort to influence the atmosphere for a SALT II agreement, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Notable omissions from the Soviet military-spaceflight schedule were satellites related to antisatellite interceptor development and nuclear-powered ocean surveillance. These systems had come under intense public scrutiny and criticism in the past yr, as President Carter emphasized that they were major instruments of instability and needed to be banned. No antisatellite system launch had occurred for several months, since the Soviets had agreed to discuss a ban of such weapons and just before the convening of the first such meeting in May. The last Soviet ocean-surveillance satellite was Cosmos 954, which had reentered over Canada Jan. 24 trailing fragments of its nuclear reactor [see Jan. 28, Feb. 20]. At that point in 1978, the USSR had sent 50 military missions into space, a significant reduction from the 65 completed in the same time period in 1977. However, the USSR had not reduced photographic recon-naissance/surveillance activity; launch of the high-resolution observer Cosmos 1047 Nov. 15 was the 28th photographic recon/survey mission in 1978, launched at the same rate as in 1977. (D/SBD, Nov 17/78, 79)
AvWk reported that the Navy’s Electronic Systems Command planned to issue a request for proposals (RFP) to establish and operate a follow-on system to the Navy/TRW fleet satellite communications (FltSatCom) system. The Navy would lease from the contractor capacity on the new system, designated Leasat, which could be either a hybrid (providing service to merchant shipping as well as to the Navy) or dedicated (serving only the Navy). The RFP would require 3 satellites positioned over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. The first satellite should be available Oct. 1, 1981; the second, Apr. 1, 1982; the third, Oct. 1, 1987. A satellite that failed would have to be replaced within 30 days. The contractor would also build and operate a telemetry, tracking, and control system with central headquarters for coordination at 4 Navy communications stations in Va., Hawaii, Calif., and Guam. (AvWk, Mar 6/78, 14)
ESA announced its Ots 2 satellite had successfully completed its first transmission tests of television programs beyond continental Europe. During a conference on “The Role of Space Technology for Development” in Cairo Oct. 7-12, ESA had demonstrated TV-signal transmission from the British Post Office’s Goonhilly Downs station via Ots 2 to a transportable receiving station in Cairo. From Oct. 7 to 11, nearly 8hr of BBC-1 TV programs were transmitted directly from Britain to Egypt at a rate of about 1.5hr per day. Ferranti Microwave Division of Ferranti Electronics Ltd., in association with the U.K. Dept, of Industry, had developed the transportable station. After 5mo of preliminary tests, the Ots 2 communications-test program had reached an operational level that would last at least 3yr, to prepare for subsequent exploitation of the operational European Communications Satellites (ECS) that would begin service in 1981. Tests had included telephone as well as TV routing and propagation experiments and new applications using much simpler terminals. Some 50 institutes, universities, and telecommunications entities would participate in the second category of tests, using more than 30 small terminals with 3m-diameter antennas. (ESA Release Oct 16/78)
The USAF announced that its ESD Spacetrack System Office had awarded Bunker Ramo Corp. of Westlake Village, Calif., a $927 000 contract for equipment to record and store data for military and authorized scientific use on all man-made objects orbiting the earth. The system would record information received at the Space Computational Center in NORAD’s Cheyenne Mountain Complex, Colo., on positions of the thousands of satellites and other man-made objects in space, and would store the data for 3yr in the computer’s active file. It would also microfilm historical data for permanent storage. The new system had become necessary because the automatic data-processing equipment formerly used by the Aerospace Defense Command lacked permanent-storage capability and was very expensive to maintain. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 6) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
FBIS reported the USSR had launched a communications satellite, Horizont, Dec. 19 under a program “for further improvement and development of communications systems and television transmissions.” Satellite apogee was 48 365km; perigee, 2581km; period, 23hr 40min; inclination, 11.3°. Horizont carried improved multiplex-relay apparatus for transmitting telephone and telegraphic radio communications and TV programs, including those from the 22nd summer Olympic games in Moscow. It had a three-axis system for precision orientation, a power-supply system with independent guidance and alignment of the solar batteries with the sun, a thermo-regulation system, a telemetry system for transmitting data on onboard systems, a radio system for precision measurement of the orbit’s parameters and control of the satellite, and an orbit-correcting system. All satellite systems were functioning normally. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 20/78)
Tass announced that the USSR had launched a Molniya 3 comsat carrying relay apparatus to operate in the centimeter waveband, into an orbit with 40 631km apogee in the northern hemisphere and 661km perigee in the southern hemisphere, period of 12hr 16min, and 62.8° inclination. The satellite would ensure operation of a long-distance telephone, telegraph, and radio-communications system, and program relay from USSR central television to points in the Orbita network. (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 24/78)
GSFC reported it had asked industry to build a computer that could process satellite images 10 to 100 times faster than present machines. The new computer would be based on 6yr of research in “massive parallelism,” consisting of 16 384 processors working together, each processor a simple computer, with a single chip of silicon probably carrying 2 processors. Previous machines had not gone beyond a web of 64 simple computers. The new system would cross-correlate landmark images from earth-watching satellites 100 times faster than present MSFC where it would undergo vibration testing from May to November 1978. (NASA photo 78-H-222) ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY	73 machines, making multispectral classifications (such as distinguishing wheatland from cornfields) and geometric corrections for comparison of pictures taken from different vantage points in one-tenth of the time previously necessary. (Goddard News, Mar 78, 3) ■
INTELSAT announced that it, together with the Federal Republic of Germany and Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB), had funded development of a new high-efficiency solar-power collector. MBB had built the lightweight deployable solar array for use in satellites of the 1980s, with AEG Telefunken as subcontractor for solar cells on the array surface. ComSatCorp laboratories in Clarksburg, Md., had tested the array. Its weight, considerably less than that of current counterparts, would mean lower launch costs, and its higher power output would handle more onboard satellite electronics, enlarging its communications eapacity. At the beginning of a 7yr mission, the new solar array would provide up to 38watts of power per kg of weight, a 300% increase over current models. Incorporating thin solar cells in the design might increase output to 50watts of power per kg of weight. (INTELSAT Release 78-22-1)
FBIS reported that the People’s Republic of China had launched on Jan. 26 an earth satellite that had functioned normally in orbit and returned to earth “after fulfilling tasks of scientific experimentation.” The report added that the achievement had resulted from the guidance of the wise leader Chairman Hua Kuo-feng. (FBIS, Tass in English, Jan 30/78)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. and USSR had opened a more reliable “hotline” using satellites, instead of telephone wires and undersea cables, to link the White House and the Kremlin. The direct line had been available since 1963 for use in an international emergency. The direct link would use the synchronous-communications satellite Intelsat and the Soviet Molniya system of satellites. The previous hotline had been subject to unexpected interruptions, a potentially grave problem in event of tension between the two governments; it had been cut at least three times, once when a Finnish farmer cut a buried cable while cultivating land. (WPost, Jan 17/78, A-10)
Spaceport News reported astronomers studying data obtained by the international ultraviolet explorer IUE satellite might have discovered a third black hole believed to be at the center of a globular cluster (a miniature galaxy shaped like a globe) some 15 000 light-yrs away. The IUE large ultraviolet telescope had penetrated the background light coming from a globular cluster and reached its core, where researchers found radiation from a group of 10 to 20 bright blue stars, apparently orbiting a black hole possibly small in size but with a mass equal to 1000 stars like the sun. Researchers would study movements and interrelationships of the stars to define the rotation about the center of the million-star cluster. (Spaceport News, Oct 13/78, 7)
LeRC reported that the communications technology satellite Cts, world’s most powerful comsat, had made possible quick diagnosis of burn and multiple-injury victims of a simulated catastrophe at the Baltimore/Washington International Airport. The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services had conducted a disaster exercise called Emergency Management of an Airport Catastrophe as part of a 2-day seminar for physicians, interns, residents, nurses, and other health care professionals. The “disaster” (a simulated collision between a commercial airliner and a ground aviation fuel tanker) had tested airport and statewide emergency medical plans to aid the “injured,” including about 180 crash victims. The scenario at the site included a breakdown in local communications, and an overload of local emergency medical facilities. A joint program between the U.S. and Canada, Cts operated on a new frequency at power levels' 10 to 20 times higher than those of other satellites; the higher broadcast power had allowed use of much smaller and far less expensive ground-receiving equipment. (Lewis News, May 26/78, 2)
A fundamental reappraisal by Western European governments of the overall European space effort had resulted in a demand by the West German government for more efficiency and better return on its investments in space, Av Wk reported. On hold during the debate were production of an initial batch of Arianes (European heavy launchers) and development of a new heavy telecommunications bus, as well as adoption of a broad new telecommunications package that would include the heavy bus. Meanwhile, determined to get more for its money, West Germany had begun exploring possible national or limited international programs outside the framework of ESA. Industry sources said that West Germany, traditionally one of ESA’s biggest contributors, was unhappy mainly because of repeated new beginnings of experimental communications-satellite programs as technological objectives changed. The Germans had wanted Europe to move directly into an operational comsat project after the successful launch and initial operations of the Franco-German Symphonie satellites. However, instead of building on this initiative, Western Europe (primarily through ESA) had taken up other experimental satellites like OTS (orbital test satellite), Marots (maritime OTS), and the H-Sat (experimental heavy telecommunications/multipurpose bus). West Germany, therefore, had begun thinking of developing independently (or more probably bilaterally), a direct-broadcast satellite that would be operationally feasible at home and commercially attractive abroad. (AvWk, Mar 13/78, 71)
The NYT reported that the Soviet Union had apparently agreed to a U.S. proposal to begin talks on banning hunter-killer satellites, which the USSR had been developing for about a decade. A senior Western diplomat said the Kremlin had formally conveyed its willingness to negotiate but had not said when. Marshal Nikolai V. Ogarkov, chief of staff of USSR armed forces, had outlined the Soviet position when he met with 21 visiting U.S. congressmen in Moscow. The Carter Administration had revealed earlier that it had suggested a treaty after 3 successful USSR tests of a new satellite (known in military jargon as Asat) able to maneuver close to another satellite in orbit and explode. If perfected, such a weapon (which the U.S. did not have) could threaten satellites used to verify compliance with strategic arms agreements, to give early warning of missile attack, or for civilian and military communications links. The Pentagon was unhappy about the administration’s decision to negotiate because it had 2 U.S. hunter-killer satellites under development: one could be launched into an orbit similar to that of the satellite to be destroyed, and another more maneuverable model using infrared sensors could seek out targets over great distances. The administration apparently hoped Pentagon plans would induce the Soviets to begin negotiations in Apr. It was not clear whether a treaty would cover only hunter-killer satellites or would include ground-based antisatellite weapons such as powerful laser beams, which the Pentagon opposed banning. (NYT, April 1/78, 5)
NASA reported that the Netherlands astronomical satellite ANS had been a success, based on comparison of mission results and prelaunch objectives. ANS, an Explorer-class x-ray and ultraviolet mission, was a cooperative program of the U.S. and the Netherlands, the U.S. providing a 2-part medium-energy x-ray instrument and the Scout, launch vehicle, and the Netherlands providing the spacecraft, a 2-part soft x-ray instrument, and a small ultraviolet telescope with photometers. During its 20mo lifetime, ANS had measured positions, spectra, and time variations of galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources in the energy range 2 to 15keV; defined upper limits of silicon-line emissions around 2keV; and transmitted more than 18 000 observations of about 4000 objects in the UV range 1500 to 3300A, in addition to other unexpected discoveries. Although an unplanned elliptical orbit had drastically limited the x-ray observations, particularly in the pointed mode, and had substantially increased the spacecraft’s exposure to radiation, the data it had returned were of a consistently high quality, except for partial failure of half the soft x-ray instrument lOmo after launch. ANS had reentered the atmosphere June 14, 1977. (NASA MOR S-875-74-01 [postlaunch] July 18/76)
GSFC reported that scientists using astronomy satellite Sas 3 had pinpointed just beyond earth’s galaxy the nearest of some 600 quasars found in the universe so far. The object, first discovered a yr ago, had never been identified as a quasar; besides being the nearest, the new quasar (named 0241) had been the third in recent mo found to radiate x-rays. The quasar had been 800 million light-yr away, obscured by thick dust in the galaxy and overlooked previously. Scientists hoped the nearby quasar might explain the mysteries of quasars’ origin, either as eruptions in the centers of galaxies or as long-dead objects associated with the beginning of the universe, whose light was only now reaching the earth. (Goddard News, Aug 16/78, 4)
In a report on Soviet space activities, Defense/Space Business Daily said Progress 2 had crashed into the Pacific Aug. 4, 2da after it had undocked from the Salyut station where it had been for 25da. This Progress resupply spacecraft (a modified Soyuz) had not been designed as a recoverable reentry and descent vehicle. The Soviets had orbited Cosmos 1028, believed to be another in a series of long-duration high-resolution reconnaissance/surveillance satellites; orbit was 182/272km, 67.1° inclination, 88.7min period. Another in the series, Cosmos 905, launched Apr. 26, 1977, had remained in orbit 30da and was recovered. Others in the series had been Cosmos 758, in orbit for 20da after launch Sept. 5, 1975; Cosmos 805, in orbit for 20da after launch Feb. 20, 1976; and Cosmos 844, in orbit 39da after launch July 22, 1976. (D/SD, Aug 8/78, 171)
GSFC reported that U.S., Canadian, and other scientists had been studying the first data from the applications Explorer mission Aem 1, launched Apr. 26 into a polar orbit. Using information on day-night temperature changes, the scientists had examined black-and-white and false-color images for clues to the locations of mineral resources and to identify rock types, soil-moisture changes and plant stress, and the effects of urban heat islands. The first false-color image had covered a 700km swath of the eastern U.S. from Cape Hatteras to Lake Ontario. The scientists would correlate data from Aem 1, first of a series of satellites for NASA’s heat-capacity mapping mission, with data from other satellites, especially Landsat. (Goddard News, July 19/78, 2)
. . . Passage of this bill would commit the nation’s taxpayers to $25 million ... in fiscal year 1979. Conservation estimates indicate capital investment reaching a . . . price tag of $2.5 trillion! The proponents of this legislation indicate that passage would commit the nation to a program plan to study the feasibility of utilizing solar energy to generate electricity for domestic purposes. This is not the first phase of this study. We respectfully point out that such a program has already been underway for sometime by the Department of Energy and NASA. . . . “Boeing estimates that the cost of a single launch vehicle would be $10 billion alone while the cost per satellite is in the $20.5 billion neighborhood. These are just a sampling of the costs in terms of dollars; they do not reflect the potential dangers to the environment that are inherent in this program. While the use of solar energy is always viewed as benign, this bill would spawn a . . . malignancy on the nation's already fiscally ill taxpayers ...” (NASA Legis Actv Rept. Aug 22/78)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science had successfully launched a satellite to study the phenomenon of northern lights, the Washington Post reported. The 200-lb Exos B, one of three artificial moons to be launched in Japan’s international magnetic-sphere observation program, would orbit the earth in an elliptical trajectory every 8hr 45min. The northern lights (aurora borealis) was a luminous phenomenon best viewed in the Arctic region. (WPost, Sept 7/78, A-16)
The Marshall Star reported that an MSFC researcher had been working to complete a weather experiment for the second Shuttle orbital flight test (OFT-2) scheduled for July 1979. His instrument, known as NOSL (nighttime-daylight optical survey of lightning), would obtain data on the many thunderstorms viewed by the Shuttle during a mission. The equipment consisted of a 16mm data-acquisition camera synchronized with a 2-channel cassette recorder, receiving the output of a photocell optical system serving as a sensor to pick up both visible and invisible lightning flashes and to record them as clicks on the tape. Otha Vaughan, Jr., system developer, said he hoped to analyze the magnetic tapes containing cine photos and associated photo-optical data to get new insights into convective structure of cloud systems and lightning, the horizontal dimensions of lightning discharges, and possible electrical discharges that extend into the stratosphere. A successful experiment would permit adaptation of the data-acquisition and analysis technique to future meteorological satellites for identifying severe weather situations. (Marshall Star, Mar 15/78, 4)
ESA announced it had organized a tour of several Mediterranean countries to demonstrate use of data from the Meteosat weather satellite. Tom: objectives were to display Meteosat-system capabilities exhibited in the documents or images produced by the spacecraft; and to show potential users (meteorologists and others working on the study and management of earth’s natural resources) how to use the system. The system included a secondary data-user’s station (SDUS) mounted on a trailer towed by a vehicle containing a 2.5m-diameter receiving antenna and all equipment needed to receive analog signals in the WeFax (weather-facsimile) format. Demonstrations had begun in Cairo and would continue in Athens, Tunis, and Algiers. ESA had planned similar demonstrations in other countries covered by Meteosat. (ESA Release June 1/78)
NASA announced that Nimbus 6, a meteorological research satellite, would track the 6000km (3728mi) journey by dogsled of a lone Japanese explorer from northern Canada to the North Pole and back. The Smithsonian Institution, which had a scientific stake in the venture, had asked GSFC to manage the tracking. The 6-mo journey would begin March 4, 1978. The explorer, 37-yr-old Naomi Uemura of Tokyo, had driven a dogsled solo some 12 000km (7457mi) from Greenland to Alaska over an 18mo period in 1975 and 1976. During his upcoming Arctic journey, Uemura would carry a 4.5kg (101b) battery-powered satellite beacon on his dogsled to transmit once per min an automatic radio signal, including local temperature and atmospheric pressure. Nimbus 6 overflying the pole every 108min would monitor the signals and collect the data for relay to GSFC by a NASA tracking station in Fairbanks, Alaska, Uemura would systematically collect snow, ice, and air samples for Japan’s Natl. Inst, of Polar Research and the Water Research Inst, of Nagoya Univ. Researchers needed as accurate a record as possible of Uemura’s daily positions to correlate with the collected data. Satellite-tracking data would also verify Uemura’s deadreckoning and celestial-navigation readings, particularly difficult in polar regions. NASA’s expenditures on the venture would be minimal because both the Nimbus 6 and its ground-control computer would be routinely operating on a 24hr basis. (NASA Release 78-29)
NASA announced that the first major symposium on crop monitoring based on space-age technology, scheduled for JSC Oct. 23-26, would discuss results of the Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE). The symposium would give participants from government, industry-agriculture, and university communities around the world more information about LACIE’s pioneering effort and how it could best be used to improve the world food situation. LACIE, a 3yr program of NASA and the U.S. Department of Agriculture working with university and industrial research groups, had been designed to estimate wheat production in major growing areas throughout the world by using satellite data and the global weather-observation network. LACIE had begun in the fall of 1974 when DOA had recognized a need for information on wheat-growing areas outside the U.S. Landsat satellites continuously scanning agricultural regions had provided the electronic imagery for area estimates. Combined daily with ground-acquired data and information received from 8000 worldwide weather stations, the imagery had made it possible to predict crop area, yield, and production of domestic and foreign wheat-growing regions and to give an early warning of problems. Earth resources scientists had learned to identify the “signature” (appearance) of wheat in the satellite data; others had been able to estimate the growth stage and potential yield of wheat. Computer programs combining records of weather conditions in past growing seasons with figures on crop yields in the past had enabled experimenters to estimate yields for the current growing season. Results from LACIE had shown the effectiveness of new technology in improving knowledge of global wheat production generally applicable to other crops. USDA was considering use of the data source to give early warning of significant changes in prospects for global commodity production. (NASA Release 78-125)
NASA announced that its Tiros-N third-generation weather satellite launched from WTR Oct. 13 had returned excellent quality data and pictures from a near-perfect circular polar orbit at 870km (543mi) by 860km (537mi) altitude. Its advanced very high-resolution radiometer, the automatic picture transmission system, and the high resolution picture transmission system designed to provide local area coverage to hundreds of weather forecasters around the world were all working. After NASA completed a checkout in 3wk, it would turn over the satellite to NOAA for operation. (NASA Release 78-164)
GSFC reported that, after a 2mo search, its Copernicus satellite had located what might be a second invisible “black hole” in the universe. The satellite’s x-ray experiment had found in the constellation Scorpio what was believed to be a super dense collapsed star with such strong gravity that even light could not escape it. Scientists had declared it much more active and convincing than the first black hole found, Cygnus X-l. The new black hole was orbiting Scorpio V-861, a supergiant star visible with the naked eye from earth, and gradually siphoning away the larger star’s atmosphere. Tracing the massive amounts of x-rays released from matter emanating from the giant star had led scientists to what they called the “best black hole yet”; discovery had given astronomers their first opportunity to study a black hole as it passed behind its companion star and to test some of their black-hole theories. Glen Pollard, coinvestigator on the project, said he hoped the new information would define the shape of the cloud of stellar material sucked into the black hole, reveal the dynamics of such systems, and provide a measure of the quantity of material being removed at speeds up to 2 million mph. Studying black holes would extend astronomers’ knowledge of physics into areas not observable on earth—the physics of relativity. (Goddard News, July 19/78, 1)
Heao 2 had radioed back its first picture Nov. 18, an image of x-rays coming from the edge of what may be a black hole, the Washington Star reported. When the picture first appeared on a GSFC television monitor as a collection of bright dots against a black background, scientists and engineers were described as “ecstatic.” Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory said: “The significance of today’s event is that for the first time x-ray astronomy has become of age, and it has achieved the kind of resolution and sensitivity which has been traditional in the fields of radio and optical astronomy.” He said the x-ray telescope on Heao 2 should be able to detect x-rays from objects two-thirds of the way toward the edge of the universe, meaning that the satellite would be seeing radiation created roughly 10 billion yr ago. Giacconi added, “The scientific significance is what it tells us we are going to get in the future,” and noted the telescope was 100 to 1000 times more sensitive than previous x-ray detectors placed above earth’s atmosphere. The picture reconstructed by computer from data radioed back by the satellite was a test to demonstrate the capability of the telescope, which had a 23-in-wide mirror and an 11-ft focal length. Target for the test was a star system in the Milky Way galaxy called Cygnus X-l, selected because of its well known location and its brightness. Cygnus X-l, 6000 light-yrs away, also happened to be the best candidate for a black hole; observations by a smaller x-ray satellite had shown that its x-ray emissions were unlike those seen from other objects. {W Star, Nov 19/78, A-13)
KSC announced it had awarded the Univ. of Florida a $99 013 contract for development of a water-management system using satellite data and other NASA-developed technology. A Florida water-resources management information system could provide managers with a computerized bank of information to help meet increased demand for water; data from earth-resources satellites like NASA’s Landsats and NOAA’s Goes should reduce guesswork in water management. Studies by the Univ. of Florida and the South Florida Water Management District had substantiated Florida’s need for a comprehensive water-management system. The university study showed lack of water as the main problem facing Florida agriculture, and reported that water demand would equal the existing supply by about 1980. These studies, coupled with a 1972 mandate by the Florida legislature for a water-use and supply development plan, prompted state water-management districts to seek help from the university and KSC in solving their problems. (KSC Release 32-78)
The ESA Council had given the go-ahead to produce an initial batch of 5 operational Ariane launch vehicles, and had approved interim funding of approximately $23.8 million for preliminary production-related expenses, AvWk reported. Although individual participating countries must approve the expenditures, Council approval had been sufficient to begin production. The first operational launcher should be available by the end of 1980 to launch ESA’s Exosat scientific satellite in early 1981. Cost of the 5-launcher package had been estimated at approximately $182.6 million, with an additional 10% proposed as a contingency reserve. Total budget would amount to about $200 million. At West Germany’s insistence, the individual satellite programs that would use the Arianes would fund the launcher costs. Program managers at ESA had sought approval to produce a first batch of 6 Arianes; however, policy of governments involved was to fund production of launchers only for identified markets. Once production buildup was completed, production rate of the Ariane was expected to reach 2 vehicles per year; program officials predicted this could increase rather quickly to 4, or possibly 5, a year to meet market demand. (AvWk Apr 24/78, 96)
NASA announced it had judged the UK 5 (Ariel 5) mission successful in prelaunch objectives. This Explorer-class x-ray mission launched in 1974 had contributed significantly to x-ray astronomy and astrophysics. Ariel 5, a cooperative program between the U.S. and the U.K. Science Research Council, had discovered many new transient x-ray sources, although most of its studies were of steady x-ray sources. The second Ariel 5 catalog had listed locations of 107 high-latitude x-ray sources, many of them extragalactic. The satellite had performed well, far beyond its 6mo design life, although gas for the attitude-control system had run out 2.5 yr after launch (18mo beyond prelaunch estimates). An onboard magnetic fine-torquing system had maintained attitude stability and allowed some spin-axis maneuvers. All 6 onboard instruments had performed as they did the first yr after launch and should continue to produce exceptional results. (MOR S-870-74-05 [postlaunch], Mar 15/78)
U.S. share of the 102-nation INTELSAT organization had dropped from its 61% starting point in 1964 (when 19 nations had joined to establish a global communications consortium) to 25.1%, Av Wk reported. Charges that the U.S. had dominated INTELSAT had caused friction in the organization since its inception. The 1964 interim agreements had ensured U.S. majority ownership of not less than 50.6%; expanded membership and traffic patterns had decreased U.S. control as well as the friction. Other ownership shares under the new allocation were those of the United Kingdom, 10.8%; France, 5.98%; Brazil, 4.23%; and Japan, 3.68%. The 1964 interim consortium had been capitalized at $200 million; the 1971 agreements had boosted the figure to $500 million, including members’ net capital contributions and the outstanding contractual capital commitments. The amount had reached $900 million in 1976 to finance Intelsat V satellites. (AvWk, May 22/78, 56)
NASA declared the launch of ESA geostationary operational environmental satellite Geos 2 on July 14, 1978 successful. Launch-vehicle performance was nominal and had placed the spacecraft and its apogee-boost motor (ABM) into the desired transfer orbit. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit, and the ABM was fired successfully July 16, 1978. The satellite was being maneuvered over the South Atlantic to a position at 6°E above the equator. All subsystem functional checks were complete and satellite status was satisfactory. The mission had replaced Geos 1, whose Delta vehicle had put it into an incorrect orbit in April 1977. (MOR M-492-302-78-02 [postlaunch] Oct 30/78)
INTELSAT announced it had signed agreements with Saudi Arabia and Zaire to lease capacity on global-coverage Intelsats for domestic telecommunications in those countries. Saudi Arabia had leased a total of 2.25 global-beam transponders, extending domestic service to 8 cities in addition to Jeddah, Riyadh, and 2 mobile antennas served since 1977. The 5-yr agreement with Zaire had earmarked a full global-beam transponder in a spare-capacity satellite to serve 13 locations in that nation. Fifteen countries had begun (or would soon begin) to use the Intelsat system for domestic telecommunications. (INTELSAT Release 78-5-1)
The USSR had launched Soyuz 28 at 4:28pm Moscow time, Tass announced, with cosmonaut Vladimir Remek of Czechoslovakia accompanying Soviet cosmonaut Aleksey Gubarev on the first of a series of international cooperative flights that would include representatives from Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, and Romania. Soyuz launches later in 1978 would carry Polish and GDR cosmonauts. Since 1967 when the Intercosmos program began, scientists and specialists of participating countries had been using Soviet satellites and research rockets to study the physical properties of outer space, space meteorology, communications, biology, medicine, and natural resources. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 3/78)
NASA announced it had adjudged performance of the Heao 1 satellite successful, as it had accomplished its primary and secondary objectives. Heao 1 had demonstrated that, in addition to its operating mode, normal scanning, it could point at specific celestial objects for detailed investigations; it had performed more than 50 pointings. NASA had solved some minor problems with the stored-command programmer early in the mission. The experiment complement had continued to receive high-resolution data over an energy range of 150 to 10 million electron volts. Although the sensitivity of the large-area counter array instruments had degraded, several of the counters remained unimpaired because of their modular construction and were able to achieve overall objectives. Heao 1 data clarified x-ray sources barely visible in older studies; the faintest sources seen were 10 to the 5th times weaker than the first x-ray star (ScoX-1) discovered 15yr ago. Heao 1 had identified many distant active sources, such as quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and BL Lacerta objects. For example, Heao 1 observed the BL Lacerta object Markarian-5011 spectra, which were extremely hard, establishing the lack of surrounding gas. Heao I had discovered that the strongest active sources in the galaxy were emitting radiation into the MeV range as a result of stimulation by strong nonthermal emission mechanisms. A map of diffuse x-rays in the range 0.15 to 60KeV indicated a hot thermal plasma extending beyond earth’s galaxy, and possibly early evolution of the universe. (NASA MOR S-832-77-01 [postlaunch] April 3/78)
INTELSAT announced it had awarded Nippon Electric Co., Tokyo, Japan, a $175 000 contract for development of a multimode phase-shift-keying (PSK) modem for a nonlinear satellite channel. INTELSAT had established full-time global communications using 197 antennas at 161 earth stations in 87 countries. (INTELSAT Release 78-3-M)
The USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) was conducting initial ground tests of a prototype laser-communications (LaserCom) system to transfer data from satellite to satellite as well as to and from ground and airborne users, the AFSC Newsreview reported. Over a 2yr period SAMSO would test the system at the White Sands Missile Range, N.M., in three phases: ground-to-ground transmission and reception of the laser beam, by reflecting it off a 24in steerable mirror 1 to 6mi from the laser; interim air-to-ground tests, evaluating aircraft ability to acquire and point the laser transmitter toward a ground-based beacon laser; and full demonstration of the air-to-ground system, using prototype equipment. Although most of the tests had been successful in laboratory Simulations, a few unknowns remained, including laser-beam communications through the atmosphere. LaserCom had some inherent advantages over existing satellite communications systems: for example, its narrow beam width enhanced security by allowing only the intended user to receive the beam, it also offered an unprecedented data-transmission capability because its 1-gigabit-per-sec rate would accommodate a great number of spacecraft, airborne and surface vessels, and ground users that would be relaying information to a synchronous-altitude LaserCom satellite for subsequent real-time or delayed transmission to other users. After completing its tests in 1980, DOD would evaluate the system for technical capability, requirements, and cost; should LaserCom application prove feasible, in-orbit operation of the system could begin as early as 1986. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 78, 1)
MSFC announced that its weather scientists working with colleagues from Texas A&M had encountered practically every kind of severe weather—thunderstorms, tornadoes, torrential rains, hail, and snow—within the study of the zone, roughly the south central states, during the 7th atmospheric variability experiment (AVE-7). As a 3-day weather pattern had moved across the test area, 24 rawinsonde stations operated by NOAA and one each by MSFC and Texas A&M had acquired data. The experimenters had also received for comparison a weather picture from a Goes satellite every 15min and reports from weather radars throughout the area every hour. In the AVE-7 experiment, rawinsonde stations every 3hr released balloons carrying instruments to record temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, and wind velocity and direction from ground level to an altitude of about 25km (15.5mi). The balloons, normally released about every 12hr, on a 3-hr schedule had allowed researchers to spot small-scale events that could dissipate quickly. The balloon data, combined with satellite pictures at 15-min intervals, had permitted computerized weather forecasts by showing scientists how to spot approaching bad weather much earlier; comparison of ground-based with satellite data would help identify the causes of severe weather. With more such experiments using space technology, scientists could eventually accumulate enough information to more accurately predict severe weather. {Marshall Star, May 10/78, 1)
GSFC announced that, in a cooperative program with NOAA, its scientists had demonstrated the benefits of using short-interval full-resolution satellite images to monitor tropical cyclones. The agencies had undertaken the program to determine optimum resolution and image frequency for selecting winds to study, in forecasting tropical-cyclone intensity. Experiments using the Sms 2 to study hurricane Eloise and cyclone Caroline, and Goes 1 for tropical storms Belle and Holly, had taken scan images of the storms at varying resolutions and at a variety of time intervals. GSFC using its atmospheric and oceanographic information processing system (AOIPS) to examine the experimental data, had found that rapid-scan full-resolution visible images could best disclose the wind vectors. Scans taken every half or quarter hr had been inadequate, because many clouds of the type and size best suited for tracking did not persist or maintain their shape for as long as 30min. GSFC scientists also had found that the full-resolution visible images could improve cirrus tracking and could increase the number of trackable elements available from coarser-resolution infrared images. (Goddard News, June 21/78, 4)
The U.S. Postal Service would soon begin a lyr test of an electronic message service system that would reduce letters to electronic impulses, relay them to their destination by satellite, reconvert them to letter form using high-speed printers, and deliver them by regular carriers, Defense/Space Daily reported. If the test was successful, the agency could offer electronic mail services in up to 10 cities within 3yr. The initial test would send messages by satellite from one room in a Postal Service facility in Rockville, Md., to another room in the facility. A $2.3 million RCA study of the electronic message service system had concluded that it would cost the Postal Service 10 to 11 cents to deliver this kind of mail, a price equal to or less than present costs. RCA suggested that the system could be used within 6 to 8yr for up to one-fourth of the 100 billion letters sent through the U.S. mails annually and estimated it would cost the Postal Service $2 billion to install the system in 87 cities around the U.S. (D/SD, Nov 27/78, 120)
Worldwide demand for international satellite communications would increase by more than 100% in the next 5yr, INTELSAT announced. The prediction came out of the fourth global telecommunications traffic meeting sponsored by INTELSAT, in which 172 international communications experts representing 93 telecommunications entities around the world participated. Purpose of the annual meeting was to forecast the demand for services provided by the INTELSAT system. INTELSAT would use these forecasts in configuring its system to meet user requirements with maximum efficiency, and in planning for future satellite systems. Preliminary figures from the meeting indicated that global demand for satellite-telecommunications capacity would increase from 14 105 equivalent full-time simultaneous telephone circuits at year end 1978, to 29 282 circuits by the end of 1982, up 108%. The biggest demand was expected to be from countries surrrounding the Atlantic Ocean, where communications traffic by satellite was expected to rise by 114% over the next 5yr. Traffic in the Indian Ocean region was projected to increase by 98%, and in the Pacific Ocean region by 91%. (INTELSAT Releases 78-19-1, 78-20-1)
ESA’s meteorological satellite, Meteosat 1, had been in orbit for a yr carrying out its image-taking, dissemination, and data-collection missions, ESA announced. Ground facilities at the European Space Operations Center (ESOC) in Darmstadt, Germany, for receiving, processing, archiving, and disseminating meteorological data from the satellite were ready to fulfill all requirements for the first GARP experiment, scheduled to begin Dec. 1. Meteosat 1, which transmitted every half hr visible and infrared images of the earth, had been retransmitting to primary and secondary data-user stations some 300 formats per day in various digital and analog forms. It also acted as a relay for image data from the U.S. satellite Goes 1 over the Atlantic, transmitted through the Centre de Meteorologie Spatiale at Lannion at the rate of about 20 formats per day. Meteosat 1 had also participated in Nov. in the first transmission tests of image data from the TJ.S. Goes 3 satellite over the Indian Ocean, so that users had received data from three geostationary satellites covering approximately two-thirds of the globe. Data-collection platform experiments had demonstrated the high quality of the links between Meteosat 1 and the mobile platforms; about 15 DCPs were operational, and about 10 were in the process of being admitted and would come into service in early 1979. Another mission of Meteosat 1 was to supply immediately usable meteorological products (wind speed, cloud height, sea-surface temperature, etc.). Meteosat image quality should maintain the serviceability of these products; results already achieved were at least comparable to those obtained by other geostationary satellites participating in the GARP. Use of the water-vapor channel, an original feature on Meteosat l, was considered by the meteorological community as a major advance in refinement of interpretation techniques. (ESA Release Nov 28/78)
Preliminary results from a 6-yr experiment at the San Andreas fault in Calif, indicated that earth motion along the fault had accumulated at a rate much faster than expected, equivalent to 6 to 7m over the past 70yr, Goddard News reported. Measurements from tracking sites on both sides of the fault in the San Andreas Fault Experiment (SAFE) to determine gross pla.e motion across the fault, and to demonstrate practical application of satellites and ground-based lasers in tracking relative motion of the earth’s upper plates, had produced satellite tracking data accurate within a few centimeters. Gross motion across the fault had provided a measure of strain energy as it accumulated, eventually to be released as an earthquake. Goddard Spaceflight Center’s pulsed laser ranging systems had measured earth motion by determining the range to a satellite, measuring the time required for a short pulse of intense light to travel from the laser to the satellite and back, and repeating the measurements once per second throughout each satellite pass. GSFC had performed the SAFE experiment in cooperation with a broad cross section of the scientific community. (Goddard News, June 21/78, 1)
INTELSAT announced it had awarded a $101 539 contract to General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., for a reconfigurable-beam satellite communications antenna. Under the 15-mo contract GE would develop an antenna capable of beaming dual-polarized transmissions that could be reshaped on command while the satellite was in orbit; GE would also fabricate portions of such an antenna for demonstration. Reconfigurable-antenna developments might be incorporated into INTELSAT satellites launched during the 1980s. (INTELSAT Release 78-36-M)
The People’s Republic of China had launched eight spacecraft, some of them military reconnaissance satellites, Av Wk reported. Mainland Chinese had confirmed earlier speculation that reentry packages returned from three PRC spacecraft were of that type. Av Wk also said that Cosmos 1031 launched Sept. 8 from Plesetsk by the USSR, appeared to be a close-look reconnaissance satellite to report on NATO’s Northern Wedding exercise to repel a simulated invasion of the Shetland Is. north of Britain. The satellite had an unusual perigee location of 60°N over the Shetlands; its inclination was 62.8°. (AvWk, Sept. 25/78, 9)
INTELSAT announced that earth stations handling satellite communications in countries bordering the Indian Ocean would begin switching to a new larger-capacity comsat, Intelsat IV-A, which would carry about 6000 2-way telephone circuits (25% more capacity than its Intelsat IV predecessor) and would eventually provide increased capacity for international satellite television. The Indian Ocean Intelsat had provided communications for and between countries in an area bounded approximately by Britain and Europe in the west and Japan and Australia in the east. The transition of 47 earth stations through 150 steps was scheduled to start Sept. 18 and to be substantially completed by the end of 1978. No interruption or disruption of telecommunications services was anticipated, except that television transmission facilities would be unavailable during the latter half of Nov. The switchover operation would position Intelsat IV and Intelsat IV-A in orbit at the same location and synchronize their harmonic motion (a sway induced by natural forces acting on the spacecraft). The proximity of the satellites would allow earth stations to see both simultaneously, permitting changes in the operational configuration without a break in service. (INTELSAT Release 78-25-1)
NASA’s Office of Legislative Affairs had reported on a letter from the National Taxpayers Union to Sen. James Abourezk regarding S.2860, a bill that would commit the U.S. to the development and demonstration of solar power satellites. The letter read in part:
NASA declared the launch from Cape Kennedy at 6:36pm Mar. 31 of Intelsat IVA F-6, last of the Intelsat IVA series, to be successful. NASA had launched the satellite on an Atlas Centaur into the desired transfer orbit, thus meeting all objectives. Orbital parameters had been 35 912km apogee, 548.8km perigee, 21.84° inclination. ComSatCorp had fired the apogee kick motor Apr. 1 to place the satellite in a neargeosynchronous orbit that would take it at mid-June to its final location at 63°E over the Indian Ocean. (MOR E-491-633-78-06 [postlaunch], June 23/78)
INTELSAT announced award of a contract to improve satellite communications in regions plagued by frequent heavy rainfall that caused satellite signals to fade at higher frequencies. Under the $39 827 contract, the Technische Universitat Graz, Austria, would conduct yr-long experiments for simultaneous comparison of fading caused by rainfall in four different locations. Results would determine whether alternative earth stations for use during rainfall would solve the fading problem. (INTELSAT Release 78-31-M)
ESA announced that the third (upper) stage of the heavy launcher Ariane, designed to use highly advanced liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propulsion techniques, had been successfully tested Jan. 10 at the Societe Europeenne de Propulsion’s Vernon test center. The firing had lasted 250sec, as scheduled. With previous successful tests, this test had demonstrated European mastery of the technology, ESA said. ESA had developed Ariane to launch communications and other applications satellites weighing up to 1000kg into geostationary orbit 36 000km above the equator; ESA had plans to launch about 200 geostationary satellites between 1980 and 1990. (ESA Release Jan 12/78)
NASA declared the launch of two satellites had been successful, Japan’s direct broadcast satellite BSE and ESA’s orbital test satellite Ots 2. A Delta had launched BSE into a synchronous transfer orbit from ETR at 5:01pm EST Apr. 7, 1978, with 35 923km apogee, 166.1km perigee, 27.2° inclination. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit. The boost motor had fired at 7:34pm EST Apr. 8 to move the satellite over the South Pacific to a position at approximately 110°E above the equator south of Japan. All subsystem functional checks had indicated satisfactory satellite status. NASA had launched Ots B (Ots 2 in orbit) at 6:59pm EDT May 11 from ETR on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit with 35 946km apogee, 183.6km perigee, and 27.4° inclination. Satellite performance was satisfactory during the transfer orbit. The boost motor had fired at 8am EDT May 13, to move the satellite over the South Atlantic to a position 10°E above the equator. All subsystem functional checks had indicated satisfactory satellite status. This was the first flight of the Delta 3914 (Castor IV) configuration since failure of the OTS-A mission in Sept. 1977. (MOR M-492-212-78-01 [postlaunch] and M-492-210-78-02 [postlaunch], both June 28/78)
NASA announced it had postponed to at least June 24 the scheduled June 10 launch of SeaSat-A because of precautionary changes and tests on the Atlas F launch vehicle. Temperature increases in the aft sections of recently launched Atlas vehicles had necessitated the changes and resulting tests. NASA would use SeaSat-A, first satellite designed to study the world’s oceans, to see if microwave instruments scanning from space could provide scientific data useful to oceanographers, meteorologists, and commercial users of the seas. The spacecraft would send information on sea-surface winds and temperatures, currents, wave heights, ice conditions, ocean topography, and coastal storm activity. NASA would attempt to demonstrate the feasibility of an operational multiple-satellite network to monitor oceans on a continuous near-realtime basis; twice daily, the system could provide ships at sea with detailed charts updated to show latest weather conditions, sea states, and hazards. Long-range use of the system could influence ship design, port development, and selection of sites for offshore facilities such as power plants. Other potential users of SeaSat data would include commercial fishermen, oil exploration firms, the Weather Service, pollution-control agencies, and the Coast Guard and Navy. (NASA Release 78-77; JPL Universe, May 26/78, 1)
NASA announced an MSFC award to General Dynamics Convair of a $250,000 contract to study feasibility of a space platform in geostationary Earth orbit carrying many separate payloads. The platform would contain plug-in equipment to accommodate communications, Earth resources, meteorology, and similar studies now flown on separate satellites. Preliminary MSFC investigations indicated that a platform could be built in space and located in a synchronous orbit at 40,000 kilometers to offer power and other functions to “tenant” missions parked there for a fee-like rent. Platform services such as power, available to all tenants, would eliminate the need for antennas, solar arrays, or batteries on individual payloads, reducing size and launch weight. Locating packages on a single platform would also simplify in-orbit repair and servicing. (NASA Release 79-82; MSFC Release
FBIS reported that U.S. scientists and engineers visiting tracking stations, research institutes, and “cosmic centers” in the People’s Republic of China had seen their achievements in rockets and cosmonautics. At one center, the Chinese showed their U.S. counterparts the latest “spy in the sky” satellite planned for launch in late 1979. (FBIS, Moscow to Asia in English, Oct 6/79)
NASA pronounced the mission of international ultraviolet explorer lue successful: observatory performance had “substantially exceeded design and mission objectives.” Gyros used on lue would serve the Space Telescope (ST); the spectrograph and cameras would influence the design of those on the ST; and operational software and guest-observer operations would provide an experience base for the ST. (NASA MOR S-868-78-03 [postlaunch] Aug 16/79) Wolfe said that all the experimenters who worked on the mission in 1969 were still alive, and only one had been changed (the principal investigator for infrared, who had taken a sabbatical). He called the media coverage of the Pioneer 10 and Pioneer II Jupiter encounters in 1973 and 1974 “outstanding.” A plaque in the National Air and Space Museum described Pioneer as “a spacecraft designed to fly by the planets Jupiter and Saturn’—Wolfe congratulated the museum on its forecast. He enumerated the options for imaging, explaining how the Pioneer would approach Saturn and its moons and how the information returned would assist the upcoming Voyager encounters. A NASA release August 21 said controllers at ARC had ordered a “left turn” for Pioneer 11 to permit one-at-a-time activation of its onboard instruments. Images of Saturn’s rings from 16 million kilometers looked no larger than a penny; by August 26, investigators expected them to be better than any taken from Earth and 20 times better by September 1. (NASA Release 79-108 [press kit], 79-109; ARC Release 79-37; text, press conf, Aug During August: NASA announced selection of a number of investigators and experiments for its missions. —NASA selected 24 scientists to use data from the laser geodynamics satellite Lageos launched May 4, 1976. Having completed an initial phase of settling into orbit and checking out its laser tracking system, the satellite was now ready to provide mobile and fixed receivers around the world with ranging data on crustal-plate motion, density distribution within the Earth, and polar motion/Earth rotation. The investigators would become part of a working group chaired by Dr. David Smith, Lageos project scientist and were to meet August 29 and 30 at GSFC. Seventeen investigators were from U.S. universities (six), private firms (five), or other government agencies (six); others were from France (four), the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and West Germany (one each). (NASA Release 79-102) —NASA selected 32 research proposals that would use global measurements of the near-Earth magnetic field from Magsat, scheduled for launch in October. The 19 U.S. investigators represented universities (12), private firms (6), and government agencies (1). The 13 foreign investigators were from Canada (4), France and Australia (2 each), and Brazil, India, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom (1 each). The 6-rnonth mission managed by GSFC would remedy shortages and discrepancies in data from many geographic areas. (NASA Release 79-103) —NASA selected 40 scientific investigations for Spacelab/Shuttle flights scheduled between 1983 and 1985; 33 of those chosen were from the United States, and 7 from other nations (Canada, France, Japan, and Belgium) each funding its own experiments. The studies, chosen from some 200 responses to a request for proposals, would be on astronomy, solar physics, upper-atmosphere physics, space-plasma physics, and high-energy astrophysics. (NASA Release 79-112)
ESA announced that, pending an INMARSAT decision on the configuration of its worldwide maritime space system, member states in the Maritime European Communications Satellite (Marecs) program had agreed at a July 26 meeting in Paris to prefinance a third maritime communications satellite, Marecs-C, under a new arrangement whereby, instead of ESA’s offering INMARSAT the Marecs-A and Marecs-B satellites through Interim European Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), ESA would offer three Marecs satellites directly to INMARSAT. The agreement authorized ESA to sign with the satellite contractor for about 45 MAU (million accounting unit) and begin arranging for a Pacific-area ground station. (ESA Release July 27/79)
NASA said it would join the Canadian Department of Communications and France’s CNES in a 15-month demonstration in 1982 of a search-and-rescue system to speed detection and location of distress signals by use of satellites. The three countries would set up ground stations and conduct simulated search-and-rescue. A satellite in polar orbit could cover the globe every 12 hours, listening on the emergency frequencies used by ships and aircraft. Minutes after receiving an alert, ground computers could pinpoint its origin within 20 kilometers (13 miles) and flash it to coordination centers. Canada would provide transponders, and France receiver-processors, to fly on NOAA satellites in polar orbit; the United States would modify, fit with antennas, integrate, and launch the satellites and develop emergency beacons for ships and aircraft to use with the systems. The parties to the agreement were also negotiating for cooperation with the Soviet Union. (NASA Release
NASA reported a prediction by NORAD that the Pegasus 2 spacecraft assembly launched by NASA in May 1965 would reenter Earth’s atmosphere about November 5. Pegasus 2, one of three satellites launched in 1965 to gather micrometeoroid data for use in designing future spacecraft, weighed considerably less at 10,430 kilograms than the 70,300-kilogram Skylab that reentered over Australia in July. The predicted descent area would be 31.7° north and south of the equator, an area three-fourths water. After the reentry of Pegasus 1 and 3 (September 1978 and August 1969, respectively), no parts of either spacecraft were found or recovered. (NASA Release 79-126)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, administrator, and Dr. Willy Moenandir Mangoendiprodjo, director of Indonesia’s telecommunications agency, had signed a memorandum of understanding April 9 for launch of two Indonesian domestic communications satellites. NASA would furnish reimbursable launch and associated services for a second generation of Palapa spacecraft. The new satellites would replace existing communications satellites: Palapa A-l, launched July 8, 1976, and Palapa A-2, launched March 10, 1977. The Shuttle would launch the first Palapa B in June 1982; the second during the first half of 1983. (NASA Release 79-43)
INTELSAT reported that two new regional satellite systems proposed by member groups would be technically compatible with its present system and would not threaten its economic well-being. A proposed European Communications Satellite (ECS) system would provide telecommunications service to countries in Eastern and Western Europe and North Africa beginning in 1982, working with Europe’s terrestrial network. A Palapa B system, a joint venture of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries including Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, would serve remote areas not having access to INTELSAT’S system, also beginning in 1982. (INTELSAT Releases 79-07-1, 79-09-1)
NASA announced that it had selected 33 scientific investigations for 4 satellite missions scheduled for launch in 1982-1985. The investigations, 23 from the United States and 10 from 6 other nations, would be in climate and upper-atmosphere research. The 23 U.S. investigations represented 11 universities, 1 private organization, and 2 government agencies. Foreign countries represented were Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom. Each country would fund its own investigations; the cost of the U.S. studies would be about $5 million over the next five years, including instruments. Spacecraft used would be the earth radiation-budget satellite, two polar-orbiting NOAA metesats, and Spacelab 3. (NASA Release 79-165)
NASA reported that an unmanned Soviet Cosmos satellite to be launched in mid-September would carry 13 experiments from the United States along with some from the Soviet Union and other countries, all designed to study effects of weightlessness on physiological processes. ARC would manage the U.S. portion of the project, in which 40 scientists representing 18 U.S. universities and research groups would participate. Major payload would be 38 white rats and 60 fertile Japanese quail eggs, scheduled to orbit about three weeks. The Soviet Union would make a first attempt to breed rats in space, separating males and females until the second flight day; two control sets of rats on Earth would be housed and fed like those in space, one exposed to stresses such as launch and reentry but not zero gravity. Three U.S. experiments would use material handcarried to Moscow a week before launch and returned to ARC after recovery. (NASA Release 79-114; ARC Release 79-39)
INTELSAT would mark the 10th anniversary of its global communications satellite system begun July 15, 1969, when an Intelsat 3 satellite went into service over the Indian Ocean; Intelsat 3 satellites were already covering the Atlantic and Pacific. It had been just over 5 years since launch of the first commercial communications satellite (Early Bird, nickname of Intelsat I) April 6, 1965. “Best of all,” INTELSAT said, its charges for leased telephone circuits by satellite had decreased 71.2% over 10 years despite inflation. (INTELSAT Release 79-17-1)
NASA reported that its small astronomy satellite Sas 3 had reentered the atmosphere April 9 over the Pacific Ocean after nearly four years of scanning the skies for X-ray data, although its design lifetime had been only one year. Launched May 7, 1975, from the San Marco platform off the coast of Kenya, the 195-kilogram. Sas J in a 500-kilometer orbit had discovered 2 new quasars and about half the 35 known X-ray bursters (stars emitting huge brief bursts of X-rays once every few hours). Sas 3 indicated that these bursts resulted from thermonuclear reactions on the surfaces of neutron stars. (NASA Release 79-44)
As decided earlier in 1979 [see June 30], NASA took the first steps to take ATS 6 out of geostationary orbit and boost it to a higher altitude to keep it from colliding with other spacecraft. On the evening of July 30, NASA fired the minus-pitch attitude-control thruster; the firing was successful, but ATS lost Earth acquisition because of intermittent telemetry problems. In order to reacquire Earth, the spacecraft was put in a Sun-acquisition mode the morning of July 31; boost procedures resumed about 1:30 p.m. and proceeded as planned, with completion expected in about 30 hours. Since its May 1974 launch, the five-year-old communications satellite had exceeded its planned lifetime by three years, but three of its four stationkeeping thrusters had failed, and the fourth was shaky. GSFC would use the remaining thruster to lift ATS to a level several hundred kilometers higher, where it would remain in orbit indefinitely. (NASA Release 79-81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt Aug 1/79)
The Washington Star reported on RCA’s plans to launch within 18 months a replacement for the $20 million Satcom 3 that vanished from orbit December 10. The company said that it wanted FCC authority to launch a spare satellite now being built; a complete search for the missing communications satellite could take several weeks, but so far “contact has not been regained.” (W Star, Dec 15/79, C-8)
President Carter designated the NOAA to manage all civilian remote sensing from space. A space policy review committee chaired by Frank Press had assessed future U.S. civilian remote sensing requirements and decided that a single agency could best handle operational satellite activities. NOAA had managed three generations of weather satellites to prepare it for responsibilities in land remote sensing as well as atmosphere and ocean. The directive said the United States would continue to supply Landsat data to foreign users; the DOC would foster private-sector involvement in remote sensing and would coordinate and regulate civil remote sensing through a board representing federal and state organizations including NASA and DOD. (Text, Nov 20/79)
NASA’s public affairs office reported that the 23,000-pound Pegasus 2 satellite reentered the Earth’s atmosphere at about 4:20 p.m. EST, coming down in the Atlantic Ocean northwest of Ascension Island. The “footprint” of descending "debris would have spread over a path 60 miles wide by 1,500	miles long over the South Atlantic, the report said. (Hq PAO, Nov 3/79)
NASA announced a new five-year development program to retain U.S. leadership in satellite communications and assigned LeRC to work with private industry, DOD, and other NASA centers to launch a sophisticated communications satellite in 1985 or 1986. Daniel J. Shramo, LeRC director of space applications, explained that NASA in 1973 had “phased down” its work in communications satellite technology because of budget pressures and “the strong capabilities present in the private sector.” Industry since then had been improving antenna performance, increasing the number of circuits per satellite, and decreasing satellite weight per channel. Technical studies already under way at LeRC should result in a communications satellite system capable of transmitting data anywhere regardless of population size or electronic sophistication. (NASA Release 79-143)
The Washington Post reported that NASA’s failure to tell a contractor about classified information on the USSR’s early-warning radar network had cost the federal government $75 million, the cost of rebuilding the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) to maintain communications with crews on the Shuttle in its first 10 years; of operations. NASA had had to renegotiate a $786 million contract awarded 3 years ago to Western Union, which designed the TDRSS without knowing about the problem of interference from USSR installations located between the Baltic and the Black Seas and using frequencies high enough to overpower transmissions between the TDRSS and the Shuttle orbiter. An unidentified source told the newspaper that U.S. intelligence had given such a “superclassified” designation to data on Soviet radar frequencies and power outputs that NASA could not give the information to Western Union and its subcontractor TRW Systems, Inc. Renegotiation and rework had delayed the satellite system by at least a year, NASA told Congress, but would not impair Shuttle operations already delayed by engine development problems. ( W Post, Feb 17/79, A-9)
NASA reported that LaRC staffers were using the SAGE satellite launched from WFC February 18 to measure and track into the stratosphere the ash and gases from an eruption of La Soufriere, a volcano on St. Vincent island in the Caribbean, between April 13 and 17. The eruption, detected first by SAGE while passing over the island April 23, deposited as much as an inch of dust on neighboring islands and provided an opportunity to study stratosphere distribution of aerosols from a single source. NASA alerted scientists around the world to use ground-based and balloon-borne instruments in checking between 6°N and 20 °N latitudes for effects of the eruption. SAGE might answer questions about the effect of aerosols and ozone on climate and environmental quality. (NASA Release 79-56; LaRC Release 79-29; WFC Release 79-8)
The ESA reported from its November 29 meeting that British Aerospace, chosen as prime contractor for ESA’s Large Satellite, would receive a contract for the first part of a study phase. Contracts for payload studies would go to Selenia (Italy) for a television broadcast payload and a 20-30 GHz transponder payload; to BTM (Belgium) for a 20-30 GHz beacon payload; to United Kingdoms Marconi Space and Defense Systems for a specialized-services payload; and to Marconi with Telespazio (Italy) and Philips (Netherlands) for mission studies related to the 20-30 GHz transponder. Contractor work would be done by April 1980, with launch scheduled for early 1984. Objectives of the Large Satellite program were to build a multipurpose space platform to match user requirements in telecommunications and to demonstrate a service payload that would advance ESA technology, assess potential of new satellite services, and promote satellite usage. (ESA Info Bltn 33) ESA reported that Meteosat 1 had put itself into standby mode November 24, one day after its second anniversary of successful operation in orbit, because of an apparent power overload. Attempts to switch it back to full operating mode succeeded only briefly. ESA had begun a step-by-step unit switching to detect the area of failure and isolate it; the fault apparently occurred in the electronics that turned off the main power supply in case of overload. Periodic instabllity had appeared in this protection unit, but the data collection function was fully operational and Meteosat 1 was able to collect and relay data from meteorological platforms within its field of view. ESA was analyzing the problem for possible effect on Meteosat 2, scheduled for launch in September 1980. (ESA Info Bltn 34)
INTELSAT announced a first step toward intersatellite communications links: an award of a $170,000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Company for design and fabrication of a traveling-wave tube, a vital component of an intersatellite link. Direct transmission via satellite was now possible only between points within one satellite’s coverage area (about one-third of Earth’s surface); messages for locations outside that area had to use land-based links or ground relay to a second satellite. The planned communications links could transmit directly from one satellite to another, saving one down and one up transmission, freeing that link for other use, and making the whole system more efficient and economical by making more stations available to direct access. (INTELSAT Release 79-10-1)
NASA announced that its satellite system ASDAR (aircraft-to-satellite data relay) had started operation as part of the GWE that began earlier this year [see January 7], collecting and relaying weather observations from aircraft in flight and leading to possible million-dollar savings annually in aviation fuel costs. The system, consisting of a power supply, clock, 80-watt transmitter, small computer, and antenna, would monitor and report eight times per hour the aircraft’s location and altitude, together with weather data generated by equipment already aboard each ASDAR-equipped airliner. The system would relay the information through a NOAA satellite to weather data centers and on to the users. Relay of quickly changing weather information to subsequent flights within two hours could save time and fuel by taking advantage of favorable winds or avoiding threatening storms. Also, the 17 widebody jets using ASDAR would regularly cross the southern hemisphere and the tropics, where data were not usually available. Participating countries included England, Australia, the Netherlands, the Scandinavian countries, Singapore, and the United States (NASA Release 79-51) NASA also reported that ARC’s research aircraft Galileo II had gone to Saudi Arabia to join an international study of the monsoon, a storm system bringing nearly all the Asian subcontinent’s annual rainfall in June, July, and August, supplying torrents of moisture for the crops and overwhelming the area in floods. In 1978 the storms killed more than 900 people and left more than 3 million homeless. MONEX (the monsoon experiment) would trace the origin of the storms and attempt to provide weather forecasts that would be “extremely useful” in an area “practically devoid of basic weather data,” according to Joachim Kuettner, director of the U.S. effort. (NASA Release
NASA announced award of a $4.7 million contract to Goodyear Aerospace Corp., Akron, Ohio, for fabricating a high-speed image-processing computer (called massively parallel processor) to analyze data from future Earth-observation spacecraft. Current computers had to process one at a time the thousands of picture elements (pixels) constituting a satellite image, a timeconsuming and expensive procedure. The new computer would use 16,384 simple interconnected elements to process the pixels simultaneously, 10 to 100 times faster than now possible and at a greatly reduced cost. Scheduled for delivery to GSFC in 1982, it would process data in the hundreds of images received there from NASA’s Earth-resources spacecraft. (NASA Release
INTELSAT reported that it would turn off Intelsat 3 F-3 this date after 10 years of service that gave the organization the first truly global telecommunications system. The Intelsat 3 series of nine communications satellites was built by TRW Systems Inc., three of them having failed to orbit or destroyed at launch; Intelsat 3 F-3 was the last of the series in operation. Original design life was five years. Launched into synchronous orbit in February 1969, the communications satellite operated over the Indian Ocean until July 1972, carrying among others a worldwide telecast of Prince Charles’s investiture as Prince of Wales. It was placed on standby in May 1977, and its mechanically despun antenna stalled in April 1979, more than 10 years after launch, rendering it inoperable. As it had enough fuel remaining to push it 4,000 to 5,000 kilometers further out into space, INTELSAT would turn off spacecraft electronic systems and activate small propulsion motors to put it where it would need 4 to 5 million years to return to its old altitude, drifting at the rate of a meter a year. (INTELSAT Release 79-28-1)
The Washington Post reported that SBS was “having a hard time getting off the ground” with launch of its first satellite put off for the third time in a month. Technical problems with the Delta had delayed the launch of SBS 1, built by Hughes Aircraft, first of its kind to offer a high-frequency interference-free signal. Liftoff had been postponed to November 6 because of insulation damage, then to November 12 when a motor bolt broke. The latest problem was a leak in the liquid oxygen system. (WPost, Oct 31/80, E-3)
NASA launched the fourth geostationary orbital environmental satellite (GOES-D) for NOAA from ESMC on a Delta at 6:27 p.m. EDT. The Delta put Goes 4 into a synchronous transfer orbit close to nominal. Firing an apogee kick motor at 8 a.m. September 11 would put it into geosynchronous equatorial orbit over 90°W for flight testing, after which it would be turned over to NOAA for operational use of the VISSR [see August 29]. The 103-day gap since NASA’s unsuccessful launch of NOAA-B May 29 almost set a record for inactivity. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 11/80; Df Dly, Sept 12/80, 62; Spacewarn, Sept 30/80)
INTELSAT announced that its assembly had agreed to technical and some economic compatibility with seven other satellite systems. Found technically compatible with existing and planned INTELSAT systems were Eutelsat, spare craft for a European communications satellite system; Germany’s TVSat broadcasting system; India’s Insat 1-A and Insat 1-B for television and meteorological use; Indonesia’s Palapa-A system for limited regional service to remote areas in southeast Asia; the Intersputnik system for limited use by Algeria; Japan’s GMS-2 metesat system; and Saudi Arabia’s broadcast-satellite system. Algeria’s proposal was the first instance of an INTELSAT signatory’s seeking use of another system for general international public traffic instead of for limited regional service. INTELSAT said that its permission would apply only through 1985 and to a total of 22 telephone lines; similar proposals by other members would require separate handling. The spec ific request by Algeria for use of Intersputnik would not constitute significant economic harm to INTELSAT at present; however, the assembly noted that INTELSAT’s objective was to promote development of “a single” global communications satellite system, and all signatories must continue to consider that a goal. (INTELSAT Release 80-23-1)
The FCC authorized the ComSatCorp to begin construction of a $15 million ground station on Saipan, in the western Pacific Ocean, to bring the first satellite communications to the northern Mariana Islands. The ComSatCorp-owned and -operated station would provide direct communications between the northern Marianas and the United States, Hawaii, Guam, Japan, and other points in the Pacific. (W Star, June 12/80, B-7)
NOAA reported that it would submit to OMB by midyear a transition plan for NOAA to assume responsibility for operating a Landsat-type system to be launched in the late 1980s. Based on technology derived from NASA’s experimental Landsat program, the system would provide essential data from space for use in food production, mineral exploration, Earth resources inventory, management of rangeland, forests, and water resources, and environmental protection. NOAA had operated meteorological satellites for 14 years, developing the ability to process, disseminate, and archive “enormous qualities” of satellitegenerated data for users who need it for decision making. NOAA would also have to determine not only the data requirements of various sectors of society but also how quickly the information was needed and in what format. NOAA would hold a series of regional meetings with users of satellite data to develop a system meeting their needs. (NOAA Release 80-48)
INTELSAT announced that Niger on April 14 had become the 103rd nation to join the organization. Niger was already linked to the INTELSAT system through a ground station at Niamey that operated with an Intelsat IV-A satellite over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-08-1)
NASA announced that the GOES-D meteorological satellite, scheduled for early launch from KSC for NOAA, would carry a new type of instrument: the visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) atmospheric sounder. GSFC would join with the University of Wisconsin in long-term evaluation of the VISSR’s usefulness in predicting severe local storms, hurricanes, and other short-term weather phenomena. Earlier spacecraft in the series had provided 24-hour two-dimensional cloudcover photography; the new sounder would measure temperature and moisture in various altitude layers besides returning high-resolution images. The synchronous GOES satellites, useful in observing storms during development, required observation schedules, data processing, and data analysis markedly different from those for polar-orbiting satellites such as the TIROS series. GSFC, NOAA, and the University of Wisconsin had set up facilities over the past few years to handle the atmospheric sounder data. (NASA Release 80-137)
ESA announced the inauguration March 6 in Geneva of the Stella experiment using the Ots satellite to transmit scientific data at high speeds between high-energy physics laboratories. Participating in the ceremony would be Roy Gibson, ESA director general; J.B. Adams, executive director of the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN); L. van Hove, research director for CERN; and F. Braun, director general for the European communities commission on internal market and industrial affairs. Some 1,600 scientists from ESA member states used CERN’s accelerators and high-energy particle detectors for fundamental research into the structure of matter. Stella would transmit electronic data at speeds up to 1 megabit (1 million bits of data) per second from CERN to member-state laboratories at Hamburg, Germany; Saclay, France; Didcot, United Kingdom; Pisa, Italy; Dublin, Ireland; and Graz, Austria. The speed of transmission would be similar to the working speeds of computers in the participating laboratories, eliminating the delay of sending magnetic tapes through the mail. (ESA Info Bltn 6)
NASA announced that, after five years of studying Earth resources and environment from an altitude of 920 kilometers (570 miles), Landsat 2 ceased operation when its primary flight-control mechanism failed because of wear. A two-month effort to use other on-board devices to keep the craft pointed at Earth had failed, and NASA staff had put it into an engineering-test mode that would allow further study of the attitude-control problem. Landsat 2, launched in 1975 with a one-year lifetime, was second of a remote sensing series that could also collect data from beacon platforms in remote areas. A major asset of the Landsat system was its repetitive observation, as often as every nine days with two satellites, which would permit immediate detection of short-term changes. Landsat L, launched in 1972, was retired early in 1978; Landsat 3, launched in March 1978, would continue to furnish data to more than 400 U.S. and foreign Earth-resources programs. NASA planned to launch a fourth and more advanced Landsat in 1981. (NASA Release 80-9)
NASA reported that France and West Germany signed an intergovernmental agreement today for joint development of a direct-broadcast television satellite to be launched on Ariane late in 1983. The two nations would split the cost of the initial three-satellite system, estimated at $250-$300 million. The sponsors said major return on the investment would come from sales of 15 to 20 such television satellite systems over the next 10 years to third parties such as Scandinavia’s Nordsat, Radio Luxembourg’s Luxsat, and People’s Republic of China. ESA would continue definition work on LSat, a parallel television-satellite effort without French and German participation. (NASA Actv Rpt, May 1/80)
INTELSAT announced that its board of governors had decided to purchase three more Intelsat 5A satellites in addition to the nine already on hand for the Intelsat 5 series, the latter to be launched by the end of 1982. Launching of the 5A series would begin in 1984; basically similar to Intelsat 5, they would have increased reliability and 25 % more communications capacity, handling 15,000	telephone calls compared to 12,000. (INTELSAT Release 80-30-1)
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) announced that it had filed with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) a 5% reduction of its basic charges to U.S. common carriers for international communications satellite services. It claimed frequent price cuts, most recently by 15 % in May 1979, since it began commercial service with Early Bird in 1965. (ComSat-Corp Release 80-3)
Press reports said that the FCC had voted 7 to 0 to approve construction and launching of 20 new communications satellites by 8 companies, tripling the number of commercial satellites providing domestic communications service, in what the New York Times called “in a single action the greatest impetus ever to the expansion of satellite service.” Besides alleviating a shortage of satellite capacity faced by cable television and other industries, FCC said that the decision would open the way for investment of more than $2 billion by the eight companies. This was their first chance to compete directly in the long-distance field with AT&T, instead of tying their local networks to the Bell System. Already operating their own satellite networks were three companies operating eight commercial communications satellites: Western Union Telegraph Company with three, RCA-American Communications, Inc., with two, and Comsat General Corporation with three leased entirely to AT&T and General Telephone & Electronics (GTE). Also Satellite Business Systems had finally launched its Sbs in November, making nine. All four current owners would expand operations under the new policy: AT&T and GTE as well as Hughes Communications and Southern Pacific Communications would build their own systems for the first time. Continental Telephone Corporation and partner Fairchild Industries would enter the field through purchase of 50% of WU’s Space Communications Corporation. (NY Times, Dec 5/80, D-1; W Post, Dec 5/80, E-2)
INTELSAT said that it would reduce by 20% its charges for communications satellite capacity leased to nations for domestic use. The board of governors decided to charge $800,000 (U.S.) per year per transponder; the previous fee had been $1 million. Fifteen nations were currently leasing capacity on INTELSAT spacecraft for their own domestic use. (INTELSAT Release 80-03-1)
ESA said that Erik Quistgaard, its director general, would meet in London November 27 with Olof Lundberg, director general of INMARSAT, to sign a contract for lease to ESA of 2 Marecs satellites [see Nov. 20]. The contract, worth about U.S.$65 million, would go into effect in 1982. ESA was first of three entities expected to contract with INMARSAT for satellites to provide a new worldwide maritime telecommunications service for the international shipping community. (ESA Info 29)
The Washington Post reported that AT&T would launch and operate its own satellites for use with its domestic satellite communications system. The firm filed with the FCC a plan to launch three satellites—one each in 1983, 1984, and 1986—to replace three Comsat satellites it had been leasing from Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of ComSatCorp). It would use its satellites to provide long-distance telephone service and specialized business services for 10 years in the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Each satellite would be able to handle up to 21,600 simultaneous telephone conversations. (W Post, Apr 30/80, B-4) During April: NASA announced appointment of Robert E. Smylie, deputy director of GSFC since December 1976 and acting director from June 1979 to February 1980, as Headquarters associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. He had joined NASA in 1962 at JSC, where he worked in various positions until assigned to Headquarters in 1973 as deputy associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology. He was previously employed by Douglas Aircraft Company. (NASA anno Apr 2/80; NASA Release 80-41)
Aerospace Daily reported that the Soviet Union today launched Cosmos 1176, possibly the first nuclear-powered ocean-surveillance satellite since radioactive fragments of Cosmos 954 crashed into Canada in January 1978. Orbit parameters were 265-kilometer apogee, 260-kilometer perigee, 89.6-minute period, and 65° inclination. Until the 1978 incident, the Soviet Union had routinely used radar-carrying satellites powered by nuclear sources traveling in pairs in similar orbits to detect ships; at end of mission, the nuclear source would be propelled into higher orbit to decay in outer space, but Cosmos 954 had malfunctioned. (A/D, Apr 30/80, 338)
DOC announced that it had upgraded the satellite division of NOAA and renamed it the National Earth Satellite Service (NESS), reflecting broader responsibilities for the former National Environmental Satellite Service. Earlier in 1980, NOAA became responsible for developing and managing a remote-sensing satellite system based on NASA’s experimental Landsat program. Since 1965, NOAA had managed operational weather satellites whose data served in navigation, commercial fishing, and water-resource management as well as weather forecasting. The greater resolution of the Landsat system should offer similar monitoring as well as data for uses such as farming, urban planning, and mineral exploration. (DOC Release 80-106)
GSFC said that a team of its scientists and technicians had pioneered a stereo-imaging technique for studying hurricanes, using photographs of the top of the same hurricane taken by two spacecraft, geostationary operational environmental satellites Goes East and Goes West, hovering over the equator at 75 °W and 135 °W. The team combined time-lapse cloudcover photos of Hurricane Frederic over the Gulf of Mexico September 12 in a stereo display showing changes in the storm as seen from space and allowing estimates of its intensity. (NASA Release 80-181)
NASA reported that astronomers using data from the international UV explorer were continuing to study the halo discovered around the Milky Way in early observations by the satellite. The halo material was found to be hot (about 100,000°), to extend 50,000 light-years from the galaxy, and to contain oxygen, sulfur, iron, silicon, and carbon. Iue launched January 26, 1978, was a joint mission of the United States, the United Kingdom, and ESA. For most of history, visible light was the only medium for studying celestial objects, but many types of electromagnetic radiation were now available for observation: radio waves, infrared, X-ray, gammEi rays, and ultraviolet rays. Earth’s atmosphere blocked most of these types of energy, which must be studied through spacecraft above the atmosphere. Iue, in a synchronous orbit keeping it in continuous touch with either the United States or the European ground station, could be used by astronomers located either at GSFC or the Villafranca station in Spain (Vilspa) much like a ground-based telescope but observing in the ultraviolet instead of visible-light spectrum. A scientific colloquium at GSFC during May heard 92 papers on Iue, findings; Prof. Robert Wilson, University College London, said “there is hardly an area of modem astronomy that hasn’t been affected.” Scientists from 25 countries were participating, and 478 astronomers had been assigned observing time on the satellite. (NASA Release 80-67)
The Washington Star reported that SBS had bet its future on the launch of a $20 million satellite as the basis of a revolutionary long-distance telephone service. SBS had promised new communications at lower rates than those of AT&T; its network would be the first in the world to use satellites and ground stations alone to transmit voice, data, and video messages from one place to another. Telephone firms had previously transmitted messages by underground cable or microwave-relay towers. The system would connect a firm with its faraway offices without reference to local phone lines: it would use a 16- to 25-foot-diameter antenna installed on a roof or in a parking lot to signal the satellite, which would relay the signal to ground stations at distant company offices and give service not presently available. Computers at far locations could talk to each other at speeds 20 times faster than was now possible; facsimile pictures could be transmitted 200 times faster; and the system would allow customers to hold videoconferences with executives located all over the United States. SBS had had difficulty in selling its services, designed for companies or government agencies conducting a large amount of nationwide business. It estimated a need for 25 to 30 private-line customers to break even by 1983. Two of its owner companies, IBM and Aetna, were among its 10 customers, and General Motors had asked for three stations to link Detroit, Atlanta, and Dayton. SBS said that the launch, scheduled for November 15, should attract attention and more customers to the company. (W Star, Nov 14/80, B-5)
NASA’declared the mission of Heao 3 successful in its prelaunch objectives. Launched September 29, 1979, the satellite had in its first six months of operation made a full gamma-ray sky survey and detected a wide range of cosmic-ray elements. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said Heao 3 should “continue to provide excellent scientific data.” (NASA MOR S-382-79-03 [postlaunch] May 13/80)
The NY Times reviewed advances in phototypesetting technology, including satellite transmission, that had made it possible for publications to print identical copies simultaneously anywhere in the world. “Cold type,” the first generation of phototypesetting, replaced use of individual characters with a matrix of symbols on a transparent material. Light sent through characters produced an image on high-contrast photographic paper. The second generation of typesetting machines also used a photographic negative to generate characters, but used digital computer scan to produce the symbols, recreating them on a cathode-ray tube as a series of minute dots or lines reproduced on photographic paper. The third generation, developed in the late 1960s, encoded text on a disk and printed out entirely by computer, working 10 times as fast as previous machines. By the 1970s, publications such as U.S. News and World Report, Newsweek, and the New York Times had switched from either hot type or less sophisticated cold type to the third-generation technology, which was amenable to satellite transmission. Some of the machines could produce entire pages of newspapers and magazines, including advertisements, artwork, and text, reducing time and cost of publication. A fourth generation would abandon photographic imaging altogether: using lasers, it would produce characters directly on paper without use of a cathode-ray tube. One such unit had the advantage of producing its output on nonphotographic paper, made without silver, at a price a third that of conventional light-sensitive paper. (NY Times, Sept 8/80, D-5)
NASA launched SBS-A, the SBS spacecraft, from ESMC on a Delta at 5:49 p.m. EST into a transfer orbit. At 5:30 p.m. EST November 17, the apogee motor fired it as Sbs 1 into a circular geosynchronous orbit over 176 °W. The final station would be over the equator at 106 °W, south of Santa Fe, N.M., for coverage of the continental United States. Sbs 1, first of a new satellite series built by Hughes Aircraft, was a spin-stabilized 1,212-pound (550-kilogram) craft 216 centimeters (7 feet) in diameter, 282 centimeters (9 feet, 3 inches) high when stowed for launch. In geosynchronous orbit, extension of its telescoping solar-panel cylinder and communications antenna would make its height 660 centimeters (21 feet, 8 inches). Sbs 1 would also be the first U.S. domestic communications satellite to use the less congested 12- to 14-GHz (K-band) high frequencies. Its highspeed all-digital 10-transponder system could relay up to 480 million bits per second, equal to more than 10 million words. It would begin early in 1981 to provide integrated all-digital interference-free transmission of telephone, computer, electronic mail, and videoconferencing to SBS business and industrial clients. This launch was also the first use of a new McDonnell Douglas solid-fuel payload-assist module (PAM) as part of the SBS-A payload, to increase Delta capability on launches to geosynchronous orbit by 20 % over that of the usual Delta third stage. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Nov 19/80; NASA Release 80-167)
INTELSAT announced that it would buy an additional Intelsat V satellite from Ford Aerospace and an additional NASA Atlas Centaur vehicle to launch it. The first Intelsat V launch had been scheduled for December 1980. The ninth in the Intelsat V series would help fill domestic and international demand until higher capacity comsats became available in the mid-1980s. INTELSAT’S decision would add about U.S. $70 million to the cost of the Intelsat V program, estimated at U.S. $650 million. (INTELSAT Release 80-19-1)
DOC reported that the Nimbus 7 satellite successfully tracked between October 16, 1979, and June 15, 1980, the 800-mile journey of a 2121-pound loggerhead turtle called Diane from a point south of Gulfport, Miss., past Louisiana and Texas to an area in the Gulf of Mexico near Brownsville, Tex., where Diane apparently shed the signal transmitter. (NOAA officials said that, after a break in transmission, a mystery developed when the signal resumed, moving inland to stop in Kansas—far from the turtle’s ocean or river habitat. A fisherman had found the 7-pound transmitter on a beach near Port Arthur, Tex., and had taken it home, where he used the $5,000 device as a doorstop.) Robert Timko, electronic engineer at NOAA’s Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) laboratory in Galveston, said that no technology except satellite tracking could have followed a wide-ranging and generally inaccessible animal like the loggerhead turtle (a threatened species) over so large an area. NMFS would use the data to identify feeding, nesting, and mating areas to help manage the stock of sea turtles. The test was inspired by previous work with polar bears, which were tracked from 60 to 90 days. (NOAA Release 80-102)
FBIS reported launch of Japan’s second commun ications satellite CS-B from Tanegashima Island at 5:35 p.m. local time. CS-B would replace Ayame (Iris), whose signal was lost when it collided with its apogee motor 12 seconds after ignition February 5, 1979. Ayame 2 would reach sta tionary orbit over northern New Guinea by March 1CT First stationary comsat designed to use millimeter-wave transmissions in communications experiments, Ayame 2 was 1.4 meters long and 1.6 meters tall, weighed about DO kilograms, and cost 6 billion yen; it would be Japan’s fifth stationary satellite. [FBIS reported February 25 that, 8 seconds after firing an apogee motor to put the spacecraft into a circular orbit, Japan’s National Space Development Agency lost radio contact with Ayame 2 also. Willi 30 billion yen spent to build and launch llie two experimental comsats, llie successive failures were “a shock to llie agency and llie Science and Technology Agency.” Japan’s tracking stations continued to send radio signals in an effort to restore contact, officials said, but llie two failures would cast a shadow on future satellite-launching plans.] (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 22, 25/80)
NASA reported that it was studying options for restructuring the Landsat D project because of persistent engineering and management problems in manufacturing the spacecraft instruments and ground systems. Fourth and most advanced of NASA’s experimental Earth-resources monitoring spacecraft, Landsat D was designed to carry an advanced scanner called a thematic mapper, to provide Earth images in more spectral bands and with twice the resolution (30 meters) of earlier Landsats. Hughes Aircraft problems with the mapper resulted in increased cost estimates and delivery delays. Mission-system contractor General Electric was also having problems and had projected schedule delays that would increase costs of both the flight system and the ground system it was building for Landsat D. Both sets of problems would effect Landsat D’s launch schedule, increasing the risk of a gap in data for present users. Landsat 3, launched in March 1978, was still operating but had had problems with its sensor, a multispectral scanner that collected data for conversion to images of Earth’s natural resources. NASA was considering three possibilities: launch Landsat D as soon as possible with a thematic mapper and a multispectral scanner like that carried on Landsat 3; launch Landsat D as soon as possible with only a multispectral scanner, following as soon as possible with another Landsat carrying the thematic mapper and a multispectral scanner; or launch Landsat D with Landsat D Prime (the backup) each carrying only a multispectral scanner. The decision weighing budget constraints against providing an ongoing Landsat data capability should take weeks, NASA said, including consultations with NOAA, which President Carter had designated to manage a follow-on remotesensing satellite system. (NASA Release 80-46)
ESA reported that INMARSAT had awarded it a five-year contract at U.S.$1 million a year for leasing MARECS satellites A and B when located over the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The completed INMARSAT system would cover the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans by using those satellites with Intelsat Vs carrying maritime communications payloads, and with one of the MARISAT satellites already in orbit. For the first time a European-built satellite would let ships at sea dial shore-based subscribers directly and establish telephone and telex links with them, through the real-time highly reliable MARECS system operating in the 4- and 6-GHz band and on 1.5- to 1.6-GHz frequencies. (ESA Info 28)
The Washington Star reported that cable television operators awaiting a replacement for the lost RCA Satcom 3 had found that they would need big new dish receivers for signals from the Comstar satellite RCA planned to lease. {W Star, Feb 27/80, C-3)
INTELSAT said that an “extraordinary session” of its signatories in Washington had authorized increasing the organization’s capital ceiling from $990 million U.S. to $1.2 billion to buy a follow-on to the Intelsat V series of satellites and launch vehicles that could fill “booming world demand” for international and domestic communications until the Intelsat VI is available around 1986. INTELSAT’s announcement said that the actual cost per unit of satellite communications was dropping steadily, in spite of the increased investment required; its charges were about a sixth of the level in 1965 when the first Intelsat went into service. (INTELSAT Release 80-18-1)
NASA reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, its administrator, had signed an agreement November 18 in Bangalore, India, with Dr. Satish Dhawan, secretary of the Indian government’s Department of Space, for launch by NASA of two India communications satellites/metesats. In geosynchronous orbit, India’s national satellites (INSAT) 1A and IB would provide the subcontinent with point-to-point television and voice, community broadcasting, and weather data. Launch would be either by Shuttle or, at India’s option, on Delta (expendable) launch vehicles. Under the agreement, India’s Department of Space would be responsible for manufacture of the satellites (under contract to Ford Aerospace), and for checkout and integration of a spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) to boost them into transfer orbit for maneuver to geosynchronous stations. NASA through KSC would provide all other launch-related services. INSAT 1A was scheduled for Shuttle launch in August 1983, or on a Delta in February 1982; INSAT IB, by Shuttle in December 1983 or a Delta in July 1983. (NASA Release 80-176)
NASA announced selection of Ball Aerospace Systems to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract estimated at $21 million for an Earth Radiation-Budget Satellite ERBS and mission operations support. The satellite would be integrated, tested, and delivered for Shuttle launch by April 1984. Working with NOAA-F and NOAA-G, it would become part of a three-spacecraft system using scanning and nonscanning radiometers to measure solar radiation received and reflected from various regions of Earth. NASA’s experimental Nimbus 6 and Nimbus 7 carried radiation-budget instruments, but the (ERBS) would offer for the first time measurement of radiation on a global basis 24 hours per day. (NASA Release 80-178)
INTELSAT said that its board meeting in Bogota approved use of time-division multiple-access equipment with its global communications satellite system; the new devices, to be installed in the 1980s, would offer three times more telephone channels on INTELSAT satellites than available from frequency-modulation (FM) equipment now in use. (INTELSAT Release
ESA reported that representatives from Canada, France, India, Japan, and the United States, as well as ESA, met in Ottawa May 8-9 to discuss international cooperation in remote-sensing satellite systems. ESA would host a follow-up meeting in 1981. A series of regional meetings with nations planning to use remote-sensing data would bring the needs of user states to the attention of satellite operators and would help in preparing for a 1982 United Nations conference on exploration and peaceful uses of outer space. (ESA Info 11)
NASA announced signing of an agreement in Jakarta December 9 by Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, and Drs Suryadi, Indonesia’s director general of posts and telecommunications, for NASA launch of two Indonesian communications satellites. Satellites Palapa B-l. and Palapa B-2 in geosynchronous orbit would offer voice, video, telephone, and high-speed data service to member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) including, besides Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore. NASA would launch B-l between January 1983 and January 1984, depending on Shuttle availability, and B-2 between January and March 1984; it had launched earlier versions of Palapa in 1976-77. (NASA Release 80-183)
NASA declared successful the mission of Magsat, launched Ocober 30, 1979, to measure Earth’s magnetic field. The satellite’s lifetime exceeded that planned for it by three months and met or exceeded accuracy requirements in instrumentation and in attitude and position determination. The mission had met the objectives of developing a worldwide magnetic-field model; acquiring data for crustal magnetic-anomaly maps; and adding to knowledge of Earth’s magnetic field and its temporal variations. (NASA MOR E-662-80-01, Oct 20/80)
INTELSAT announced that its “assembly of parties” in Florida last week had agreed to technical and economic coordination of the proposed Arabsat communications satellite system, as Arabsat would lack significant economic impact on, and would be technically compatible with, the INTELSAT system. It would be the third regional system coordinated with INTELSAT; others were the European and Indonesian systems. (INTELSAT Release 80-06-1)
ComsatCorp said that it had signed a contract with MultiVisions, Ltd., of Anchorage for the first commercial use of a new 10-meter multiple-beam torus antenna, a revolutionary design allowing a user to work with as many as seven geosynchronous satellites at the same time. The usual parabolic dish antenna could work with only one satellite at a time. The torus, scheduled to be in operation in Anchorage next year, would be equipped initially to receive television programs from three satellites simultaneously. With three dual-polarization receive-only feeds, the new antenna could receive up to 72 different programs from 72 different transponders from U.S. domestic satellites, and additional feeds would provide even greater capacity. Where access to more than one satellite was needed, the torus would be cheaper both to build and to operate than the two or more conventional antennas that would usually be required. It would also reduce the amount of real estate needed for several parabolic antennas and the amount of interference in congested frequency areas (of which Anchorage was one). ComSatCorp had asked the FCC for permission to locate torus antennas at Etam, W. Va., Andover, Maine, and Jamesburg, Calif. (ComSatCorp Release 80-30)
NASA announced a change of date to April 1982 for completing orbital flight tests of the Shuttle. “Several factors” such as continuing engineering assessment and improvement of the thermal-protection system led to the decision. First operational flight of Columbia, now slipped from March to September 1982, would carry the tracking and data-relay satellite TDRS-A into a geosynchronous orbit. Other schedule adjustments would be discussed with users at KSC May 29-30. Changes in the manifests had been coordinated with DOD, NASA said; it would make use of Deltas during the transition to full Shuttle operations. Others set to use the Delta included Telesat of Canada, Hughes Aircraft, and Indonesia. (NASA Release 80-74; JSC Release 80-037)
MSFC said several companies had proposed definition studies to demonstrate performance of a large space antenna in low Earth orbit. Wide use of such a system could revolutionize satellite communications and radar and radiometry. Large space antennas might solve problems preventing expansion of satellite communications, Earth-resources survey, weather research, and other services. Dozens of small satellites, each with its own antennas, were now providing such services, but their growing number had crowded the transmission frequencies and filled up the orbital slots. The MSFC study would define the structure of a large antenna as well as packaging, transportation, and orbital deployment. (MSFC Release 80-54; NASA Release 80-48)
Comsat General announced that it was providing consulting service to Alascom Inc., based in Anchorage, on a new generation of communications satellites to meet Alaska’s future communications needs. Alascom was now leasing 15 to 17 transponders on a domestic Satcom to relay communications throughout Alaska, but growth by the late 1980s should require double that number. Comsat General would help design a spacecraft to meet increased transponder demand. (ComSat Gnl Release 80-5)
NASA reported that it had begun a three-year program with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources using Landsat data to detect gypsy-moth damage. Under an agreement signed recently, the data would identify and locate damage so that subsequent satellite images could be used to monitor affected areas. Foresters could identify infestations and isolate areas for pest management. Results would be passed on to other states in the eastern United States that could use the techniques to control spread of gypsy-moth damage initially mapped in New England in 1910. Damage to hardwood forests in Pennsylvania over the past 10 years was an estimated $32 million; in 1980 alone, gypsy-moth caterpillars defoliated 440,000 acres of hardwood forest, (NASA Release 80-155)
Responding to press reports on the Ariane, ESA issued a statement on its program of four flight tests, the second of which failed when the first stage malfunctioned. ESA had identified the trouble and taken steps to rectify it. Test 3 would now take place in June 1981 and test 4 in the autumn of that year, a timetable ESA said was compatible with its commitments to put scientific and communications satellites into orbit in late 1981 and 1982. Financing arranged at the outset, which included 20% for contingencies, would cover the additional studies and tests needed. (ESA Info 31)
an arrangement under which the initiating company would share the cost of satellite data gathering, but the technology developed would be available to all other timber companies. In 1977 St. Regis had begun a test program with NASA to see if Landsat data could improve the company’s data base on forest lands; it wanted to use the information to plan timber harvesting, leasing and buying new timber lands, and monitoring more than 2.3 million acres across the southern United States [see A&A77, Oct 25]. The success of the project led to the authorization by St. Regis Southern Timberland Division in Florida of more than $300,000 new capital investment for an information system using Landsat data to support its general operations. St. Regis was the first private company to participate in NASA’s test program on resource-observation applications. The program began a unique relationship between NASA and the private sector, because St. Regis (not NASA) initiated the project and the company shared in the cost. NASA said that the entire forest industry would gain by the venture because technology from the St. Regis experiment would be in the public domain, available to other firms. NASA and St. Regis planned to conduct a symposium in 1981 to demonstrate Landsat data interpretation to timber industry management. The program was managed by JSC and Purdue University’s Laboratory for Applications of Remote Sensing, as well as by St. Regis. (NASA Release 80-44)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) reported that it had bookings for 260 hours of international satellite television when the winter Olympic games opened at Lake Placid, N.Y.; a tally after the games showed that 448 hours had been used, nearly double the original demand. Countries receiving direct broadcasts of the games included the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Yugoslavia, Australia, Japan, Mexico, and Venezuela; these would have relayed many of the telecasts to a large number of other nations through Earth networks, INTELSAT said. (INTELSAT Release 80-02-1)
NASA reported studies by Western Union and U.S. Telephone & Telegraph warning of a fivefold increase in satellite video and data traffic by the end of the century. By the year 2000, executive telecommunications would be a substitute for business travel; 90% of the messages would need real-time (instantaneous) service and only 10% (such as electronic mail delivery) would be non-real-time. The demand for telecommunications would saturate domestic communications satellite capacity in the 4-6 GHz (C-band) and 11-14 GHz (Ku-band) frequencies. Having decided to resume advanced communications satellite research, NASA would work toward opening the frequency band at 20 -30 GHz for commercial use in the next two decades. This band had not yet been used in the United States. The 20-to 30-GHz (Ka-band) offered a far greater range than the C-or Ku-band; capacities of communications satellite systems using it would be 50 to 100 times greater than those working in C-band. (NASA Release 80-19)
ESA observed the fifth anniversary of its first satellite, Cos B, designed for an operational life of one year. ESA commended the quality of the spacecraft and its subsystems, especially the spark chamber for which no space experience existed at the time of its construction. The eighth satellite built by European industry for ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization (ESRO), Cos B made the first complete detailed survey of the Milky Way in high-energy gamma-ray spectra and discovered a score of new gamma-ray sources. The spacecraft was made by the CESAR consortium led by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom with industrial firms of seven ESA member states: Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. (ESA Info 21)
Further press comment on the USSR launch April 29 of Cosmos 1176 included a Washington Post speculation that the United States might deplore the nuclear-powered vehicle for more reasons than its deterrent effect on United Nations negotiations. Recalling the aborted attempt April 24-25 to rescue U.S. hostages in the Tehran embassy, the Washington Post noted that the Cosmos 1176 launch came only four days later. Just before it began the rescue attempt, the U.S. aircraft carrier Nimitz “sped away from a Soviet spy ship that had been trailing it, and apparently was able to launch the rescue helicopters on their secret mission without notice.” Satellites spying with radar needed nuclear sources for the necessary power; solar cells, e.g., could not produce enough electricity. The new satellite “passing daily over the Indian Ocean and Middle East.. .may well be meant to keep the Kremlin from being surprised again by providing radar surveillance of the U.S. fleet,” the Washington Post said. The Washington Star cited the January 1978 breakup of Cosmos 954 that scattered radioactive debris across a remote region of Canada; one expert suggested that the Soviet Union might have solved the problem causing the Canada crash or might have developed a new nonnuclear power source for the new satellite’s radar. However, U.S. officials were “virtually certain” that the new satellite was, like those in the Cosmos 954 series, powered by radioactive thermal generators creating heat that turned turbines to produce electricity. The United States had already detected radar emissions from Cosmos 1176, indicating that it was looking for U.S. and other ships. Its radar was 90% able to detect objects the size of aircraft carriers, 50% cruisers, and 30% frigates. Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had revealed that such satellites carried about 1001 pounds of uranium; after about 75 days, they were supposed to be rocketed to 500-mile-altitude orbits where they would remain for about 100 years, or until the materials were no longer dangerous. (W Post, May 2/80, A-6; W Star May 2/80, A-l)
The Washington Post reported that Great Britain’s postal service June 17 became the first international public service to send letters by satellite. In-telpost, the new system, used a satellite 25,000 miles above Earth to send documents and letters by facsimile, an electronic means of transmitting the written word from one place to another. The first letter using the new system took just over 1 minute to get from Great Britain’s Post Office chairman-designate Ron Dearing to a receiving center in Toronto. (WPost, June 18/80, C-2)
Today newspaper said that a 13-nation U.N. committee that met in Geneva, Switzerland, had drafted a report on a proposed satellite system to scan the Earth and spot disarmament violations. Ending a closed two-week session of the committee, the report said that the scientific, financial, and legal experts would meet there again in February 1981 to consider and approve the draft for submission to the United Nations. The statement contained no details of the proposed satellite monitoring system. U.N. Secretary General Kurt Waldheim had appointed the committee after a special General Assembly session in 1978 on disarmament received a proposal by France for U.N. establishment of an international satellite agency to check up on disarmament pledges. {Today, Sept 20/80, 10A)
NASA issued a summary of Saturn encounter events for the period August 22 through December 15, beginning with “in-bound movie sequences” from Voyager 1 through Saturn-Titan close approach and ending with a postencounter movie sequence. Subjects of Voyager research at Saturn would be the planet itself, its rings, its satellites (especially the Mercury-size Titan), and Saturn’s magnetosphere; the summary listed points of special interest and the unique properties to be investigated. (NASA Release 80-145)
Digital techniques would cope with “the coming world telecommunications explosion” and cut the cost of overseas transmissions as well, said INTELSAT Director General Santiago Astrain in his keynote address to the fifth international conference on satellite communications in Genoa, Italy. In the first use of the giant new Intelsat V (launched December 6, 1980, from Cape Canaveral into geostationary orbit 22,300 miles up), the speech was heard simultaneously in three countries. The telecast also marked INTELSAT’s first use of the 14/11 GHz frequency band. Receiving stations were two small 3-meter antennas at Genoa; a 10-meter torus antenna at COMSAT laboratories in Clarksburg, Md.; and 19-meter antenna at Goonhilly, England. (INTELSAT Release 81-5-1)
NASA launched SBS-B from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) on a Delta at 7:09 p.m. EDT into a transfer orbit. Owned by Satellite Business Systems, Inc. (a consortium of IBM, Comsat General, and Aetna Insurance Company), the Hughes-built cylinder was second of four commercial communications satellites planned for launch by NASA at a fixed cost to SBS Inc. of $22 million. Called SBS 2 in orbit, the spin-stabilized communications satellite 660 centimeters high and 216 centimeters in diameter weighed 555 kilograms on station. It would be the first to offer routine commercial service in the K-band, 12-14 GHz. (NASA Release 81-130; NASA MOR 0-492-213-81-02 Iprclaunch] Sept 21/81, [postlaunch] Jan 27/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 25/81, 2)
NASA reported “encouraging initial results” from a two-month experiment that it conducted jointly with the FAA, National Center for Atmospheric Research, and Northwest Airlines. An instrument on Nimbus 7, called total ozone-mapping spectrometer, sent GSFC experimenters data on the total ozone profile in the atmosphere. Within three hours the GSFC scientists relayed the data, processed to indicate upper-air patterns and meteorological activity, such as rapidly moving fronts, to Northwest Airlines meteorologists in Minnesota for use in forecasting. Knowing the location of the fronts could help in avoiding them, both because they were associated with clear-air turbulence and because ozone encountered by airlines at high altitudes had caused shortness of breath as well as eye, nose, and throat irritation among airline passengers. Further research would lead to deduction of troposphere heights from total-ozone data for comparison with satellite temperature-sounding data. (NASA Release 81-90)
Science magazine said that Congress was in a “stir” because the administration planned to let a U.S. company sell materials for an advanced communications satellite to an Arab consortium that included the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Ford Aerospace would sell satellite parts to the French firm Aerospatiale, which was under contract to build three communications satellites for a group called Arabsat, composed of 22 governments, among them Libya, Syria, South Yemen, and the PLO. Libya has been “an avowed enemy” of the United States. The $135 million contract would cover satellites similar to but less sophisticated than the one Ford Aerospace was building for global communications system INTELSAT: Arabsat would offer 8,000 simultaneous twoway telephone conversations and one television channel. These services would cost less if bought directly from INTELSAT, but the Arab group apparently preferred to operate its own system. The matter came up November 3 during hearings before the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, when Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger said that he knew nothing about the deal; the next day, Secretary of State Alexander Haig also said that he knew nothing about it. The Arms Export Control Act required State Department approval of exports of high-tech items, even those having no direct military application. (Science, Nov 20/81, 891)
NASA launched Intelsat 5-CF3 from ESMC at 6:35 p.m. EST on an Atlas-Centaur into a highly elliptical transfer orbit with 35,953-kilometer apogee, 165.8-kilometer perigee, and 23.7° inclination. Firing of the apogee motor by INTELSAT would put it in geostationary orbit at 15 °E for tests by Telespazio at Fucino, Italy. It would later become the primary Atlantic communications satellite at 335.5°E, replacing Intelsat 5 FI, which would move to an Indian Ocean location at 62 °E to begin service next March after launch of another communications satellite as a spare. The two-ton F3, capable of 12,000 simultaneous telephone conversations plus two international color television channels, was third of the 5 and 5A series of 15 communications satellites planned by INTELSAT to handle international communications, such as telephone, telegrams, telex, data, and television. (NASA MOR 0-491-203-81-03 [prelaunch] Dec 1/81, [postlaunch] Jan 9/82: NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 16/81; Spacewarn, Dec 29/81; INTELSAT Releases 81-27-1, 81-32-1; A/D, Dec 22/81, 268)
After a series of delays, NASA launched GOES-E, fifth of a series of geostationary operational environmental satellites funded by NOAA, from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) at 6:29 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 49,768-kilometer apogee, 192-kilometer perigee, 921-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. The craft would move into synchronous orbit at 85 °W by the first week of June for testing. The Hughes-built 875-pound satellite, Goes 5 in orbit, carried a new visible-infrared radiometric atmospheric sounder (VAS)—modified from the original visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) first carried by Goes 4 in September 1980—to provide not only visual imagery of Earth surface and cloud cover and infrared sea-surface temperature but also temperatures and amount, distribution, and movement of water vapor at various altitudes. Goes 5 would ultimately replace an older craft at 75 °W, now serving as “Goes East” to monitor the eastern United States and Canada, Central America, South America, and much of the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA MOR E-612-81-03 [prelaunch] Apr 28/81, [postlaunch] July 23/85; NASA wkly SSR, GSFC, May 28/81; D/SD, May 29/81, 156; AvWk, June 15/81, 53; Spacewarn SPX-332, June 30/81)
NASA declared the mission of Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 successful. Launched September 5 and August 20, 1977, each of the spacecraft had traveled more than 2.4 billion kilometers during the past four years and had conducted scientific investigations at seven major bodies of the solar system. They had made comparative studies of the Jupiter and Saturn systems, including their satellites, rings, and fields and particles environments. They had also measured characteristics of the interplanetary medium from Earth to Saturn. Achievements included: —acquiring more than 62,000 images from the outer solar system —discovering rings around Jupiter and unusual braiding, spokes, ringlets, and shepherding satellites in the rings of Saturn; new satellites of Jupiter and Saturn; lightning on Jupiter; eight active volcanoes on Io; and new sources of radio emissions in the Jupiter and Saturn systems —measuring atmospheric composition, temperature, pressure, and dynamics, magnetospheres; and particle environments of Jupiter, Saturn, and Titan. (NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02 [postlaunch] Dec 10/81)
The Soviet Union launched an Intercosmos-Bulgaria 3000 satellite into an orbit with 906-kilometer apogee, 825-kilometer perigee, 81.2° inclination, and 101.9-minute period. A Tass report said that the satellite would study ionsopheric plasma and high-energy charged-particle flux, magnetic fields, and upper-atmosphere glow in the ultraviolet and visible bands of spectrum. The Soviet Union and Bulgaria cooperated on the design of the craft and would continue to work together in data processing and analysis. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 7/81)
NASA launched Comstar-D, last of a series of four domestic communications satellites built by Hughes Aircraft for Comsat General, from KSC at 6:23 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. The 6.1-mile (20-foot) high cylinder called Comstar 4 in orbit, weighing 1,516 kilograms (3,342 pounds) at launch, had 12 transponders (channels), each capable of relaying 1,500 two-way voice circuits (overall capability of 18,000	simultaneous high-quality two-way phone transmissions). A postlaunch report said the apogee motor firing February 23 was successful. (NASA Release 81-27; NASA MOR-O-491-201-81-04 [prelaunch summary] Feb 10-12/81, [prelaunch] Feb 17/81, [postlaunch] June 17/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 24/81, Feb 25/81; ComSat Gnl Release 81-6; D/SD, Feb 25/81, 286; Feb 26/81, 294; A/D, Feb 26/81, 292; Spacewarn, Mar 31/81, 2)
ESA reported that it had successfully tested injectors for the five Ariane engines to be used in the L03 flight, now scheduled for the latter part of June. The L03 vehicle could carry a tech capsule to monitor equipment and environment; a second flight model of the Meteosat 2 aimed at putting ESA into the Earth-observation field; and an India communications satellite known as Apple (Ariane passenger-payload experiment) at Kourou, French Guiana. (ESA Info 3)
NASA launched RCA Satcom 4 from the ESMC on a Delta at 8:37 p.m. EST into a transfer orbit with 19,356-kilometer apogee, 100-kilometer perigee, and 25.5° inclination. The objective of the commercial communications satellite was to transmit video programs to cable television (CATV) systems throughout the United States. The 500-kilogram box-shaped craft, fourth in a series of large 24-transponder communications satellites, managed by a subsidiary of RCA, carried a payload-assist module (PAM) to put it into geosynchronous orbit at 132 °W, joining three other RCA satellites providing television, voice, and high-speed data to all 50 states and Puerto Rico. More than 4,000 Earth stations had direct access to these spacecraft. GSFC had project-management responsibility for the launch vehicle; RCA Americom, which managed the Satcom program, including spacecraft acquisition and tracking, telemetry, and command systems, would reimburse NASA $22 million for the launch and launch support. (NASA Release 81-172; NASA MOR 0-492-206-81-04 [prelaunch] Nov 18/81, [postlaunch] Jan 27/82)
The Soviet Union launched India’s satellite Bhaskara 2 into an orbit with 557-kilometer apogee, 514-kilometer perigee, 95.2-minute period, and 50.7° inclination. It carried television and microwave radiometers to study Earth’s natural resources. Tass said that India and USSR stations were receiving data. (FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 20/81)
NASA launched the U.S. Navy’s improved Transit navigational satellite Nova 1 at 2:07 a.m. from the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) on a Scout vehicle into a polar transfer orbit with 935-kilometer apogee, 353-kilometer perigee, 90.16° inclination, and 97.67-minute period. The solar panels deployed, and the payload was in a housekeeping mode. A multiple-burn spacecraft motor fired on later orbit would raise the 368-pound spacecraft’s altitude to about 600 nautical miles. This 102d launch of a Scout was the ninth success in a row. NASA provided the launch under a June 1962 agreement with DOD to reimburse NASA for the cost of Scout vehicles, Western Test Range (WTR) launch services, and mission support, as required. So far, NASA had launched 15 Transit satellites and 3 Transit improvement program satellites, of which 5 were currently operating. The Navy would reimburse NASA about $7.6 million for services and hardware provided for the program ($1,825 million for launch-vehicle hardware; $0,950 million for WTR launch services and mission support; $4,825 million for FY81 support services). (NASA MOR 0-490-603-81-01 [prelaunch] May 13/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, May 18/81; SF, Oct 81, 274)
ESA announced that it had “rejected” NASA’s decision to cancel the U.S. spacecraft that would have been part of the joint International Solar-Polar Mission (ISPM). NASA told a meeting of the two organizations in New York that the cancellation resulted from budget cuts imposed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in preparing the Reagan administration’s budget proposal. ESA responded that canceling the satellite without consultation was a unilateral breach of a memorandum of understanding between the agencies and was unacceptable. ESA asked that NASA restore the program to its original level, noting that unilateral actions of this kind would be detrimental to future space cooperation between the United States and Europe. ESA said that, when its science-program committee decided to pursue ISPM in 1979, they chose that mission over a number of purely European missions because of the value ESA put on transatlantic cooperation. Because of NASA’s decision, European scientists from 17 institutions who supplied experiments for the NASA spacecraft would not be able to fly them. The experiments, “in an advanced stage of development” with more than half of the costs committed, ESA said, would be lost with no corresponding scientific return. ESA’s director general immediately asked all of its member states to protest, through their ambassadors in Washington, the decision taken by NASA. Timing was crucial, because Congress would consider the federal budget in March. (ESA Inf 2)
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) reported that it had signed an agreement with the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) to provide satellite communications services to ships. INTELSAT would put at the service of INMARSAT three of its satellites to be launched between mid-1981 and mid-1982: two Intelsat Vs over the Indian Ocean, one over the Atlantic. The maritime communications subsystems (MCS), each with a capacity of 30 voice channels plus data, would operate for up to seven years and would bring more than $100 million (U.S.) to INTELSAT. In addition to the MCS, each Intelsat V could carry up to 12,000 simultaneous international telephone calls and two television channels. (INTELSAT Release 81-1-1)
Japan reported that its National Space Development Agency successfully launched the first N-2 vehicle from Tanegashima carrying the 21st Japanese satellite—the engineering test satellite Ets 4 (Kiku 3)—into a transfer orbit with 36,000-kilometer apogee, 230-kilometer perigee, and 10.5-hour period. The 650-kilogram satellite would monitor vehicle performance. Japan would launch seven N-2s between August 1981 and February 1986 to meteorological and communications satellites and aeronautical experiments. Although used for five years, the N-l did not have the power to carry big geostationary spacecraft into orbit. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb 11/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 12/81)
A JSC release described a space operations center (SOC) concept completed by a special JSC study team. A manned center in space to exploit the Shuttle and allow incremental growth was the “essential next step in exploitation of space”; it would become a space-base and marshaling yard for large and complex payloads, including an upper-stage propulsion system in low Earth orbit. It would serve as “garage space” for reusable cryogenic stages for easier access, lowering costs of geosynchronous space operations. It could be a manned base with Department of Defense (DOD) military capabilities or a manned platform for science and applications research. It could provide a manufacturing facility in a weightless environment. The JSC design was for an SOC operating continuously, with maintenance and resupply, for 10 years; parts would be delivered and assembled by the Shuttle orbiter in a low Earth orbit (230 to 280 statute miles). An 8- to 12-man center, about 435 feet long tip to tip, would weigh about 245,000 pounds. Initial launch would put into orbit an energy section, a short cylinder carrying two booms with solar arrays, antennas, reaction-control system, and radiators, weighing in total between 34,000 and 43,000 pounds. A second launch would bring a command module to be joined to the energy section, completing phase 1; this module would have one docking and nine berthing ports, airlocks, command station, guidance and control, data management, open-loop lift support, and accommodations for two (but able to support a crew of four, in an emergency). Weight would be between 40,000 and 50,000 pounds. The next launch would bring a second command module to the other end of the energy section. Each of the next two launches would bring a habitat module able to accommodate a crew of four; the two habitats would provide emergency accommodations and life support for a crew of eight. Each habitat would weigh between 25.000 and 28,000 pounds. After phase 3, the SOC would be ready for long-term manned occupations by eight to twelve persons; the platform could now handle full flight support, satellite servicing, and space construction. (JSC Release 82-009; AvWk, Feb 15/82)
NASA launched RCA-E (RCA-Satcom 5) from ESMC at 9:28 p.m. on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit. It would be stationed on the equator at 143 °W over the Pacific to serve the continental United States, Alaska, and Hawaii. First of a series of second-generation domestic communications satellites made by RCA Astro-Electronics, it arrived at ESMC “slightly overweight” and carried no third-stage telemetry. Confirmation of third-stage burn and spacecraft separation was delayed until it passed over the tracking station in New Jersey to confirm that it was working satisfactorily. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Oct 29/82; NASA Release 82-155; NASA MOR M-492-206-82-06 [prelaunch] Oct 26/82)
The first Maritime European Communications Satellite, Marecs A, launched December 20, 1981, began service at midnight. The spacecraft and its payload, leased to the International Maritime Communications Satellite (INMARSAT), was working well and already improving communications between land and ships and oil rigs in the Atlantic. The Marecs program would lease two satellites to INMARSAT: Marecs A would cover the Atlantic ocean; Marecs B, the Pacific. Launch of Marecs B on an Ariane L5 had been put off to September 1982 to allow time for modifications reducing the effects of electrostatic discharge that had caused the Marecs A command system to malfunction during tests in February. (ESA Info 15)
NASA signed an $11.6 million contract with a 22-member Arab group of nations and organizations to launch a communications satellite from the Shuttle in 1984. Administrator James M. Beggs signed the agreement for NASA; Dr. Ali Al-Mashat, director general, signed for the Arab satellite group. Arabsat, a consortium, included both Libya and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO); some uproar ensued on Capitol Hill until senators were persuaded that the deal did not imply U.S. recognition of the PLO. The United States also had no diplomatic relations with Libya and had a policy of selling no military goods to its government. A State Department spokesman said that Arabsat members would “get no more than they already had through the existing INTELSAT satellite communications system.” The deal envisioned no transfer of technology, as the satellite would never be handled by its Arabsat owners. Saudi Arabia, which would be the center of operations, would control television programming for Arabsat use. NASA Associate Administrator James A. Abrahamson said that the Shuttle was a commercial service and that its launches “should not be considered a political activity.” (NASA Release 82-173; W Post, Nov 23/82, A-2)
NASA launched Intelsat 5-F4 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) from Cape Canaveral at 7:23 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,953-kilometer apogee, 165. 8-kilometer perigee, and 24° inclination. INTELSAT would fire an apogee motor to put the communications satellite into a near-geosynchronous orbit for testing before moving it over the Indian Ocean to provide communications between Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East. This fourth of the Intelsat 5 series built by Ford Aerospace had a capacity of 12,000 voice circuits plus two television channels. INTELSAT’s global system consisted of a space segment (10 satellites in synchronous orbit) and a ground segment (295 communications antennas at 242 ground stations in 129 countries and territories). The combined system provided more than 800 links between ground stations, with about 8,500 international voice circuits in full-time use, plus telegraph, telex, and television. (NASA MOR-491-203-82-04 [prelaunch] Feb 25/82, [postlaunch] Mar 25/82; INTELSAT Release 82-4-1)
NASA reported a happy ending to a search-and-rescue mission that began in July with the loss of a pilot somewhere in northern British Columbia. The Canadian government conducted an unsuccessful search that cost $2 million before it ended. The father of the missing pilot started to search with a pilot and another passenger and failed to return on September 9. They had crashed in a valley 3,500 feet deep where the Rockies hid their rescue beacon from passing planes. The Canadian rescue center had no data on their location. Canada had just joined in the SARSAT (search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking) program using Cospas 1, a Soviet satellite launched June 30, and asked for any data it might gather. Early September 10 the satellite 600 miles up detected an emergency locator-transmitter in the area; a search aircraft found the crash and called for a rescue helicopter. All three persons had been injured but had survived. Canadian authorities praised the timely rescue of the victims at minimal cost. (NASA Dly Actv Apt, Sept 16/82; W Post, Sept 30/82, A-3)
NASA announced that ARC and LaRC were cooperating in the acquisition of data on the giant stratospheric cloud produced by the eruption of El Chichon volcano in March and April, now covering much of the Earth’s northern hemisphere, to define the cloud’s effect on global weather patterns. The centers were using satellites, U-2 aircraft, and lidar (light-intensification detection and ranging) for the study. The lidar equipment, mounted in a Lockheed Electra aircraft, would shoot laser pulses into the atmosphere and monitor reflections, “painting” the spatial and vertical extent of cloud layers above the aircraft. Lidar measurements in mid-July confirmed earlier findings of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) that the volcano had put up to 50 times (500 times in some areas) the normal amount of aerosols into the upper atmosphere; that the material layers had spread to different latitudes, depending on altitude; and that sunlight reaching Earth’s surface could be reduced several percent. The cloud, a mixture of dust and sulfuric acid, would offer “a once-in-a-lifetime chance” to form an information base for prediction of dispersion, changes in temperature, and dynamic and photochemical changes, according to Dr. M. Patrick McCormick, head of LaRC’s aerosol research branch. Dr. Brian Toon, atmospheric physicist at ARC, said that the most likely effect of the cloud would be a gradual reduction in northern hemisphere temperature over the next two years. (NASA Release 82-115; ARC Release 82-31; LaRC Release 82-57)
NASA announced signing of agreements with Telesat Canada for launch of five Anik communications satellites, four on the Shuttle and one on a Delta. The launches would cost Canada’s domestic satellite communications corporation about $75 million; the spacecraft would be worth about $130 million. The third-and fourth-generation Anik C and Anik D communications satellites would be the backbone of Canada’s system until the 1990s, carrying new pay-television, voice, video, and data links, private business networks, and other special services. First of the D series would be launched in August from KSC; the next Telesat launch would be an Anik C, one of two communications satellites scheduled for the Shuttle’s fifth flight and first commercial mission. (NASA Release 82-101) and development, manufacture, and use of propulsion systems for aircraft and space, surface, and marine vehicles. Glenn, keynote speaker, received an award commemorating the 20th anniversary of his orbital flight. Representatives of European and Asian firms presented papers, and a group from the People’s Republic of China attended. Beggs, luncheon speaker, said that foreign competition in high-tech research required a new partnership between government and industry. Although NASA-industry cooperation over the past 25 years was a major factor in U.S. world leadership, many foreign firms had been able, with “far-sighted planning [and] government-industry cooperation,” to move from idea to manufacture to delivery in half the time the United States needed. The world edge once enjoyed by the United States in many high-tech areas has “been eroded,” he said: France was ahead in nuclear power; West Germany, in chemicals; Japan, in optics and metallurgy. “The Japanese have managed to capture some 70% of the American market for the 64K random-access memory, which can store 64,000 information units.” The Harvard Business Review had even suggested that U.S. firms look abroad—even to Iron Curtain countries—to tap foreign technology. What was needed, Beggs said, was a more balanced cooperation between government and industry, geared to investment in projects leading to speedy adoption of new technologies. “No one ever ran a race by standing still. And we are in a race, a dead serious one. The stakes are high. They include not only our own economic security but the economic security of the Free World,” he concluded. (LeRC Releases 82-30, 82-34)
NASA said that Cospas/SARSAT, an international search-and-rescue project of the United States, the Soviet Union, Canada, and France, had located four accident sites and saved seven lives in its first month of operation. The Soviet Union’s Cospas satellite, launched June 30, had located two downed planes in Canada during September, another in September in New Mexico, and a capsized catamaran off the coast of New England in October less than 24 hours after receiving the first signal. As part of the program the United States planned to launch in February 1983 a weather satellite, NOAA-F, carrying a search-and-rescue capability. GSFC managed SARSAT activities for NASA. (NASA Release 82-152)
The New York Times said that the Soviet Union had assembled six, possibly eight, intelligence-gathering satellites over the south Atlantic to watch Argentine and British military movements around the Falkland Islands. U.S. sources said that they assumed information from the satellites was being relayed to the Argentine government but had no proof of this. A senior official at the State Department said that leaders in Argentina had told Security of State Alexander Haig that they would not accept such help from the Soviet Union. The United States had two satellites over the area and was passing information from them to the British. The Soviet satellites were communications interceptors Cosmos 1346 and 1354; radar-sensing craft Cosmos 1345 and 1351; and photoreconnaissance craft Cosmos 1347 and 1352, and possibly 1350 and 1353. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-14; AvWk, May 3/82, 22; W Post, Jun 7/82, A-20)
Press reports said that weather satellite Goes West, monitoring the Pacific Ocean and the western United States, had stopped functioning November 25, leaving more than 60° of Earth’s surface (an area responsible for most of the winter storms on the Pacific coast) with a “blind eye.” Efforts to revive it were unsuccessful; officials said that the problem was in the Goes radiometer. Launched in 1980, the satellite was designed for three-year operation; a replacement was to be launched in 1983. If further efforts failed, the National Weather Service planned to reactivate one of several older satellites that had been retired but were still in place. W Post, Nov 28/82, A-8)
Astronomers from JPL and the University of Hawaii on October 19 reported detection on two solar-system bodies—Pluto and Neptune’s largest satellite Triton—of frozen methane, a substance present on Earth as a product of living organisms ,and petroleum. Although the surfaces, mostly water ice, of Pluto and Triton differed from those of other bodies orbiting the Sun, the methane did not seem to come from biological activity. (NASA Release 82-157; JPL anno Oct 20/82)
NASA launched Westar 4, first of a series of second-generation 24-transponder domestic commercial communications satellites built by Space Communications Company for Western Union, from ESMC on a Delta into a suborbital trajectory. An apogee kick motor would put it into orbit at 99 °W, 19,300 nautical miles over the equator to relay voice, data, video, and facsimile communications to an area covering the United States from Hawaii to the Virgin Islands. Westar 4, with a design life of 10 years would join three other Western Union communications satellites: Westar 1 and Westar 2, launched in 1974, and Westar 3 launched in 1979. It was twice their si2:e and had four times their capacity. (NASA Release 82-17; NASA MOR 0-492-203-82-06 [prelaunch] Feb 25/82, [postlaunch] May 13/82)
NASA reported the failure at 9 a.m. of a high-speed tape recorder on Nimbus 5 collecting Antarctic and Arctic radiometer data for the U.S. Navy. The loss of the last recorder on Nimbus 5 meant that future operations would have to be in real time, subject to the communications satellites view of the Alaska ground station. NASA had agreed to provide Nimbus 5 data through FY83, and the Navy had reimbursed NASA as a source of data for polar sea-ice calculations. NASA would review real-time operation with the Navy. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 30/82)
NASA launched RCA-G, third in a series of high-traffic capacity communications satellites, for RCA Americom from ESMC on a Delta at 6:52 p.m. EDT into a transfer orbit with 35,758-kilometer apogee, 176-kilometer perigee, 104-minute period, and 24° inclination, preparatory to assuming station over the equator at 72 °W. RCA-G would join four other communications satellites in orbit (RCA-C through RCA-F) to provide a five-satellite RCA network providing coverage to all 50 states. More than 4,000 ground stations had direct access to these communications satellites, which all carried 28 completely solid-state C-band amplifiers in a configuration that gave 24 operating channels for television, voice, and high-speed data transmission. (NASA MOR M-492-206-83-08 [prelaunch] Sept 8/83, [postlaunch] July 26/84)
NASA launched Intelsat 5-F at 6:26 p.m. EDT from ESMC on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit. This was the 100th launch for LeRC. The 4,400-pound Ford Aerospace-built communications satellite carried 12,000 voice and two color television channels and was the first to have a maritime communications link for ship-to-shore communications. (NASA Release 83-77; LeRC Release 83-25; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, May 20/83; D/SD, May 17/83, 95)	" NASA declared the May 19 launch of Intelsat 5-F successful, as the Atlas Centaur had put the satellite into the desired transfer orbit. After an apogee kick motor fired May 22 put it in near-geosynchronous orbit for initial positioning and preliminary tests, the Intelsat would be moved on station over the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA MOR M-491-203-86-06 [postlaunch] June 13/83)
The European Space Operations Center (ESOC), at the request of the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT), completed a switching operation on board ESA’s operational Maritime European Communications Satellite Marecs-A that increased the satellite’s capacity from 30 simultaneous voice telephone channels to 46. ESOC completed the transfer in less than 10 minutes; thus, avoiding the need to transfer communications to the spare satellite and back again. The satellite provided the total of the Atlantic Ocean region shore-to-ship and ship-to-shore satellite communications. Marecs-A was providing to INMARSAT its full capacity, one in excess of the contractual requirement of 40 voice telephone channels. The increased capacity seemed to bode well for Marecs-A to fulfill its design lifetime of seven years. (ESA Release, Nov 28/83)
LeRC said that Dr. Henry G. Kosmahl, an electron physicist employed there, had developed an amplifying system that could double the number of channels on a communications satellite. The system, called a dynamic velocity taper, was a “relatively minor technical modification” of an existing device. Most nations had been seeking additional output from communications satellites for voice, picture, and data transmission. However, communications satellites could be spaced around the globe no closer than 20 part; otherwise, the signals from one would interfere with those adjoining. The number of possible communications satellites in orbit was therefore limited, and all available slots would be full by the year 2000. Kosmahl’s idea would make each communications satellite able to .handle more traffic without affecting quality of the signals or increasing the power supply. He had applied for a patent on the device, which would be owned by NASA but available to industry. (LeRC Release 83-62)
Japan launched a second operational communications satellite, Cs-2B (code-named Sakura 2B), at 8:20 p.m. GMT from Tanegashima Island toward a stationary orbit above northwestern New Guinea. This seventh satellite launched by Japan was only the second “for practical purposes”; the first was Sakura 2A launched in March as communications link between Japan’s mainland and outlying Pacific islands. Each communications satellite had capacity equal to 4,000 phone circuits, and the two were designed for use in a major emergency like an earthquake. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Aug 6/83)
Launched January 25, IRAS had already discovered up to 20 distant galaxies too small to see previously. Dr. James Houck of Cornell University, one of 18 astronomers on the three-nation IRAS science team, said at JPL that only 20 small galaxies outside the Milky Way were measured before IRAS went into orbit. “In 12 hours of operation with this satellite, we doubled that number.” In a single minute, the 22.4-inch IRAS telescope found out more about the Large Magellanic Cloud, galaxy closest to the Milky Way, than ever discovered by Earth telescopes. The IRAS telescope, cooled by liquid helium to 2.5° above absolute zero to offset any stray heat that might confuse its imaging, was so sensitive that it could detect an object with temperatures far below that of freezing on Earth. Optical telescopes, by contrast, could see only objects with temperatures hot enough to make them shine (above 10,000 °F). The telescope was built in the United States, the spacecraft in the Netherlands; Great Britain was tracking it. The biggest surprise, said Houck, was that the $80 million satellite was “working better than we had hoped,” seeing cooler objects in greater detail than astronomers thought possible. Over its 12-month lifetime, IRAS could survey 95% of the sky in the infrared, never attempted from the ground. Infrared lightwaves were longer than those in the visible spectrum but shorter than radiowaves. The projected lifetime would probably be extended by 50% because of the slow rate of helium use so far. (W Post, Mar 12/83, A-10)
NASA launched RCA-F at 5:39 p.m. EDT from the Eastern Sipace and Missile Center (ESMC) on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 36,266-kilometer apogee, 169-kilometer perigee, 634.2-minute period, and 24° inclination, before reaching geosynchronous orbit at 139 °W where for 10 years it would provide commercial and official voice, digital, and video communications between Alaska and the continental United States. Called Satcom 1R in orbit, the 3-axis stabilized craft weighed nearly 600 kilograms (1,320 pounds) and carried 24 solid-state transponders. It would replace the first of RCA’s domestic communications satellites, RCA Satcom 1 launched December 12, 1975, which had served for seven years. Satcom 1R joined five previous RCA communications satellites to provide television, voice, and high-speed data transmission to all 50 states and Puerto Rico. More than 4,000 Earth stations had direct access to these spacecraft. (NASA MOR M-492-206-83-07 [prelaunch] Mar 31/83; NASA Release 83-44; SPX-354; NASA wkly SSR, Apr 14/83)
NASA said that it would have to revise the schedule for Challenger’s first launch because delays had pushed the date past the vernal equinox and would put the Shuttle’s communications satellite payload in Earth’s shadow for an undesirably long time. Liftoff would be reset for 1:30 p.m. EST, regardless of the date, shortening the launch window from 4 hours to 18 minutes, because of the need for daylight conditions at an emergencylanding runway in Dakar, Senegal. Spring would start March 20 at 11:39 p.m. EST. With the sun directly over the equator, the time in darkness between transferring the communications satellite from the Shuttle’s low Earth orbit to stationary orbit at 22,300 miles altitude would have resulted in too much heat loss. All five Columbia missions were launched in the morning, the earlier the better according to NASA, so that the crews had more daylight to work in. (NY Times, Mar 6/83, 38) PRECEDISMG PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED WTfNTinNAI tV RtANti' relay satellite (TDRS) to be carried on that flight. A storm February 28 with winds from 60 to 70 mph had carried “sand, salt, silica particles, and paint chips” into the room at the launch pad where the payload was kept and onto the satellite. NASA said earlier that the TDRS was not seriously damaged by “particulate matter” found on it; however, the contaminants were undergoing laboratory tests, and the sensitive Earth-scanner and tracking instruments were being closely examined. Launch would again be delayed, probably to April 7. Spokesman James Kukowski said that NASA could fly the 2'/2-ton satellite as is; try to clean it inside the Challenger cargo bay (where it was installed February 25); remove and clean it at the launch pad; return it to a KSC payload assembly building; or send it back to TRW’s plant in California. Delays were costing up to $3 million a day in overtime. (NY Times, Mar 8/83, C-8; Mar 11/83, A-14; Mar 19/83, 14; W Post, Mar 9/83, A-17; Mar 11/83, A-18; Mar 19/83, A-10)
NASA launched Galaxy 1, first of a series of three wholly owned Hughes communications satellites, at 7:08 p.m. EDT from ESMC on a Delta into a transfer orbit before stationing it at 135 °W to serve the cable television industry. Hughes had sold its 24 operating transponders on a noncommon-carrier basis to ensure purchasers a stable source of programming. NASA would launch the other Galaxies in September 1983 and June 1984. (NASA MOR M-492-215-83-01 [prelaunch] June 27/83; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 29/83)
The Nimbus 5 Earth-observation satellite would end operations as of April 1, said Dr. S.G. Tilford of NASA’s environmental observation division. Launched in 1972, Nimbus 5 would probably reenter after the year 2000. Its last on;bOard tape recorder stopped in November 1982. The U.S. Navy, the only user of its data, would get this information from Nimbus 7. (NASA Release 83-40)
NASA launched at 6:18 p.m. EDT the Hughes Communications, Inc., Galaxy-C communications satellite from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) by Delta 3920 vehicle. The satellite would relay business communications throughout the United States. It was the third in a series, with Galaxy-A dedicated to cable television programming and Galaxy-B (along with Galaxy-C) relaying video, voice, data, and facsimile communications for large corporations, long-haul carriers, and broadcasters. (NASA MOR No. M-492-215-84-03 [prelaunch], Sept. 19/84, [postlaunch], Oct 15/84; NASA Release 84-128)
Arianespace launched at 1:14 a.m. GMT Ariane VII varying Spacenet 2, for the GTE’s Spacenet, and the second ESA European Space Agency maritime communications satellite, Marecs B-2. Marecs B-2 was placed in geostationary transfer orbit with a perigee of 199.9 kiometers and an apogee of 36,022 kilometers. Following firing on November 11 of its apogee boost motor, Marecs B-2 was injected into a near circular orbit at 135.5 °E with a perigee of 35,600 kilometers, apogee of 35,900 kilometers, and inclination of 3.190°E. Ariane VII was the second flight of the more powerful version of the European launcer, Ariane 3, developed by ESA. Ariane 3 was 49 meters high and weighed about 237 tons at liftoof. It had three stages, the first povided with two strap-on boosters that ignited just after liftoff. Ariane 3 could place payload of up to 2,580 kilograms into geostationary transfer orbit. (ESA Release Nov 12/84)
ESA’s Director, R. Bonnet, and Director General of Arianespace C. Bigot signed a contract for the launch of ESA’s scientific spacecraft Giotto, which was designed for observations of Halley’s comet, aboard an Ariane 1 launcher. They scheduled the launch for the first day of the July 1985 launch window. Giotto would go into a heliocentric transfer trajectory that would be very close to the ecliptic plane (the plane in which the planets orbit the Sun). During its flight, which would last eight months, Giotto would be under the command of the European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt, Germany. Ground-based telescopes would track Giotto, and course corrections would be made with the on-board propulsion system to ensure that the spacecraft passed as close as possible to the comet nucleus during the encounter phase, planned to last four hours. It was expected that the most important data from the mission would come from 10 scientific experiments on board Giotto within a few minutes before and after Giotto’s closest approach to the comet’s nucleus. It would be during that period that the spacecraft’s camera would photograph the comet’s nucleus in color, resolving surface structure down to 50 meters (150 feet). (ESA Release, July 16/84) —NASA and NOAA announced that the NOAA-8 environmental monitoring satellite appeared to have lost it latitude control system and was tumbling in orbit unable to relay its signal effectively to Earth. Launched board an Atlas E launch vehicle in 1983, the 1,700-kilometer (3,775-pound) satellite had six environmental monitoring instruments and a search-and-rescue payload, provided by Canada and France under an international cooperative space project with NASA known as SARSAT (search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking). Much of the environmental monitoring lost by NOAA-8 could be conducted by NOAA-6, launched in 1979. And although the SARSAT capability, which permitted the satellite to relay emergency signals from downed aircraft and ships in distress, was out of service, the SARSAT project would continue operations through use of three Soviet COSPAS search-and-rescue satellites in orbit. NOAA-8 first showed signs of problems on June 12, when it experienced a “clock interrupt” that caused the spacecraft’s gyros to desynchronize. Continued clock disturbances interfered with the meteorological instruments, preventing scientists and engineers from obtaining good data. The satellite was the first in a series of three Advanced TIROS-N (ATN). NASA planned the next launch of a TIROS-N, NOAA-F, for October 1984. (NASA Release 84-93; NY Times, July 14/84, 46)
At the request of Switzerland and the Federal Republic of Germany, ESA reactivated the GOES-2 spacecraft. The two countries wanted use of the satellite to obtain data over a complete 11-year solar cycle and to support the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Experiment (AMPTE) project. GOES-2, launched in June 1978, completed its planned scientific mission in July 1980. It resumed operations in 1981, continuing these until the end of 1983. In January 1984, GOES-2 was moved from the densely occupied geostationary orbit into a higher and slightly asynchronous orbit, where it was drifting at a rate of about 3.5° in longitude per day and becoming visible to the European Space Operations Center station at Michelstadt, Germany, for 4 weeks every 3 Vi months. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84)
Japan launched today the BS-2A (Broadcasting Satellite) from Tanegashima. The apogee kick motor (AKM) firing occurred successfully on January 26 at 12:14 a.m. EST. Under NASA’s Space Tracking and Data Network (STDN) support for Japan, the STDN would provide continuous coverage for 30 hours after AKM firing and contingency support for another 30 days. STDN support to BS-2A had been nominal to date. Launch and early orbit support was provided by the STDN on a cost-reimbursable basis. (NASA Dly Act Kept, Jan 30/84; GSFC SSR) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
The Rome Air Development Center planned to award three contracts for work in support of the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's (DARPA) proposal to develop a multiple satellite system (MSS) consisting of several hundred low-cost, low-orbiting communications satellites in several orbits, Defense Daily reported. The satellites, expected to cost about $1 million each, would comprise a highly survivable, high-bandwidth global communications system through the combination of high bandwidth packet switches and burst radios with low-cost proliferated, low-orbiting satellites. Each satellite would carry a low-cost burst radio capable of instantaneous data rates on the order of 100 Mbps, along with digital controllers to do the packet switching and a suitable antenna system capable of both omni-directional and directive beams. The contracts would be for study of burst radio development, low-cost antenna design, and low-cost satellite integration. (D/D, June 11/85, 229)
Weather satellite engineers from the Shanghai Institute of Satellite Engineering in the Peoples Republic of China planned to visit the U.S. to seek technological help to complete within the next few years assembly and launch of China's first polar orbit weather satellite, Aviation Week reported. The institute was building a primary and backup spacecraft for China's first weather satellite mission and had started preliminary design of a Chinese geosynchronous orbit weather spacecraft planned for launch in the early 1990s. The Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics was working on the imaging system the weather satellites would use to take cloud photos and collect other data comparable to that from the U.S. Tiros weather satellite series. Ground test data from the Chinese-designed tape recorder system and elements of the gyro system for the new polar orbit weather spacecraft, however, had not achieved a high enough reliability standard. The weather satellite manager planned to visit the U.S. in late 1985 or early 1986 to try to procure a U.S.-built tape recorder that could fly in the satellite in tandem with a Chinese-built recorder to improve reliability of the spacecraft. A U.S. space team visiting the satellite engineering institute said the satellite was relatively large, about 4 feet tall and 4.5 feet wide. With solar arrays deployed, total spacecraft span was about 30 feet. The spacecraft would weigh 1,500 lb. at launch and be in a 500-mile-high orbit at 99° orbital inclination. The Chinese State Bureau of Meteorology, Beijing, supplied performance specifications and funding for satellite. The Chinese weather spacecraft, like U.S. weather satellites, would transmit data continuously. Any nation with the receivers used for U.S. weather data could pick up the Chinese data as well. (AvWk, Aug 5/85, 79)
NASA announced that personnel at Ames Research Center (ARC) would break ground March 14 for the numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) facility building to house the world's most powerful supercomputer system, which was intended to provide a national computational capability that would complement NASA's experimental facilities in maintaining national preeminence in aeronautical research. Researchers would use highspeed supercomputers in the system to solve complex aerodynamic equations describing the fundamental fluid physics and large scale aerodynamic flows associated with aircraft flying in earth's atmosphere. In effect, they would test aircraft configurations by "flying" them in the NAS supercomputer system, reducing both time and costs associated with development of new aircraft. NAS would also support other research, including computational materials and structures, chemistry, and astrophysics; weather predictions; and genetic engineering. ARC also intended to make the supercomputer network available to remote users in universities, private industry, and other government research agencies via satellite. Cray Research's Cray 2 supercomputer, with an expected operating speed of 250 million calculations per second when working aerodynamic problems, would be the heart of the initial NAS network when it became operational in mid-1986. NASA intended to incorporate even faster supercomputers as they became commercially available, with the aim of including supercomputers with up to one billion calculations per second in 1988 and 10 billion calculations per second in the 1990s. In an effort to create a partnership between people and machines that, in itself, would advance computer simulation, NASA had architects Hunt and Co. design the 90,500-sq. ft. concrete building so as to encourage scientists who would use the computers for research to work closely with the people who would operate, maintain, and develop the NAS system. Building contractor was Perini Co. (NASA Release 85-37)
NASA announced today the launch by Atlas/Centaur 64 from KSC of the Intelsat V-A (F-11), second in a series of improved International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) commercial communications satellites launched by that vehicle. Intelsat V-A had a capacity of 13,500 voice circuits compared with Intelsat Vthat had 12,000; Intelsat IV-A, 6,000; and Intelsat IV, 4,000. All satellites had two TV channels. Figures collected as a result of the INTELSAT-sponsored global telecommunications traffic conference indicated that an Intelsat IV-A satellite would have insufficient capacity by the early 1980s to cope with the traffic and load on the Atlantic Ocean primary satellite and on the Indian Ocean satellite. Although one solution could have been to orbit another Intelsat IV-A Atlantic Ocean and Indian Ocean satellite, subsequent planning proceeded toward the development of a high-capacity Intelsat V satellite. After an international bidding process, the INTELSAT Board of Governors at its September 1976 meeting awarded a contract for development and manufacture of seven Intelsat V satellites to Ford Aerospace and Communication Corp. as prime contractor and an international team of manufacturers as subcontractors. Since that time, the board decided to order two additional Intelsat V satellites and to order six higher-capacity Intelsat V-A spacecraft for launch in 1985 and beyond. Members of the international manufacturing team included Aerospatiale (France), GEC-Marconi (United Kingdom), Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (Federal Republic of Germany), Mitsubishi Electric Corp. (Japan), Selenia (Italy), and Thomson-CSF (France). (NASA MOR M-491-203-85-09 [prelaunch] May 27/85, [postlaunch] July 17/85)
The USSR today launched Cosmos 7667 intended for the continuation of research on the effects of spaceflight on living organisms, TASS in English reported. During the flight, there would be experiments to study processes of adaptation to weightlessness and to investigate opportunities for radiation shielding during spaceflight. The satellite carried two monkeys, Verny and Gordy, for studies on vestibular and hemodynamic responses of living organisms to weightlessness at the acute period of adaptation. Experiments carried out at that time would take quantitative measures of the excitability of the vestibular apparatus and to note increases in its reactivity. The experiments would also yield direct data on the outflow and inflow of blood to the head. Experiments with 10 male rats aboard the satellite were intended to determine the influence on all parts of a living organism of the acute period of adaptation to weightlessness and later readaptation. Ten tritons (mollusks) carried on the satellite previously had a portion of their front limbs and lenses amputated in order to study possibilities of regeneration and division of cells at zero gravity. And a biocalorimeter would monitor 1,500 Drosophila flies aboard the satellite to determine processes of energy exchanges during the emergence of the flies from nymphs and to study the flies' metabolism. Guppy fish, cornseeds, and crocuses were also experimental subjects. Scientists from the U.S., Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Poland, Romania, Czechoslovakia, and France cooperated with Soviet scientists in developing the experimental equipment for the flight and in pre- and postflight examination of the animals and plants abroad the spacecraft. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 10/85, July 13/85)
The European Space Agency (ESA) and the Department of Commerce's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced that the U.S. agreed to lend ESA its GOES-4 standby geostationary weather satellite as a temporary substitute for ESA's Meteosat-1 spacecraft. Meteosat-1, launched in 1977 with a planned 3-year lifetime, had run out of station-keeping fuel and would drift out of view of ESA's ground-station network in July. NOAA would move GOES-4, which had been at 140° W longitude over the Pacific Ocean, westward by 4° a day to bring it by mid-June to its new position at 10° W longitude above the Atlantic Ocean. Because ESA group equipment was not compatible with the GOES-4 command system, NOAA would operate the satellite for ESA from its satellite guidance facilities at Suitland, Maryland, and Wallops Station, Virginia. ESA's Meteosat ground facilities in Darmstadt would receive data from the spacecraft. When NOAA's Atlantic-area GOES-East Satellite lost its imaging capability in 1984, ESA's Meteosat-2 provided U.S. weather watchers with weather data, including information on the eastern Atlantic hurricane breeding grounds. (ESA Release, May 7/85)
In addition to TV programs, the satellite would transmit newspaper facsimile, educational programs, medical consultations, weather information, and computer linkages. (Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese, May 30/ 85)
The USSR today boosted the nuclear-reactor core of its Cosmos 1607 radar ocean-surveillance satellite (RORSAT) to a higher orbit, marking the end of its 92-day mission, Aerospace Daily reported. Some observers linked the maneuver to the failure the week before of Cosmos 1625, a solar-powered electronic ocean reconnaissance satellite (EORSAT). They believed that EORSATs and RORSATs worked together to monitor movements of potentially hostile ships and that, upon the failure of Cosmos 1625, the Soviets decided Cosmos 1607 was not worth maintaining. Others said the Soviets terminated the Cosmos 1607 mission because it had operated successfully for three months, and were therefore uncertain of the satellite's reliability if kept in operation any longer. (The Soviets had problems with RORSATs in the past—parts of the Cosmos 954 reactor came down in Canada in 1978, and the nuclear power-pack components of Cosmos 1402 reentered over the Indian Ocean and South Atlantic in early 1983. Cosmos 1266 lasted only about a week in 1981, and in that same year Cosmos 1299 only a little longer. In 1982 Cosmos 1412 was operational for only 40 days.) Cosmos 1607 was the second Soviet RORSAT of 1984; they safely boosted the power pack of Cosmos 1579, launched June 28, to a higher orbit on September 28. The Soviets boosted the power packs to high orbit so their decay would occur after half-life of the nuclear elements. (A/D, Feb 11/85, 1)
NASA announced it had scheduled the Spacelab 3 mission, a European-developed and NASA-operated space laboratory, for launch on STS 51 —B no earlier than April 29, 1985. Spacelab 3 was a microgravity mission with 15 investigations in five scientific disciplines: materials science, life sciences, fluid mechanics, atmospheric science, and astronomy. Two of the investigations—one in materials science, mercury iodide crystal growth [France], and one in astronomy, very wide field camera [France]—had flown aboard Spacelab 1. Scientists in the U.S. sponsored 12 of the investigations, and an ionization measurements investigation was from India. Important new hardware developments in materials science, fluid dynamics, and life sciences would be on the flight, and researchers had designed the experimental hardware for multiple flight use. NASA had selected two payload specialists with expertise in crystal growth and fluid mechanics for the flight. The Spacelab 3 configuration consisted of a long tunnel, a long module, and a mission peculiar equipment support structure (MPESS). The module PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	373 and tunnel would provide a pressurized shirtsleeve environment within which the crew could operate. The MPESS also supported experiments that did not require a habitable crew environment. Common payload support equipment used on Spacelab 3 was the scientific airlock that could extend from the module into space for experiments requiring exposure to the space environment and flight crew hands-on activities. There were three experiments on materials science: the fluid experiment system (FES), the vapor crystal growth system (VCGS), and the French materials science experiment. In fluid mechanics, the crew would perform fundamental experiments in the drop dynamics module (DDM) to test theoretical predictions of drop behavor in a near-zero gravity environment. The geophysical fluid flow cell (GFFC) experiment would study fluid motion in a microgravity environment. The six investigations in life sciences included four in the Ames Research Center's (ARC) life sciences payload system to verify a new facility for housing and studying animals in the space environment, observing the animals' reactions to that environment, and evaluating operations and procedures relative to in-flight animal care; the urine monitoring investigation to monitor crew water intake and to prepare urine samples for postflight analysis; and the autogenic feedback training experiment to test a technique to control space adaptation syndrome. The four investigations in atmospheric science and astronomy were the ionization states of solar and galactic cosmic ray heavy nuclei that would use a new detector system to determine the composition and intensity of ions emitted toward the earth from the sun and other galactic sources; the French astronomy investigation to make an ultraviolet survey of the celestial sphere in a study of large-scale phenomena such as clouds within our galaxy; the auroral observations experiment to observe and record the visual characteristics of pulsating and flickering auroras; and atmospheric trace molecules spectroscopy to examine on a global scale the composition and variability of the upper atmosphere. In addition to the Spacelab 3 experiments, NASA had scheduled two GetAway Specials for the flight—a Northern Utah University satellite (NUSAT) and a global low-orbit message relay satellite (GLOMR). NASA would enclose each in a canister mounted in the orbiter payload bay for deployment near the end of the mission following completion of Spacelab operations. (NASA MOR E-977-51-B-02 [prelaunch] April 17/85)
NASA issued a revision of its October 28 report on the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) [see Astronomy, Oct. 28], in which it noted a major IRAS survey discovery that many galaxies emitted far more energy in the infrared than in the optical band where normal stars emitted the bulk of their luminosity. Astronomers considered these galaxies to be of three distinct kinds. The first was "starburst galaxies," those that were presumably undergoing an active period of star formation leading to a large infrared luminosity and in which as much as 10 to 20 solar masses of gas and dust were being converted into new massive stars each year. Another class was sometimes called Seyfert galaxies, which astronomers believed were powered by matter falling into an accretion disk surrounding a black hole. The active regions of these galaxies had a great deal of interstellar dust, which absorbed the optical and ultraviolet radiation from the accretion disks, accounting for the large infrared luminosity. The third and most mysterious class of extragalactic objects discovered by IRAS was the extremely luminous infrared galaxies corresponding to very faint optical galaxies. Such galaxies produced 100 to 300 times as much energy in the infrared as in the optical, and the total luminosities of these galaxies were approximately 100 times those of ours. Astronomers believed the infrared radiation in these galaxies was probably from thermal dust emission, where the dust was reradiating energy absorbed from shorter wavelengths. Astronomers found a large fraction of the active infrared galaxies were interacting galaxies, that is, galaxies that were undergoing a collision or near collision with a neighboring galaxy. The IRAS survey demonstrated the profound effect such collisions had on galaxies, and it could well be that such events dominated the evolution of most galaxies. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [postlaunch] Oct 28/85, revised Dec 2/85)
In a commencement address today at the George Washington University School of Public and International Affairs, Charles Wick, director of the U.S. Information Agency, said that the "very survival" of the U.S. may depend on the extent to which its citizens use and master the tools of mass communications, the NY Times reported. "Through the explosion of global satellite communications, a technological 'genie' has been unleashed which will change forever the way that governments communicate ideas and information abroad," he said. However, he noted that". . . not all countries believe in freedom of ideas. Not all accept the Western tradition that free expression is a basic human right. These opposing forces are attempting to persuade other countries, particularly those in the third world, that the state, not the people, must decide which ideas circulate in their magazines and newspapers and on the TV and radio stations . . . "Since the 1970s, the Soviet Union has introduced resolutions at Unesco, in the guise of a 'New World Information Order,' to impose this control of the mass media on all nations of the world . . . "Unless you and I do a better job of explaining to the world how the free flow of information can benefit mankind, other nations will not be persuaded to open their borders to the ideas and opinions of others. This could have damaging, even fatal consequences for a dangerous world, in which cooperation—and survival—depend so heavily on mutual understanding," Wick concluded. (NYT, May 7/85, B8)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced it would hand over on February 5 MARECS B-2 to the International Maritime Satellite organization (INMARSAT) for commercial operation. The spacecraft, launched November 10 and operational since January 8, would complete INMARSAT'S first-generation satellite system, which would offer worldwide service covering three oceans: the Atlantic region with MARECS-A positioned at 26° W, the Indian Ocean with INTELSATMCS A at 63° E, and the Pacific Ocean with MARECS B-2 at 176.5° E. In preparation for future communications satellite services, ESA in cooperation with INMARSAT was conducting experiments with MARECS B-2 to design economically operated equipment compact enough for installation in small vehicles. (ESA release Feb 4/85)
NASA announced that the United Kingdom's contribution to active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE), the UK Subsatellite [UKS), did not respond to commands when it had passed over Chilton on January 16 or since. Efforts to contact UKS by Chilton and the Deep Space Network (with 10 kw-uplink power) were unsuccessful. British officials said they would continue periodic efforts to contact the satellite, but were not optimistic. In five months of operation, the UKS had supported three chemical releases and had met 70% of the UK-project objectives. (NASA announcement, Feb 13/85) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED PA6^Jl£LjH1INTI0NAtlf BLANI UNITED STATES
The Soviet Union signed a memorandum of understanding with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) to formalize its relationship with the 109-member nation global satellite consortium, the Washington Post reported. However, neither the USSR nor INTELSAT indicated that the understanding would lead to full-fledged membership for the nation that was the largest nonmember user of the satellite network. The understanding, which came after seven years of negotiations, laid the groundwork for increased use of INTELSAT'S network for global transmission of Soviet voice, data, and TV transmissions. If the Soviets increasingly used INTELSAT, experts said, it would be to expand their broadcasting system to reach Third World countries. In 1984 the USSR broadcast 441 hours of TV programming over INTELSAT'S satellites, representing 1% of the consortium's total TV traffic. By contrast, the U.S. used INTELSAT TV transmission capacity over 6,884 hours, 14% of the organization's TV traffic. INTELSAT had to accept the membership of any nation that belonged to the International Telecommunications Union, which included the Soviet Union. INTELSAT denied using the Soviet Union as a means to deflect competition the organization was facing from entrepreneurs seeking to launch their own satellite systems. (WPost, Aug 28/85, G1)
Colombia lodged a protest with the U.S. over placement of a private U.S. satellite in geostationary orbit over that country, FBIS, Bogota Emisoras CARACOL Network in Spanish reported, space that Colombia claimed as its own. Colombia's Foreign Minister Augusto Ramirez Ocampo said the satellite was placed there secretly, since the firm owning it had not presented a request to the interested nation in accordance with international legal procedures. Colombia's United Nations Ambassador Ernesto Rodriguez Medina denounced the situation before the U.N.'s Legal Subcommittee for Outer Space, saying his country planned to place its Satcol satellite in that same position in orbit. (FBIS, Bogota Emisoras CARACOL Network in Spanish, Apr 11/85)
NASA had brought under control a $5Q-mil!ion weather satellite, NOAA-8, that had tumbled helplessly in space for nearly a year due to a malfunctioning oscillator, the Washington Times reported. The defective oscillator gave out during April, allowing NASA and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) scientists to activate a backup oscillator and reprogram the satellite via remote control. NOAA was checking and calibrating the spacecraft's instruments before putting it July 8 into service to transmit daily weather photos and information. (IV Times, May 24/85, 3A; W Post, May 24, 85, A8)
During 1985 the Soviet Union launched 96 spacecraft, the U.S. 17, the Washington Post reported, reflecting what space specialists said was the fact that most Soviet spy satellites burned out within weeks while U.S. satellites often remained in orbit for years. The Soviets launched 33 photo reconnaissance satellites, amounting to more than one-third of the total Soviet launches from January 1 through December 26. In 1985 the Soviets continued to stress the ability to locate with satellites U.S. ships at sea, Navy officials commented. One type of Soviet ocean surveillance satellite, which had radar beams that could penetrate clouds, sought aircraft carriers and other big ships. The radar provided the location of ships below the satellite, forcing the Navy to resort to new methods to foil radar detection. Nicholas Johnson, advisory scientist to Teledyne Brown Engineering Co., kept a widely used log of U.S. and Soviet space launches, and he said that the Soviets launched in 1985 five ocean surveillance satellites, two carrying radar and three equipped with electronic eavesdropping gear. He added that Soviet launches included 19 communication satellites, two of a variety never seen before, and seven satellites designed to warn Moscow of a nuclear attack. Through espionage the Soviets had learned a great deal about U.S. spy satellite capabilities and had taken steps to mask some of their military activities, intelligence officials noted. Space specialists largely agreed that the U.S. was well ahead of the Soviets in the art of spying from space, although they indicated the Soviet's reconnaissance satellites were steadily improving. (IVPost, Dec 31/85, A4)
NASA announced that Harris Corp. successfully deployed on the ground a 50-foot antenna system, marking a milestone in NASA's program to demonstrate that large space antenna concepts were feasible. In the test, a hoop-column antenna unfolded, umbrella-style, from a compact package to a combination of thin structural members, quartz filament cords, and gold-plated mesh. The mesh, serving as a precision reflecting surface stretching across the diameter of the supporting hoop, was shaped like a dish but could be made flat, spherical, or conical, depending on the intended application. The antenna column was a precise telescoping hub, forming the central structure of the antenna, tensing the cords that shaped the antenna surface, and housing the electronic feed mechanisms. The size of potential large space antennas meant a significant boost in effective radiated power from space and an increased sensitivity to weak signals from the ground or from space. One potential application was in communications, because at that time each earth station had to have a large antenna to receive the weak signals transmitted through small antennas on satellites. Large antennas in space would greatly reduce the size and cost of the antennas required at ground sites. And a few super-antennas placed in high geosynchronous orbit could cover the globe, instead of the great number of smaller satellites otherwise required. Millions of inexpensive home rooftop or land mobile unit antennas could receive satellite signals then picked up only by a few very large ground stations. NASA believed the 50-foot antenna system was the largest precision antenna designed for space that could be accommodated in existing ground electromagnetic test facilities. However, the ultimate deployable space antennas might have 150- to 300-foot diameters. Studies showed that these larger antennas required space assembly. (NASA Release 85-76)
On October 27, Hughes engineers ignited the satellite's engines to take it up to its intended orbit 22,300 miles above the Pacific Ocean, then Hughes and Navy engineers completed a month of testing. Following the certification, Hughes president Steven Dorfman commented, "We are meeting all our specifications. Six months later than originally intended, we are going into service." The successful repair turned around a loss for Hughes and its insurance carrier, which had paid the company $85 million. Dorfman said the insurer would get back $65 million by sharing revenues with Hughes over the satellites's ten-year lifespan. (IVPost, Dec 1/85, A3) SEARCH FOR EXTRATERRESTRIAL INTELLIGENCE
Under pressure from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to define its requirements in the internationally authorized 1,544 to 1,660.5	MHz-frequency band and to make allocations in this band for commercial mobile-user communications and surveillance systems, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) indicated satellites might play a key role in air navigation, surveillance, and communications in its follow-on generation, air-traffic control system. Therefore the FCC was trying to protect the radio spectrum required for such services, Aviation Week reported. In addition, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) would review at the 1987 World Radio Conference the earlier-assigned band, seeking to assure sufficient spectrum availability for civil aviation operators' future global needs. The Special Committee 155 of the Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics said it would report at an April 26 ICAO meeting results of its yearlong study intended to define future spectrum operational requirements for the year 2010 and beyond for all classes of airspace users. The report called for service over both land and water, from the surface to a 70,000-foot altitude, a requirement most easily met by spaceborne systems. The FAA had considered spaceborne systems for air traffic communications for nearly two decades, but had rejected them as not cost-effective replacements for terrestrial-based facilities (except for transoceanic communications). However, at the urging of the Air Transport Assn. (ATA), the FAA had initiated in the early 1970s a joint program with the European Space Agency (ESA) to explore satellite use for oceanic aircraft communications, resulting in contracts with Comsat Corp. for the service and GE to build a satellite; the FAA had terminated the program when ATA lost interest. More recently, Aviation Week said, the FAA had responded cooly to DOD's push for FAA adoption of its Rockwell Navstar Global Positioning System, partly because of Pentagon-imposed signal accuracy limits of 500 miles (1,640 ft.) for civilian users. Currently, commercial applications to the FCC for authorization to offer domestic communications- and surveillance-satellite services to users, ranging from trucks to aircraft, had raised serious FAA concerns. FAA officials doubted the technical suitability of some of the proposed systems to meet airspace users' demanding requirements. The government traditionally had owned and operated the surveillance, navigation, and communications facilities the FAA used for air-traffic control. If the FCC, under the Reagan Administration policy of commercializing space activities, should allocate spectrum currently assigned for aviation to nonaviation use, this could preclude a future optimum global spaceborne-avia-tion system. Therefore, the FAA task force was studying spectrum needs for several types of spaceborne systems, including multifunction satellites, and expected to have recommendations ready for submission to the Future Air Navigation System Committee and the National Telecommunications and Information Agency, which addressed government frequency-allocation issues. (AvWk, Feb 4/85, 36)
A conflict between industrial and developing countries over the use of space would likely be the dominant issue at the five-week World Administrative Radio Conference that would open August 9 in Geneva, the NY Times reported. The meeting was intended to negotiate a plan to avert traffic jams in the space used by orbiting communications satellites. The conflict existed as a result of the desire of industrial countries to gain an advantage from their technical lead with a flexible approach to assigning orbital slots and the desire of some developing countries to reserve orbital slots years before they might be used. Communications experts around the world said the increased use of low-cost satellites to expedite domestic, regional, and world communications was leading to a virtual traffic jam in the satellite belt, 22,300 miles above the equator. The radio frequencies that gave the clearest signals also were rapidly filling. The U.S. and INTELSAT used most of the orbit space and radio spectrum. Reagan Administration officials said they would offer a proposal that the U.S. refrain for 10 years from using parts of the radio spectrum opened to satellite use by a 1979 conference. By staying out of the expanded spectrum, U.S. officials said, the U.S. would reassure less-developed nations that there would be radio room for them when their satellite-launching plans matured. The U.S. plan would let a country ask for radio frequencies 15 years in advance against the current five years. The U.S. plan would also establish a requirement that countries with a satellite in operation made compensatory payments to countries forced to put satellites in less desirable orbits or forced to use less desirable radio frequencies. The most persuasive aspect of the U.S. proposal was the prospect that between 50 and 100 U.S. satellites were at some stage of planning, development, or scheduled for launch over the next three years. Less-developed countries, particularly those in the tropical zone, wanted rigid assignments of radio bands, including the lower frequencies then dominated by the developed nations, because the bad weather common in the tropics did not noticeably disturb those frequencies. (NYT, Aug 7/85, D1)
The satellite carried search and rescue (SARSAT) equipment that would resume operation as part of an international program begun in September 1983 to use satellites to save people in downed airplanes or on ships in distress. During the 11 months NOAA-8 malfunctioned, three USSR and one U.S. satellite were picking up distress signals and relaying them to ground stations. The reactivated NOAA-8 would assume weather data collection that NOAA-6 had been doing. NOAA-6 had no search and rescue equipment and its infrared radiometer for taking temperature measurements was not working. (NASA Release 85-81)
Observers had anticipated seeing the world's first man-made comet 72,000 miles above earth (over the Pacific Ocean west of Lima, Peru) the morning of December 27, 1984, the JPL Universe reported. Although clouds obscured viewing from official ground-observation sites, scientists called the artificial comet a success, marking another milestone in the active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE) program sponsored by the U.S., West Germany, and the United Kingdom. Mission goal was to inject, from a satellite tracer, ions of lithium and barium inside, outside, and just within the earth's magnetosphere (creating the comet appearance) and to detect and monitor these ions with two other satellites as the ions convected and diffused through the inner magnetosphere. Scientists hoped that this new data would improve understanding of the influence and mechanisms of interaction of the solar wind with earth's magnetosphere, including formation of the van Allen Belts. A NASA Convair 990 reported a six-minute viewing; an Argentine Boeing 707 an eight-minute view. Overall intensity of the "comet" was lower than expected; the 12,000- to 20,000-km tail was somewhat shorter than expected. Experimenters withheld other canisters of chemicals aboard the German ion-release module (IRM) for AMPTE experiments later in the year. GSFC managed the U.S. portion of the project; a JPL mission control team operated the charge composition explorer (CCE) spacecraft to observe the cloud. GPL Universe, Jan 11/85, 1; GSFC News, Jan 85, 3)
NASA announced that it would launch Intelsat V-A (F—10), first in a series of improved INTELSAT commercial communications satellites, by an Atlas-Centaur (AC-63) from KSC no earlier than March 19, 1985. The Intelsat V-A series had a capacity of 13,500 two-way voice circuits and two TV channels. Aerospace manufacturers around the world, under the direction of prime contractor Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., had contributed to the design, development, and manufacture of Intelsat V-A. These contractors and their responsibilities were: Aerospatiale (France)—designed the main member for the spacecraft's modular construction and supplied the main body structure thermal analysis and control; GEC-Marconi (United Kingdom)—produced the 11-GHz beacon transmitters used for earth station antenna tracking; Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (Federal Republic of Germany)—designed and produced the satellite control subsystem and the solar array; Mitsubishi Electric Corp. (Japan)—contributed the six-GHz and four-GHz earth coverage antennas and manufactured the power control electronics and the telemetry and command digital units; Selenia (Italy)—designed and built the six telemetry, command, and ranging antennas, two 11-GHz beacon antennas, and two 14/11-GHz spot-beam antennas and built the command receiver and telemetry transmitter that combined to form a ranging transponder for determination of spacecraft position in transfer orbit; and Thomson-CSF (France)—built the 10-w, 11-GHz traveling wave tubes. The Intelsat V-A spacecraft would weigh about 4,402 lb. at separation from the Centaur, including the solid-propellant apogee kick motor (AKM) for circularization in the geosynchronous orbit. The separated spacecraft weight of 4,389 would include 1,963 lb. of AKM expendables and nine lb. of transfer orbit propellants. NASA would use spin-stabilization during the transfer orbit coast to geosynchronous altitude. After burnout of the AKM, NASA would despin the spacecraft and deploy the antenna and solar array. In this configuration the spacecraft would be about 51 feet wide (measured across the solar panels) and 22 feet high. In orbital operation, the spacecraft would be three-axis stabilized with the body-fixed antenna pointing constantly at the earth and the solar array rotated to point at the sun. The INTELSAT global satellite system comprised two essential elements: the space segment, consisting of satellites owned by Intelsat, and the ground segment, consisting of earth stations owned by telecommunications entities in the countries in which they were located. The space segment had 16 satellites in synchronous orbit at an altitude of about 25,780 km (22,240 miles). There were 424 communications antennas at 334 earth station sites in 134 countries and territories in the ground segment. The combined system of satellites and ground stations provided more than 800 earth station-to-earth station communications pathways. (NASA MOR M—491-203-85-08 [prelaunch] Mar 18/85)
M. Peter McPherson, head of the Agency for International Development (AID), said a U.S.-financed and -built satellite weather-alert system may have given Bangladesh up to 24 hours notice of a devastating cyclone that killed approximately 10,000 people, the Washington Times reported. The advance notice may have saved "a substantial number of lives," along coastal areas of the Bay of Bengal, McPherson said. McPherson pointed out that the satellite system in Bangladesh, developed in phases since 1978 by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and AID warned of the storm. He said Bangladesh technicians had tracked the cyclone for four days and had the capability of predicting landfall and wind speed within 18 to 24 hr. (IV Times, May 29/85, 5A)
Comsat Corp. announced unaudited year-end results showing a $29 million decrease in income from continuing operations in 1984 compared to 1983 income, the Washington Post reported. Comsat reported consolidated 1984 operating revenue of about $442 million, with consolidated net income of about $51 million and income from continuing operations of about $45 million. The company attributed $13 million of the decline to a write-off associated with Satellite Television Corp., the direct satellite-to-home TV company, and to the write-down of inventory from Comsat's equipment manufacturing business. Comsat officials said they would release final figures and per share earnings later in the month (IVPost, Feb 1/85, F5) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED m**MLjmmrtAu.r Bum
President Reagan informed Congress that the U.S. planned shortly to conduct the first test of an antisatellite weapon (ASAT) against a target in space, which a spokesman said would provide an "incentive" to the USSR to negotiate limits on such weapons, the Washington Post reported. Reagan promised the U.S. was bargaining in good faith with the Soviets to limit ASATs, although the White House repeated the administration's opposition to a Soviet proposal for a moratorium on ASAT development and testing. Officials said they expected the test of an ASAT fired from an F—15 at an obsolete U.S. satellite to take place in September or early October. Technical problems with both the antisatellite weapon, called the miniature homing vehicle, and the intended target, an instrumented balloon to be inflated in space, delayed the first test. Since the original target was still experiencing problems, the test would use an obsolete satellite. That same day Presidential spokesman Larry Speakes read to reporters a lengthy statement criticizing Soviet advances in antisatellite weapons and technology and said this provided justification for the first U.S. test against a target in space. Speakes added that a moratorium on antisatellite weapons tests would "perpetuate" a Soviet "monopoly" on antisatellite systems. (W Post, Aug 21/85, A1)
The Arab League's Arabsat 1 telecommunications satellite, launched February 8 by an Ariane 3 from Kourou, French Guiana, experienced control problems during initial in-orbit checkout, but was reported stabilized with all systems functioning normally, Aviation Week reported. Anomalies in the spacecraft's gyro package caused the problems, detected March 16 by operators at Arabsat's Dihrab, Saudi Arabia, ground station when the satellite was at its final on-station location at 19° E longitude. Investigators were attempting to pinpoint the problem. An electrostatic discharge may have caused one of the gyro package anomalies. Although the gyros provided pitch, roll, and yaw information, "we never lost control of the satellite," said Michel Duigot, Aerospatiale's Space and Ballistic Systems Division communications satellite system manager. "There is redundancy in the satellite because we have two packages of three gyros each," he pointed out. The satellite experienced solar array deployment difficulties soon after launch, but the arrays eventually extended successfully. Program officials said the two problems were unrelated. The solar array deployment problems had resulted in minor modifications to the solar panels on the No. 2 Arabsat, originally scheduled for launch by NASA from KSC in May, but rescheduled for June. The 22-member Arab Satellite Communications Organization would use the Arabsat 1 for national and regional communications and TV broadcast requirements. The schedule called for an operational satellite by the end of April, and program officials believed this might still be possible. (AvWk, Mar 25.85, 22)
INTELSAT'S Assembly of Parties, representatives of INTELSAT member nations, rejected a proposal by 21 nations that all INTELSAT parties and signatories boycott interconnection discussions with private companies planning to launch international satellites and that the U.S. reconsider its favorable policy toward non-INTELSAT satellites, Aviation Week reported. INTELSAT signatories, telecommunications organizations that operated ground facilities and represented INTELSAT member nations in organization management, had resolved in April 1983 that diversion of international traffic would threaten INTELSAT'S viability. A resolution adopted by the assembly urged all signatories and parties to "take into account" the boycott and the signatories' economic-viability resolution and to express opinions on separate systems to the U.S. and at the upcoming INTELSAT assembly. U.S. officials had joined the consensus after objectionable language was deleted, but said naming a specific nation in the resolution could set a bad precedent. As one official noted, "The criticism of the U.S. we expected turned out to be expressions of concern by developing countries that competition could mean increased rates for them." PACTjlL __INT£NTtONAHt SUNK The assembly asked the Board of Governors to submit recommendations for separate-system coordination to the assembly as soon as possible, as the U.S.'s Federal Communication Commission was processing five applications for private satellite launches. (AvWk, Feb 11/85, 29)
Sources inside and outside the Reagan Administration said the Department of Defense (DOD) was developing for constant surveillance of all objects in deep space a new generation of navigation, communications, and spy satellites, which would orbit 22,000 miles high and be aided by a nearly completed network of ground stations, the Washington Post reported. DOD would harden the new satellites against radiation and laser attacks and give them some small jet engines for maneuvering away from attack. DOD was also determining if the satellites could be armed to defend themselves. DOD was completing Spacetrack, a worldwide U.S. network of five spacewatching facilities, that would provide adequate time to take defensive actions if the USSR launched weapons at U.S. deep-space satellites. DOD's FY 86 budget reportedly would contain $20 million to complete a fully operational Spacetrack sensor system by 1988. The Soviets had had for 10 years a rudimentary weapon that could knock down low-level U.S. satellites. The Pentagon was beginning tests on its own antisatellite weapon, which would knock down low-level Soviet satellites as they passed over the U.S. (IV Post, Feb 18/85, A1)
The Commerce Department and Eosat, which was selected the previous fall to operate the system, had not yet finalized the contract, but a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) official told Congress the contract would be signed within two weeks. Eosat was proposing to provide two satellites and a new ground station for a fixed price of $250 million, satellite hardware continuing present capabilities with improvements, greater data processing capabilities at the new ground station, and a program covering 10 years. Government funding would occur in the first five years. (A/D, June 21/85, 1)
NASA said that the GOES—6 weather satellite turned its eye toward space for about four and a half hours today before NASA personnel reversed it, the Washington Post reported. Located at a fixed point about 22,000	miles above earth, the satellite transmitted weather photos widely used by TV stations and newspapers across the nation. NASA repositioned the satellite in a reprogramming effort that required transmission of 14 groups of 256 commands each, retiming the revolving satellite so that its instruments would come on when facing the earth. Since August 1984 when GOES-5 lost its ability to transmit photos because a light in it failed, GOES-6 was the lone fixed-point satellite making transmissions. NASA had scheduled for launch in spring 1986 a replacement for GOES-5. If a failure like the one that occurred on August 25 were to last longer, it could have a serious impact on the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) ability to monitor severe storms. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A8)
Adm. James Watkins, speaking to reporters after a ceremony during which astronaut Thomas Mattingly was promoted to commodore and named to head the Navy Space Program Office, said that a Navy oceanographer who had traveled on a Space Shuttle flight the previous fall had brought back "some fantastically important" information that would make it easier for U.S. submarines to hide in the world's oceans, the Washington Post reported. Watkins said the oceanographer, whom he would not name but was known to be Paul Scully-Power, a civilian who worked at the Naval Underwater Systems Center, New London, Connecticut, said the information was vital in trying to understand the ocean depths. When asked if satellite technology might not be hastening the day when submarines could be tracked from space, Watkins acknowledged that technology was opening some doors on submarine tracking. However, he pointed out that the question was whether doors opened on detecting submarines faster than doors opened on learning about the oceans depths. He added that "we're still ahead of the game in the latter category. "So the ability to track submarines—we don't see that as being a threat to our forces until the turn of the century or later, depending on what kind of breakthroughs we might find at the end of this decade or into the next," Watkins concluded. (W Post, Mar 22/85, A10)
Three government agenciesthe National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)proposed a longterm plan for the study of human effect on the Earth's environment. The project envisioned cooperation from other scientifically advanced nations and would use the disciplines of geology, meteorology, oceanography, forestry, agriculture, and computer and satellite technologies to study the Earth as an integrated system. NSF director, Erich Bloch, noted that "for the first time in history we have the capability to observe the entire Earth from the outer reaches of its atmosphere to its molten inner core." NASA's Earth System Sciences Committee predicted that the program, enlisting satellites from countries around the globe, would be in full swing by the middle 1990s. (B Sun, Jun 27/86; CSM, Jun 30/86)
A Tracking and Data Relay Satellite lost transmitting capability on an Sband singleaccess antenna, SA1, which provided voice and data links to low Earthorbiting satellites, including the Shuttle. Services were switched to the remaining antenna, SA2, and little or no data loss to customers occurred. (NASA Release 86175)
Administration sources said that President Ronald Reagan might delay funding for a new orbiter until 1987. Because budget restraints made any commitment to a replacement impossible, many advisors were in favor of producing expendable launch vehicles for private satellites. (W Post, Jul 30/86; P Inq, Jul 30/86; WSJ, Jul 31/86)
A weeklong exercise to upgrade the Search and Rescue Satellite System got underway at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, expanding coverage to the Southern Hemisphere. (LA Times, Nov 12/86)
was 1 in 1,000 launches as compared to NASA's 1 in 100,000 firings. The panel was created because 19 missions carrying potentially hazardous plutonium power sources (were an accident to occur within the Earth's atmosphere) involved the Shuttle. Two other nuclear powered satellites were scheduled for launches from the Shuttle later in 1986. (WSJ, Mar 5/86; C Trib, Mar 6/86)
Boeing Aerospace was selected to supply NASA with Shuttle upper stages to place two Tracking and Data Relay Satellites into geosynchronous Earth orbits. Engineering support and integration of the upper stages with the satellites were also to be provided. The contract was expected to run from March 1886 through April 1990 at a price of approximately $93 million. (NASA Release 8614)
A lightweight transmitter for sending messages to weather satellites was placed on polar bears and caribou in the spring of 1985, and had so far functioned very well, said biologist Steven Amstrup. Because of the satellite's ability to track these animals, biologists could determine whether the animals were walking, running, sleeping, or foraging for food. (B Sun, Mar
COSPAS/SARSAT, an international search and rescue system, was scheduled to monitor the aroundtheworld, nonstop and unrefueled flight of the Rutan Voyager airplane. The SARSAT system uses four satellites, three from the Soviet Union and one'90*from the United States, to locate downed aircraft and ships at sea by picking up their emergency signals. The Rutan Voyager aircraft, designed by aeronautical engineer Burt Rutan and piloted by his brother Dick and Jeana Yeager, carried a 11/2pound prototype beacon that could transmit on a 406 Mhz frequency for location determination and a 121.5 Mhz frequency on which rescue workers could hone in. The signals could also be recorded by a satellite if the aircraft was not in immediate range of a ground station. Since the initiation of the program in September 1982, 606 lives had been saved, by September 1986, in 251 emergencies worldwide. (NASA Release 86132)
Fairchild Space Company proposed a lightweight refueling device to be attached to the Space Shuttle's bay that could service satellites with the fuel required for keeping them in orbit. The refueling device would extend the maximum life span for a satellite about 15 years. Fairchild was in a race with Rockwell International and Martin Marietta for the lightest weight and best functioning design; submission of the designs to NASA was to be no later than November 7. (W Post, Sep 15/86)
Six days after launch and 24 hours after being put into operation, the Search and Rescue Satellite Aided Tracking satellite (SARSAT) picked up its first distress signal from 4 downed Canadians in a remote area of Ontario. Rescue workers were easily able to locate the downed Cessna, and all four Canadians were taken to safety. Canada, France, the United States, and the former Soviet Union all shared in the search and rescue program known as COSPAS/SARSAT aboard the NOAA10 satellite. (NASA Release 86144)
A joint venture of Hughes Aircraft and RCA, the Earth Observation Satellite Company said that the Reagan administration was withholding funds for the Landsat program it managed. The $65 million not released was earmarked for new satellites, receiving stations, and support operations. The Landsat satellite was launched in 1972 as a data gathering operation for the government and public, but its monopoly for providing detailed services to companies and private individuals was broken by the French satellite, SPOT. Elimination of the program, warned a representative from the company, "would destroy the first U.S. attempt to commercialize space." (W Post, Dec 5/86)
Dr. Albert Boggess was awarded the Herschel Medal, by the Council of the Royal Astronomical Society of the United Kingdom, for his contribution to the success of the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE). The IUE satellite was designated to study Comet Halley's evolution as it approached and receded from0*the Sun. Boggess was named corecipient of the award with University of London Professor R. Wilson. (NASA Release 8628)
NASA planned for a display of current and future technologies at the 34th Annual EAA International FlyIn Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition, with an exhibit entitled "21st Century Aviation," August 18 in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Featured would be hypersonic cruise vehicles and high altitude aircraft that could fly from the U.S. West Coast to Tokyo five times faster than subsonic flyers and have the capability of taking payloads and passengers to Earth orbit. In addition, NASA also planned advanced cockpit displays in which aircraft controls reacted to voice commands, and presentations of a supercomputer capable of one billion computations per second, rotocraft research and potential applications, aeronautical art, and the Search and Rescue Satellite (SARSAT) system. The latter display was intended to show how using a satellite saves time in rescuing air and maritime casualties. (NASA Release 8690)
NASA issued a request for proposals to various contractors for a satellite for use in a joint venture with the French Space Agency, Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, in the Topex/Poseidon oceanographic mission. The satellite would map the'+0*circulation of the world's oceans by using a precise radar altimeter to measure height variations on the sea surface. Contingent upon congressional approval of funds, a launch of the satellite in late 1991 was planned. (NASA Release 8686)
Remote sensing via satellite, combined with a computer technology that could provide a simulation of the properties and processes in the soil, related Dr. Elissa Levine, would allow shortterm prediction of changes that occur in soils over a period of time and the ability of the soil to support different types of plant life. Advancing her theory at an annual meeting in New Orleans, Levine noted, "We can obtain critical environmental data which will help us understand how changes brought about by both nature and humankind will affect the total ecosystem over time." (NASA Release 86170)
Using data collected between June 1978 and summer 1986, from NASA's costal zone color scanner on board the Nimbus7 satellite, scientists from many international institutions completed a computergenerated color image that shows the distribution of microscopic plant life, phytoplankton, in surface waters over the North Atlantic Ocean. This image was generated by measuring sunlight reflected from the sea surface at five wavelengths to determine ocean color. The most striking feature of the study for understanding man's role in carbon dioxide and other important cycles is the "spring bloom," high phytoplankton concentration extending across the Atlantic and into the North Sea. (NASA Release 86147)
NASA scheduled five expendable launches in 1986 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, employing Delta rockets, used in joint management with the McDonnell Douglas launch team, and Atlas Centaur rockets, jointly managed launches with General Dynamics Convair. Of the five satellites, two were for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The Geosynchronous Operational Environmental Satellites were designed for weather forecasting and collecting data on various environmental effects. The other three were for the Department of Defense. Two Fleet Satellite Communication satellites would provide secure communications between landbased facilities and ships, submarines, and aircraft, and one other was for support of the Strategic Defense Initiative. (NASA Release 8632)0*March 20: The U.S. Government considered plans for replacing the Challenger by allowing private investors to raise the money and lease the new Shuttle to NASA, stretching out payments for perhaps 15 years. The plan called for NASA to order a replacement shuttle from Rockwell, but Willard Rockwell's new firm, Astrotech, would buy it. Furthermore, investors would be reimbursed by NASA for any accident loss, and Astrotech would market the launches to commercial customers. (WSJ, Mar 20/86; W Post; Mar 30/86; B Sun, Apr 1/86)
General Dynamics Space system Division was awarded a contract by NASA and the Department of Commerce for expendable launch vehicle transportation services for meteorological spacecraft GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellites). The GOES spacecraft provided nearly continuous, highresolution visual and infrared imaging of weather systems over large areas of the Earth. (NASA Release 87156)
The Transportation Department announced that it has granted approval for Martin Marietta Corporation to launch private communications satellites. Within hours of the announcement,h)0*0*0*Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization to launch two Intelsat6 satellites into orbit on Martin Marietta's Titan 3 rockets. Launchings were scheduled for 1989 and 1990. The agreement between two private companies to launch private communications satellites was the first instance of the implementation of the Reagan administration's space commercialization policy. (B Sun, Aug 11/87; W Times, Aug 11/87)
NASA selected General Electric Company, Space Systems Division, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and Harris Corporation, Government Communication Systems Division, Melbourne, Florida, to negotiate contracts for Phase I system design studies of the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) ground terminal. (NASA Release 8729)
Soviet and Japanese scientists confirmed the first positive detection of Xrays from an exploding supernova. Soviet scientists, using Xray telescopes aboard the Soviet astrophysics module Kvant, made the detection on August 10, 1987. Japanese scientists, using smaller Xray instruments aboard their Ginga satellite, first observed the Xrays from the supernova on August 15, 1987. (W Post, Oct 4/87)
NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced that a Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOESH) would be launched sometime after February 23, 1987. The satellite would provide cloud cover images and atmospheric temperature profiles, collect space environment data, and conduct an experiment for detecting emergency distress signals on the ground from a geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release
General Dynamic Corporation announced it had been awarded a contract to launch between one and three European satellites by the European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT). The 26nation European consortium selected General Dynamic's AtlasCentaur rockets for the launching of its satellites because of their cost and reliability. The agreement called for a launch of a EUTELSAT2 communications satellite in early 1990 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with options for two additional launches. (LA Times, Sept 26/87)
An ESA Ariane 3 launch vehicle carrying two U.S. communications satellites was launched from the Korou launch facility in French Guiana. The Ariane 3 was carrying the 1.3ton GSTAR 111 and 1.2ton SBS 5 telecommunications satellites, both designed for television, telephone, and digital data transmission. Upon reaching low Earth orbit, the GSTAR satellite failed to boost itself into its planned 23,000mile geosynchronous orbit. (FBISLat175, Sep 9/88; SSR 1998 081CD; AP, Sep 7/88; Reuter, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 9/88; NY Times, Sep 15/88; WSJ, Sep 15/88; W Post, Sep 15/88)
NASA announced it would testthroughout the montha new deepspace communications system with its Voyager 2 spacecraft, in preparation for the Voyager 2 flyby of Neptune in August 1989. As part of the new system, NASA added the 27 telescopes from the National Radio Astronomy Observatory's (NRAO) Very Large Array (VLA) facility to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's deep space network (DSN). This action more than doubled DSN's ability to capture the Voyager signal, which became extremely faint as it approached the vicinity of Neptune. Under an agreement between NASA and the National Science Foundation, NRAO sponsors, engineers installed new receivers and microwave horns, tuned to the Voyager XBand radio frequency, on all the 82foot dish antennas at the0*VLA. Special signalprocessing and communication equipment was added so that the VLA would be linked by satellite to the DSN's Deep Space Communication's Complex at Goldstone, California. (NASA Release 88102)
NASA and the Department of Commerce awarded the first U.S. Government contract for commercial launch transportation services to a private firm. The two agencies contracted General Dynamics Space Systems Division, San Diego, California, to provide expendable launch vehicle transportation services for the Department's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). This contract marked the first time a contractor assumed systems performance responsibility for overall program and subcontractor0*management, vehicle design, production, testing and vehicletopayload integration, mission integration, launch services, system effectiveness, overall launch vehicle performance, and mission In a related matter, NASA's Kennedy Space Center recently entered into an agreement with General Dynamics that allowed the company to use NASA Launch Complex 36 and associated facilities for commercial launch operations of the Atlas/Centaur rocket. (NASA Release 8866; UPI, May 23/88; AP, May 24/88; B Sun, May 24/88; NY Times, May 25/88; C Trib, May 26/88)
A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 3 launch vehicle was successfully launched from Kourou Launch Center in French Guiana carrying two communications satellite payloads, including a U.S. satellite. The launching had been scheduled for December but was delayed for extra tests after abnormalities were detected in the oxygen and liquid hydrogen thirdstage engine. Twenty minutes after launch, the Ariane 3 released the French Telecom 1C and GTE's Spacenet III Geostar R01 communications satellites for autoboost into geostationary orbit, 22,554 miles above the Equator. The spacenet satellite was expected to begin its boost toward geostationary orbit at 87 degrees west longitude on Wednesday. (FBISWEU88049, Mar 14/88; SSR 1988 018AD; NY Times, Mar 13/88; W Post, Mar 12/88; LA Times, Mar 12; C Trib, Mar 13)
China successfully launched its first experimental weather satellite, the Wind and Cloud No. 1. The satellite was launched by a Long March 4 launch vehicle from the Taiyuan launch facility in northcentral China. (FBISCHI8890, Sep 16/88; SSR 1988 080AB; AP, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 8/88)
An advanced Navy navigation satellite, NOVAII, was launched into polar orbit on a NASA Scout launch vehicle from Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC), California. This was the 111th flight of the 73foot long, fourstage, solid propellant Scout launch vehicles. (SSR 1988 052C; NASA Release 8875)
An ESA Ariane 3 launch vehicle carrying an experimental communications satellite was successfully launched from the Kourou launch facility in French Guiana. The 161foot Ariane 3 placed the European Olympus 1 satellite in a preliminary orbit from which it would boost itself into a 22,300mile geosynchronous orbit over the equator. (SSR 1989 053AC; UPI, Jul 12/89)
After an aborted attempt in August, an H1 launch vehicle carrying a GMS4 weather satellite was successfully launched by Japan's National Space Development Agency. (FBISEas89173, Sep 8/89; SSR 1989 070 AC; WSJ, Sep 7/89)
The Solar Maximum (Solar Max) satellite tumbled out of orbit and reentered the Earth's atmosphere, spreading small amounts of debris over the Indian Ocean. The satellite had been launched in
An ESA Ariane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the Kourou launch facility in French Guiana. The Ariane 2 carried the TELEX Nordic communications satellite into a preliminary elliptical orbit, from where it subsequently boosted itself into a 22,300mile geosynchronous orbit. (FBISWEU89062, Apr 3/89; SSR 1989 027AB; UPI, Apr 1/89)
An ESA Ariane 4 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the Kourou launch facility in French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites. The 192foot Ariane 4 was carrying a SuperbirdA communications satellite owned by Japan and a West German DFS Kopernikus1 television relay satellite. This was the 27th successful launch by Arianespace and the fourth successful launch of the new Ariane 4 launch vehicle. (FBISWeu89107; SSR 1989 041AD; UPI, Jun 5/89; P Inq, Jun 6/89)
The Coloradobased Energetics Satellite Corporation announced that it had completed an agreement with the Soviet Union's civilian space agency, Glavkosmos, to launch two U.S.built commercial satellites on Soviet boosters. The contract provided for the launching of two geosynchronous satellites at a cost of $6.5 million each, with an option to add six more satellite launches in the future. The total potential value of the agreement was $54 million for the eightsatellite launch option. (W Post, Nov 16/89; NY Times, Nov 17/89)
After several delays, an ESA Ariane 4 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the Kourou launch center in French Guiana. The 195foot Ariane 4 carried Japan's first commercial communications satellite and a European weather station into low Earth orbits, from where the two satellites would later boost themselves into 22,300mile geosynchronous orbits. This was the third launch of the new Ariane 4 launch vehicle, one of the most powerful boosters available for commercial satellite launches. (SSR 1989 020AD; UPI, Mar 6/89)
The first major privatesector launch of a satellite was delayed by several months as a result of a launch pad accident that damaged the satellite. A communications satellite owned by the government of India was seriously damaged when it was accidentally struck by a lift hook connected to a crane. The satellite was being prepared for launch at a McDonnell Douglas facility at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (W Post, Jun 27/89; O Sent Star, Jun 21/89)
The National Weather Service's Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite6 (GOES6) ceased to function,0*creating a temporary gap in U.S. satellite weather coverage. The 6yearold GOES6, which had surpassed its expected operational lifetime by a year, was to be temporarily replaced by a similar satellite already in orbit. The GOES7 satellite was to be shifted eastward to cover the entire United States until a permanent replacement, GOESI, was launched in 1990. (UPI, Jan 23/89; W Post, Jan 23/89; W Times, Jan 23/89; NY Times, Jan 24/89)
At the request of the National Space Council, President George Bush restored funding for continued operation of two Landsat satellites and the launching of a third. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had earlier decided to deactivate the Landsats because of a shortfall of $5 million in fiscal year 1989 funding for the program. (WSJ, Jun 2/89)
A European Space Agency Ariane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the Kourou launch center in French Guiana. The Ariane 2 carried a twoton IntelsatV telecommunications satellite. (SSR 1989 006AB; W Times, Jan 27/89)
Contel Federal Systems transferred title of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System to NASA, effective July 1, 1990. Contel transferred the system 42 months earlier than called for, saving the Government $16 million. (NASA Release 9086)
President George Bush said he would allow U.S. commercial satellites to be launched by Soviet rockets. The rockets would be fired from a projected site in Australia, an advantageous position for orbits, located just 12 degrees south of the equator. (FBIS Sov, Jul 9/90; NY Times, Jul 9/90)
During January: NASA completed a facility to house the second ground station for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) system. Located at White Sands, New Mexico, near the existing terminal, the station was predicted to be fully operational by 1993. The equipment that the new terminal would house was to be technically superior to the communications network in the original building, but the two were to work together in a combination meant to reduce the likelihood for any loss of contact with the two TDRS satellites in orbit. (CSM, Jan 30/90)
A report from a panel convened by the National Research Council and released to the White House recommended smaller and simpler satellites to monitor the Earth's climate, as opposed to the $30 billion, six large satellites being planned by NASA. The expense of the Earth Observing System (EOS) could take funds away from other important studies and future budgets. It could result in a delay in launching the EOS spacecraft, the report warned. Noting that at least one large platform was necessary for a number of scientific instruments to be grouped together, the panel recommended that three of the large satellites be replaced by smaller ones. (NY Times, Aug 22/90; W post, Aug 22/90)
The United States and the Soviet Union signed an agreement in which NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) would fly on a Soviet Meteor3 spacecraft sometime in 1991. A TOMS instrument had monitored ozone concentrations from a Nimbus7 satellite since 1978, focusing on the southern hemisphere and the development of the Antarctic ozone hole. This satellite, however, had already performed well beyond its designed lifetime, and the TOMS/Meteor3 mission was slated to replace it. Another TOMS satellite was scheduled to be aboard a U.S. spacecraft in 1993; two or three years subsequent to that mission another TOMS was scheduled for a Japanese ADEOS satellite. (NASA Release 90105)
The military reconnaissance satellite launched from Atlantis in February malfunctioned and was slowly spinning from orbit, said White House intelligence officials. The satellite, "vital for START (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) verification," was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere in April. (W Times, Mar 19/90; W Post, Mar 19/90)
China launched a communications satellite, AsiaSat 1, from Sichuan Province for an Australian firm and became the first thirdworld country to enter the commercial satellite launching business. China promised to follow fair pricing practices after President George Bush lifted a sanction, brought on the country for human rights violations, that barred them from launching the U.S.built satellite. The launch still drastically undercut U.S. and Ariane fees. (FBIS China, China Daily, Apr 7/90; CSM, Apr 9/90; W Post, Apr 8/90)
The Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico issued a report concerning an electric gun, the coil gun, that could thrust payloads into orbit. Hoping one day that the device would launch small satellites, Bill Cowan, director of the project, predicted that objects could be hurled into space at 2.8 miles per second at 1 percent of the cost of conventional rockets. The gun accelerates projectiles by pulling them through successive, interacting magnetic fields created by electric currents passing through coils of wire. According to Cowan, obstacles such as damage to the payloads and launchers themselves and the heat generated by projectiles rapidly propelled through the atmosphere would eventually be overcome. (NY Times, (Jan 30/90)
NASA said it had received the go ahead from Intelsat to rescue the Intelsat 6 satellite put into a low orbit three months earlier. Plans called for lifting the satellite into a higher orbit sometime in 1992; sources said that the mission would probably be carried out during the inaugural flight of Shuttle Endeavor. (B Sun, Jun 14/90; W Times, Jun 14/90)
NASA said that it would rescue the uninsured communications satellite that Martin Marietta Corporation boosted into a useless orbit last March 14. The cost was set at $1 million to either retrieve it or attach rockets, that would send it into a higher orbit, in 1991 or 1992. Intelsat said that it would consider the cost at its next board of governors meeting. W Times, May 16/90)
NASA announced that the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) had discovered a new, distant object that astronomers described as the most luminous object ever seen in the universe. Findings were published in the British science journal Nature, indicating it was a massive dust cloud that radiated 99 percent of its light in  the infrared part of the spectrum. Astronomers speculated it might be a massive galaxy in the process of formation or a quasar in a massive galaxy. (NASA Release 91-98; P Inq, Jun 29/91)
NASA announced that its newest Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, launched from Atlantis on August 2, 1991, was operational. This expanded the communications capability required by the increasing number of scientific spacecraft. (NASA Release 91-164; Business Wire, Oct 9/91)
NASA solicited proposals for establishing additional Centers for the Commercial Development of Space (CCDS). These centers were to specialize in the commercialization of advanced satellite communications technologies and other space-based telecommunications technologies. NASA's current CCDS specialize as follows: materials processing, 5; life sciences, 3; remote sensing, 2; automation and robotics, 2; space propulsion, 1; space structures and materials, 1; and space power, 2. (NASA Release 91-58)
The rocket-launching site at Poker Flat, Alaska, is near the North Pole, has a high success rate for suborbital, scientific launches, and lacks military red tape, being university owned. These factors caused commercial ventures to inquire about possible commercial satellite launches into polar orbits from Poker Flat. Glenn Olds, Commissioner of the state Department of Commerce and Economic Development, believed a launch might occur in 1993. (AP, Apr 29/91)
AP quoted President Bush's science adviser, D. Allan Bromley, as saying that declassification of Star Wars technology would enable NASA to begin a $30 billion study of Earth's environment earlier and cheaper. Bromley added that the Defense Department and the Department of Energy would allow the use of some of their inventions for non-military purposes. The most important was a technology that allowed pointing an instrument from space with greater accuracy to a given spot on Earth and holding it, as well as a technique to fly individual satellites, bring them together, and lock them into formation so several satellites can look at the same spot on Earth. (AP, Oct 22/91)
According to Florida Today, a group of Florida universities hoped to attract a five-year, $5 million NASA grant to set up a commercial space development center. The center would focus on the commercial potential of advanced satellite communicatios technology. (Fla Today, Jun 16/91)
Hughes Aircraft Company said its Space and Communications Group had signed a $300 million contract to build three communications satellites for Alpha Lyracom, a private global communications satellite operator. The first satellite was scheduled for launch in May 1994 and is to serve the Pacific Ocean region. (WSJ, Nov 5/91)
The media reported the launch of the Soviet Meteor-3 weather satellite carrying the NASA-built Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS). The Meteor was to view the hole in the ozone over Antarctica in September and October; the United States and the Soviet Union were to share ozone information gained. (AP, Aug 15/91; UPI, Aug 15/91; P Inq, Aug 16/91; W Post, Aug 16/91; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
The Los Angeles Times quoted National Hurricane Center director Robert C. Sheets as being concerned about the "precarious situation" with regard to hurricane forecasting. The GOES-7, the only U.S. weather satellite in orbit, was nearing the end of its five-year life expectancy and no replacement was available in the near future. Among possibilities were buying a satellite from Japanese or European makers. (LA Times, Jul 16/91)
Scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico developed a new technique of "clustering" to speed the analysis of satellite images. The technique was being adapted for use in crop forecasting, land-use studies, pollution monitoring, and mineral and oil prospecting. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
According to the Washington Times, Eosat, based in Lanham, Maryland, a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Company and General Electric Company, defeated its competitor and gained the contract for distributing images from the new Soviet Almaz satellite. (W Times, Aug 9/91)
According to the New York Times, the Space Studies Board of the National Research Council recommended that NASA move quickly to develop and deploy a system of Earth-monitoring satellites with the intention of studying climate. The proposed Earth Observing System called for six large, heavily instrumented orbiting platforms and smaller supplemental satellites, to cost $30 billion over the next 30 years. (NYT, Jul 14/91)
A Journal of Commerce editorial analyzed the factors relating to NASA and the Federal Communications Commission's licensing of a private communications consortium joint venture to develop a mobile satellite to provide clear voice communications in remote U.S. areas. In early 1991, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia challenged the FCC's authority to form the joint venture and license it, with the result that Congress cut NASA's proposed $56 million contribution to the project. The companies feel cheated and the editorial advised that NASA should not be involved. (Journal of Commerce, Jun 21/91)
According to the Wall Street Journal, Telesat Canada planned to file a $240 million insurance claim because of the failure of its Anik E2 communications satellite launched in April to deploy one of its two antennae. (WSJ, May 24/91)
NASA Combined Release and Radiation Effects satellite released a barium canister to gain data about the magnetosphere and more reliable predictions of magnetic disturbances in space. (AP, Feb 17/91; W Times, Feb 18/91)
Steve Piacente, Washington correspondent for the Charleston Post-Courier, wrote "Weather Service Modernization: No Goes" describing problems of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA with launching new weather satellites. Lack of effective supervision of contractors and poor engineering workmanship were among the shortcomings. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
According to AP, two congressmen, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, and Sherwood Boehlert, Republican of New York, urged that the United States "borrow" or buy a GMS-5 weather satellite being built by the U.S. firm Hughes for Japan. This would allow NASA time to fix the problems with the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-Next. In connection with GOES, Washington Technology reported in some detail on the "troubled history" of the weather satellite and its contractors and congressional criticism of the program. The Christian Science Monitor reported on lessons learned from GOES-Next, including not to cut corners in developing sophisticated technology and the importance of sharing weather data globally. (AP, Aug 7/91; Washington Technology, Aug 8/91; CSM, Aug 20/91; H Post, Aug 21/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to Discovery's maneuvers as it conducted missile-detecting experiments for the Pentagon. The scientific satellite, which it launched previously, captured with infrared sensors and television cameras engine exhaust plumes and plumes from smaller steering jets. (B Sun, May 2/91; W Post, May 2/91; W Times, May 2/91; NY Times, May 2/91; USA Today, May 2/91; P Inq, May 2/91; LA Times, May 2/91 AP, May 2/91; UPI, May 2/91; CSM, May 3/91)
Representative Howard Wolpe wrote in a space trade journal concerning the GOES-NEXT weather satellites. He commended Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher's statement that although GOES-NEXT would not be launched on schedule, it would meet original specifications. He continued to be concerned about a possible five-year gap without a weather detection system and stated that firm commitments of assistance must be obtained from Europe and Japan. He also criticized NASA for lacking a planned prototype instrument for GOES and for its ineffective cost controls. (SP News, Oct 14-20/91)
NASA announced it would resume active space physics experiments by conducting several chemical releases in July and August with the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite. Barium vapor releases in the Caribbean area were involved. (NASA Release 91-107)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the National Weather Service's one weather satellite was nearing the end of its life. However, NASA's next generation of satellites, one of which was to replace it, were three years behind schedule and $500 million over budget. The atmospheric sensor of the new model reportedly tested poorly, but NASA planned to launch it nevertheless. AP quoted Joan A. Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as saying that meanwhile there were contingency plans to use both NOAA and Defense Department polar orbiting satellites and a European weather satellite to watch hurricanes in the Atlantic and Caribbean.(P Inq, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91)
Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science announced that Japan had successfully launched a solar flare observation satellite, designed to analyze X-rays and gamma rays from solar flares. (DPA, Aug 30/91)
The first release of barium vapor, creating a green cloud, by the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite occurred the evening of January 12, NASA announced. The second release consisted of lithium vapor the night of January 13, causing a red cloud. (P Inq, Jan 14/91; USA Today, Jan 14/91; NY Times, Jan 14/91; AP, Jan 13/91; UPI, Jan 12/91; W Post, Jan 13/91)
NASA announced that the Ohio State University's Center for Mapping, Columbus, one of 16 NASA Centers for the Commercial Development of Space, had developed a system that would reduce the amount of time and money needed to gather information on highway conditions. The system uses both positioning data from the Defense Department's Navstar Global Positioning Satellite Systems and images taken from a pair of video cameras mounted in a standard van. The system would help locate roads needing repair and other hazardous conditions, including the location of fatal accidents. The 18-month project, called the Global Positioning System for Transportation Planning, involved the Federal Highway Administration, 38 state transportation departments, and the Canadian province of Alberta. The states had contributed $565,000 to the project, and NASA had given $280,000. The system also is ideal for mapping and the mobile unit enables digitizing to be done immediately. (NASA Release 91-16)
NASA announced that it had reached agreement with Columbia Communications Corporation, Honolulu, to delay for up to six months the start of operations under Columbia's lease of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) C-Band capacity. NASA leased to Columbia the C-Band transponders on two geostationary TDRSS satellites to serve commercial international telecommunications customers in the Atlantic and Pacific coastal regions. (NASA Release 91-181)
The U.S. Space Surveillance Network, inside Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado, originally designed to serve as an early warning system against missile attacks, was described. The organization now mainly is engaged in tracking 7,000 pieces of orbiting space debris, to which some 240 new pieces were added each year. Efforts were being made internationally to develop new technologies to track space debris. In all, more than 100 spacecraft fragmented while in orbit, including at least 12 satellites deliberately destroyed by the United States and the Soviet Union during weapons testing. (P Inq, Dec 26/91)
The Christian Science Monitor discussed the cases of Ulysses, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), and Hipparcos, an ESA satellite. Ulysses, which was designed to study the environment over the north and south poles of the sun, developed a wobble that threatened its usefulness, but the problem was resolved. Hipparcos was designed to measure the positions, motions, and distances of more than 100,000 stars. It also developed orbit problems but to date measured more than 1 million stars. (CSM, Feb 13/91)
UPI reported that the NOAA-D spacecraft developed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA was scheduled for launch on May 14. The satellite, which was to measure temperatures on Earth's surface, including oceans, and gathering data on solar radiation, might help scientists better predict floods and understand the causes of droughts. (UPI, May 10/91)
The Baltimore Sun commented at length on an article on galactic studies appearing in the April 20 issue of The Astrophysical Journal. The article described work done by a group of scientists using the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), a scientific satellite operated by NASA and the European Space Agency. The yearlong work required 60 observations with the IUE studying the cores of rare galaxies. (B Sun, May 19/91)
According to the New York Times, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration was completing arrangements to get exclusive use of the European weather satellite Meteosat-3. The purpose would be to move it further west to cover the United States more thoroughly if the U.S. weather satellite, GOES-7, were to fail. NASA was several years behind in the development of new U.S. weather satellites, the GOES-NEXT, originally scheduled to begin operating in 1989 but now probably late 1992 at the earliest. Subsequently, several newspapers reported arrangements made for the United States to borrow at least one and possibly more European weather satellites. (NY Times, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91)
A senior U.S. trade official, on condition of anonymity, stated that Japan had drafted a plan to subsidize the entry of several Japanese companies into the commercial satellite-building industry but abandoned the plan under U.S. pressure. Hiroshi Hirabayashi, economics minister at the Japanese Embassy in Washington, confirmed the existence of such a plan but said if implemented it would probably be limited to research satellites. (NY Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91)
The findings of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite have caused astronomers to question part of the Big Bang theory, according to a report by Dr. Will Saunders of Oxford University and his colleagues in the journal Nature. The cold dark matter model cannot explain the giant superstructures and companion supervoids found in galactic surveys. These structures appear too vast to have formed since the Big Bang. (NY Times, Jan 3/91; W Post, Jan 6/91; LA Times, Jan 4/91)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite appeared to confirm aircraft and ground-based research about the chemical processes leading to ozone depletion. (NASA Release 91-155)
NASA announced that preliminary data from its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the NIMBUS-7 satellite, indicated that a 4,800-mile-long cloud of sulfur dioxide was spread across the tropical Northern Hemisphere from the major eruption of Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines. (NASA Release 91-96; UPI, Jun 26/91)
A solar flare, a strong release of energy from a small area of the sun, created the most intense geomagnetic storm on Earth since 1989. Such events increase radiation levels near Earth and affect electrical power systems, satellites, space missions, and communications and navigation systems. (UPI, Mar 27/91)
The European organization EUTELSAT selected the Ariane launch vehicle of Arianespace, Inc. for the fifth telecommunications second generation satellite EUTELSAT II-F5. This satellite is a Spacebus 100 spacecraft developed by Aerospatiale and MBB in Germany, with a payload provided by Alcatel. The satellite would provide full coverage of the European continent, parts of North Africa and the Middle East. (PR newswire, Mar 27/91)
The Wall Street Journal discussed the January 1989 offer by Nikolai Ponomarev-Stepnoy, leader of a Soviet design team that built a top secret military spy satellite, the Topaz-2, to sell, for a few million dollars, the Topaz-2 with the satellite's lightweight nuclear reactor. Moscow had no money to develop the reactor for commercial use but the paper deplored the U.S. delay in taking up the offer. The above discussion followed up on a statement by the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Office, reported on December 11, that the office stopped its share of funding for a space-based nuclear reactor projected to cost $1.6 billion by 2002. The reactor program, called SP-100, was shared by NASA and the Department of Energy. Instead the Pentagon office was inclined to go with the Soviet-style process represented by the Topaz, for which it earmarked $15 million. (WSJ, Dec 11/91; WSJ, Dec 17/91)
NASA announced that in January 1991, it would conduct experiments from an orbiting satellite to test the possibility of creating an artificial aurora. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) was to release clouds of barium and lithium vapor in the Earth's magnetosphere, the region above the atmosphere.
An ongoing NASA project released a lithium canister from a satellite, producing a red sphere. Rick Howard, one of 40 scientists working on the project, said the purpose was to try to inject an artificial lithium plasma cloud to see if precipitation can be increased. (AP, Feb. 12/91)
Orion Network Systems of Rockville, Maryland, has been gradually creating a private satellite communications network for businesses in the United States and Europe. It was awaiting approval for its financing from the Federal Communications Commission. The satellites were to be built by British Aerospace Limited and the launch was to be handled by General Dynamics Commercial Launch Services of San Diego, which would use Atlas rockets. (W Post, Feb 2/91)
In repositioning one of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites, TDRS-3, on October 22, it came near a Hughes Communications' Galaxy 1. On October 23 it disturbed GE Americom's Satcom 1R. The result was that cable television nationwide was disrupted. NASA Associate Administrator Charles T. Force said engineers suspected a hardware failure on TDRS caused the problem. (AvWk, Nov 4/91)
Paul Hays, scientist in charge for NASA of one of 10 instruments on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS), launched by Discovery on September 15, said the UARS discovered surprisingly violent, continent-size 200-mile-per-hour windstorms in a rarely studied part of the atmosphere known as the mesosphere. (AP, Dec 12/91; C Trin, Dec 13/91; P Inq, Dec 14/91; W Post, Dec 16/91; LA Times, Dec 16/91; NY Times, Dec 17/91)
The media covered extensively final preparations leading up to the evening launch of Discovery in its 13th flight, a record. Biographic data were given concerning members of the mission as well as descriptions of the satellite to be launched to gather ozone information. (B Sun, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 12/91; USA Today, Sep 12/91; P Inq, Sep 12/91; LA Times, Sep 12/91; AP, Sep 12/91; UPI, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91; B Sun, Sep 13/91; P Inq, Sep 13/91; W Post, Sep 13/91; WSJ, Sep 13/91; USA Today, Sep 13/91; W Times, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 13/91; AP, Sep 13/91; UPI, Sep 13/91; LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 14/91)
An editorial in a space publication criticized NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for its handling of GOES meteorological satellites. The magazine maintained that the two agencies failed "in their effort to balance the risk of buying new technology with the need to provide assured satellite service." (SP News, Oct 7-13/91)
NASA announced that the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) would resume experiments after four successful chemical releases in the past week. The releases should aid in studying the way that charged particles interact with the Earth's magnetic and electric fields by creating artificial auroras. (NASA Release 91-9; Time, Jan 21/91)
NASA announced that it had selected 31 experiments from the public and private sectors for inclusion in the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Program. Scheduled for launch in early 1993, this national communications facility was to operate as an orbiting testbed for the next generation of commercial communications satellites. A two-year experiment, the ACTS program was designed to offer a unique opportunity for commercial, governmental, and academic organizations to experiment with and to validate new communications satellite technologies. (NASA Release 92-134)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, said it had won a $13.5 million contract from Brazil's civilian space agency to launch a remote-sensing and date-relay satellite in 1992. (W Times, Sept 2/92)
Reuters reported that two telecommunications satellites worth more than 350 million dollars were placed into oribt for Japan and the Arab League after launch from a European base in French Guiana. (Reuters, Feb 26/92)
The first meetings of the National Space Policy Assessment Task Group took place on October 1 and 2 in Washington, D. C. The group was considering policy changes to military, civilian, and commercial space efforts and ways to make them work more in tandem now that the Cold War had ended. At the meetings, government officials urged the group's members to privatize the weather satellite system, to call for revamping commercial space rules, and to decry missile proliferation. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
NASA announced that astronomers using a new NASA satellite had detected a powerful, exotic object 2 billion light-years beyond the Milky Way Galaxy. The radiation source was observed by the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Spacecraft launched on June 7. (NASA Release 92-169)
The Pentagon, bowing to congressional pressure, revealed the existence of the super-secret agency that buys and operates the nation's spy satellites and its other airborne espionage systems. The National Reconnaissance Office's mission is to ensure that the United States has the technology and spaceborne and airborne assets needed to acquire intelligence worldwide, according to the Pentagon. (P Inq, Sept 1992; C Trib, Sept 18/92)
Congressional investigators said that the space agency's Earth-observing satellite program was flawed because of risky plans for gathering information from the satellites. (NY Times, Feb 27/92)
NASA said the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite Conference '92, co-sponsored by NASA, Comsat Laboratories, Harris Corporation, and MITRE Corporation, scheduled for November 18-19 in Washington, D. C., would focus on pioneering communications technology developments to provide better service, lower cost, greater convenience, and improved reliability. The conference marked another of NASA's partnerships with industry in developing advanced technologies that create new markets and commercial applications. (NASA Release 92-206)
NASA ground controllers said they had reactivated two key scientific instruments aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and hoped to revive the other eight in coming weeks following two major glitches with the motors that drive the solar power array. The problems had sent the satellite into a quiescent safe mode June 1 and 2. The Microwave Limb Sounder, which helps measure ozone depletion, and the Cryogenic Limb Array Etalon Spectrometer, which has a limited lifetime, were restored to service.  (Space News, Jul 7/92)
Milton B. Ames Jr., 78, an aeronautical engineer who was mission director for the Pegasus satellite launches using Saturn rockets and who was a recepient of numerous NASA awards, died of heart failure at Mount Vernon Hospital, Alexandria, Virginia. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
Scientists studying data from the Magellan radar-mapping satellite around Venus concluded that Venus is not a twin of the Earth. Magellan has produced images 10 times sharper than any seen before of more than 97 percent of the planet's surface. Magellan's images show Venus to be as geologically active as the Earth, but whereas Earth's crust is shaped by continuous recycling, Venus' surface appears to evolve by building crust vertically as lava flows out of volcanoes or meteorite craters. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
A TRW unit was served with a whistle-blower lawsuit alleging that the firm made fraudulent claims for payments on government satellite contracts. The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, alleged that TRW's Space and Technology group in Redondo California Beach, used improper design standards for the spy, communications, and scientific satellites, then billed the government for the cost of correcting the errors. (LA Times, Mar 26/92)
NASA announced that satellite measurements showed that the ozone hole over Antarctica was now the largest on record, being almost three times as large as the area of the United States. Measurements by the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer instrument aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite last Wednesday showed that the south polar territory under the depleted ozone area extended to about 8.9 million square miles, about 15 percent larger than the ozone hole measured in 1991. (NASA Relese 92-159; W Post, Sept 30/92; Time, Oct 5/92; AP, Sept 30/92; UPI, Sept 30/92)
NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Company to build a data and information system for the Earth Orbiting System. The program, which would collect environmental data from satellites, was expected to cost NASA about $3 billion. (NASA Release C92-16; NY Times, Sept 30/92; WSJ, Sept 30/92; W Post, Sept 30/92; AvWk, Oct 5/92)
NASA announced that more than 200 scientists from 13 countries were participating in a science expedition, spearheaded by NASA, to investigate newly discovered concentrations of harmfull ozone over large regions of southern Africa and Brazil. The ozone pollution was recently uncovered by satellite analysis. (NASA Release 92-155)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported last week that Hermes, the ESA's spaceplane program, already scaled back to an unmanned demonstrator, would have to be downgraded to a technology development program because of budgetary constraints. On another project, ESA's scientists were evaluating data from a test of inter-satellite communications conducted by Eureca, ESA's large, retrievable satellite. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
Thomson Consumer Electronics, owned by the French electronics concern Thomson SA, said that it would help launch a satellite-to-home television broadcasting system through a venture with the Hughes Electronics division of General Motors Corporation. The system, called DirecTV, would be capable of providing more than 100 channels to 18-in-diameter outdoor satellite dishes. (B Sun, Feb 5/92)
NASA announced that its Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite had detected an object emitting extreme ultraviolet radiation located outside the Milky Way galaxy through interstellar dust and gas, once thought to block this source of radiation. EUVE also had detected a new source of extreme ultraviolet radiation coming from the corona of a star much like the sun located about 16 light-years from Earth. The EUVE satellite, now six weeks into a survey of the entire sky in extreme ultraviolet wavelengths, was intended to provide astronomers with their first detailed maps in multiple extreme ultraviolet energy bands. (NASA Release 92-138)
NASA announced that it expected to launch a radar satellite in August that would sweep above the Bering Sea off Alaska and beam down a detailed radar snapshot giving the location of every fishing vessel. The project was intended to be the beginning of a foolproof system to police the world's fishing grounds against pirate trawlers. NASA expected to spend $650,000 as its share of a program to transfer its sophisticated technology to commercial uses. (P Inq, Jul 9/92)
A satellite launched to study oceans and global climate was maneuvered into position Monday for months of tests before beginning its mission. The Topex-Poseidon, the first major space mission conducted jointed by the United States and France, was launched August 10 from French Guiana. (AP, Sept 21/92)
According to a released congressional study, a three billion dollar U.S. space agency satellite programme to monitor the environment would be useless without massive new computer technology. The study said that NASA would need the new technology to store and distribute the information its satellite programme gathers. The Earth Observing System (EOS) was designed to take continuous measurements of ozone depletion, global warming, polar ice melt, depletion of rainforests, and other environmental developments. But the study also indicated that the data collected by EOS would require vast new ways to store information and make available to a wide range of researchers. (Reuters, Feb 25/92; AP, Feb 25/92)
Weather satellite officials at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration expressed concern about the heightened danger from hurricanes because of delays in modernizing the U.S. weather satellite system. The delays forced the use of antiquated and poorly positioned satellites that raised the risk of forecasting errors. Two hurricanes, Andrew and Iniki, showed the limits of the antiquated satellites. Replacement satellites were stymied by a series of technical failures, delaying the first launching from 1989 to 1994. In the meantime, the United States was borrowing surplus satellites from Europe. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Nov 15/92)
At a recent meeting in St. Louis, astrophysicists discussed the mystery of blasts of gamma rays that appear every few days from somewhere, but never from the same place. After reviewing new satellite observations and discussing various theories, experts could not even determine where the gamma ray bursters, as they are called, were coming from.
NASA announced that sea surface measurements taken by the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite have confirmed that conditions are ripe for development of an El Nino even in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean this winter. (NASA Release 93-205; USA Today, Nov 10/93)
New software, the New Spectral Imaging Processing System (NEWSIPS), was giving researchers a remarkably improved look at data from NASA's International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), the space agency's longest-running astronomical satellite in Earth orbit. (NASA Release 93-164)
After making a final series of engine maneuvers that brought it within reach of the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca), a free-flying platform of science experiments, the commander of Shuttle Endeavour plucked the satellite out of space and stowed it in the Shuttle's cargo hold for return to earth.
The Danish industry ministry announced that Denmark was scheduled to take part in a scientific satellite project in cooperation with NASA in 1995. The project involved the launch of a small Danish satellite into orbit to study Earth's magnetic field. (RTw, June 21/93)
NASA announced that new information on the El Nino ocean current would be discussed at a briefing on the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite mission on February 26. The satellite was launched in August 1992 to map circulation of the world's oceans and study the oceans' role in climate. (NASA Release N93-08)
August marked the tenth anniversary of the first use of NASA's Tracking Data and Relay Satellite System (TDRSS).  The system consists of several satellites plus a ground station at White Sands, New Mexico. (Onset Magazine, Aug 2/93)
A $220 million Landsat 6 Earth Observation satellite was launched into the wrong orbit, and ground controllers were unable to make contact with the satellite, according to a mission spokeswoman for Earth Observation Satellite Company (ESAT). The satellite was supposed to go into orbit over the poles during a five-year mission studying the Earth's environment. An ESAT official said that the company hoped to get the satellite into the proper orbit by the end of the week.  (W Post, Oct 6/93; USA Today, AP, Oct 6/93)
The AP reported that the nonprofit group SatelLife, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, last year had launched a low-orbiting satellite that "talks" to the Internet and coordinates the Healthnet message-relay service connected with the satellite. The service makes it possible for remote regions of the world to receive much-needed medical advice. (AP, May 24/93)
NASA said that satellite controllers had lost contact with the NOAA-13 satellite on August 21, and preliminary indications were that the spacecraft's power system was not working.  NOAA was the newest in a series of polar-orbiting weather satellites. Designed to monitor the Earth's ocean and atmosphere, it collects meteorological and ocean data for direct transmission to users around the world and to central data processing centers. (NASA Release 93-151)
NASA said that the U.S.-French Topex-Poseidon satellite had revealed that sea levels dropped 12 inches off the East Coast during the period between October 1992 to March 1993 as cold winter air chilled the Atlantic Ocean and made the water contract. The satellite also found that sea levels rose 12 inches in parts of the Southern Hemisphere, where warm summer air heated the oceans and made the water expand.
A two-ton chunk of a Chinese reconnaissance satellite launched earlier this month fell into the Pacific Ocean 1,000 miles west of Peru, the U.S. Space Command said. (USA Today, Oct. 28/93, Oct 29/93; P Inq, Oct 28/93, Oct 29/93; W Post, Oct 28/93, 29/93; NY Times, Oct 26/93)
French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said that European countries should attempt to cooperate on space projects because progress in technology was a way to assert themselves on the world stage. He made the comment after talking by satellite link with a French cosmonaut who was on a joint Franco-Russian mission.  (RTw, Jul 7/93)
NASA announced that during the first six months of their mission scientists using the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanographic satellite had recorded the most accurate measurements to date of global sea level changes. Oceanographers would use the data to calibrate computer models that help forecast future climate changes. (NASA Release 93-122)
Europe's Arianespace Inc announced that it had signed a launch contract for two intelsat VIII satellites. The satellites were to be built by General Electric Corporation's Astro Space Division and launched in 1996 from a site in French Guiana. (W Times, Mar 5/93)
A $67 million weather satellite to track storms, floods, and environmental damage went into orbit aboard an Atlas-E-rocket.  It also was scheduled to be used to pinpoint the sites of plane crashes and shipwrecks.  The NOAA-13 satellite reached its 541-mile-high orbit on schedule.  The new satellite, which eventually was scheduled to replace the aging NOAA-11 satellite, was to circle Earth every 103 minutes and view the entire planet twice daily. (NY Times, Aug 10/93; RTw, Aug 10/93
Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, George Smoot, an astrophysicist at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley, California, described his cosmic research work  Using the space-time ripples that were discovered a year ago, Smoot and his group want to explore backward in time toward the universe's origin and forward to the universe of today. In its investigation, the group uses one of the instruments on the Cosmic Background Explorer Satellite to study the microwave radiation that permeates the cosmos. Cosmologists now have what Smoot compares to "a baby photograph of the universe at about five hours into a human lifetime."  That snapshot contains enough information to allow investigators to work backward and forward in time. (CSM, Mar 3/93)
NASA reported that the new joint U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite  had observed giant waves measuring up to 40 feet high in the North Atlantic on March 14. The satellite's mission was "to study the dynamics of the currents of the world's oceans by measuring the sea level using a radar altimeter." (W Post, Apr 5/93)
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology( MIT) and NASA reported that water that evaporates on the equator flows towards the Earth's poles in airborne "rivers" of vapor that can equal the volume in the Amazon. Reginald E. Newell of MIT said that researchers were trying to determine how and why these atmospheric rivers occurred and what role, if any, they played in cyclones and other phenomena. The rivers were discovered using data collected in 1984 and 1991 by NASA's Measurement of Atmospheric Pollution by Satellite program and analyzed by the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. (LA Times, Jan 22/93; B Sun, Jan 22/93; AP, Jan 22/93; W Post, Jan 25/93; NY Times, Jan 26/93)
Callers jammed switchboards at Cape Canaveral, Florida, reporting that a fiery object had lit up the night sky over the Southeast. People in Georgia, Alabama, North Carolina, and Tennessee reported seeing an object streak across the sky about 10 p.m. Tuesday. Some observers said the object hit the ground and exploded. NASA confirmed that it had launched a navigation satellite at that time, but the boosters fell into the Atlantic Ocean as planned, said Gary Peltier, a spokesman at Cape Canaveral. (AP, Feb 3/93; B Sun, Feb 4/93)
NASA announced that the location of a third radiation belt of cosmic rays had been pinpointed several hundred miles above the Earth. A NASA satellite, orbiting 375 above the Earth, had mapped a portion of the new belt. (NASA Release 93-94; AP, May 25/93; B Sun, May 26/93)
Brazil was scheduled to begin a campaign in July  to fight the burning of the Amazon rain forest.  The months from July  to November make up the dry season in the Amazon, and clearing of the rain forest through burning largely occurs in that period.  NASA has agreed to monitor fires through its satellites and other equipment.  (Reuters, Jul 16/93)
Satellite research supported by NASA found that far fewer trees had been cut in the Amazon rain forest than previously assumed. However, the same study also found that three times as many animal and plant species were being killed or were near extinction than previously had been estimated. (AP, June 6/25; W Post, June 25/93; RTw, June 24/93; NY Times, June 29/93)
NASA announced that it had restructured the agreement under which Columbia leases the commercial C-band capacity on board two of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS)
NASA announced that a 12-member panel of experts from NASA and NOAA had been named to investigate the failure of the NOAA-13 meteorological satellite. (NASA Release 93-154)
Government officials reported that a high-altitude weather satellite borrowed from Europe had been positioned to monitor the weather over the United States. It joined the GOES-7 U.S. weather satellite, which had been working alone since its companion satellite failed in 1989. The addition of the European satellite  restored the normal system of having two weather satellites in orbit, one each over the East and West Coasts. (NY Times, Feb 25/93)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chantilly, Virginia, unveiled the Orbcomm communications satellite, which was  designed to provide global personal communications service.  The company said it planned to initiate Orbcomm service in the United States by mid-1994 and planned worldwide service by 1995.  The Orbcomm system planned to provide low-cost, two-way data communications to users worldwide through a constellation of 26 small satellites. (W Times, Aug 26/93)
WorldView Imaging of Livermore, California, received a government license to launch small, inexpensive spy satellites. Worldview claimed that it could take super-sharp photos from 250 feet up and sell the photos for about half the $4,000 charged by the government's Landsat and France's SPOT Image. Possible uses included traffic monitoring, urban planning, and corporate spying. (USA Today, Feb 12/93; NY Times, Feb 12/93)
Martin Marietta Corporation, which in one three-week period in August, saw one of its rockets explode soon after launch and two of its satellites lose contact with Earth, announced on September 3 that it was undertaking an internal investigation of all phases of its space division. (W Post, Sep 4/93)
Analysis of measurements from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE) satellite confirmed that Mount Pinatubo's eruption in the Philippines in June 1991 had resulted in a temporary cooling of the Earth that equated to a decrease in global surface temperature of approximately 1 degree Fahrenheit (0.5 degree Celsius). The data provided the first conclusive evidence of a significant change in global energy caused by a volcanic eruption. (NASA Release 93-41; P Inq, Mar 5/93; B Sun, Mar 5/93; NY Times, Mar 9/93)
NASA announced that flight tests with a NASA research aircraft last week had demonstrated the first precision automatic approaches and landings using Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) navigation satellite signals.  The procedures were carried out without using complex processing techniques. (NASA Release 93-165)
The 1993-94 season of NASA's Update for Teachers telecasts was scheduled to feature presentations on astronomy, life sciences, research, high-speed aeronautical research, and the environment and global change. The telecasts, a series of four, one-hour, live and interactive education television programs, were broadcast via satellite to schools in all 650 states, Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico between 3-4 p.m. Eastern time.  (NASA Release 93-150)
NASA announced that the 12-member panel investigating the failure of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)-13 meteorological satellite in August 1993 had concluded that the probable cause was a short circuit that prevented the solar array current from powering the spacecraft and recharging the batteries. The short circuit probably resulted from a 1.25 inch screw that extended too far below an aluminum plate and penetrated the insulation. The board made recommendations for future NOAA spacecraft; NASA supervised the design and construction of the weather satellites. (NASA Release 94-157; P Inq, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
NASA was commended for raising the problem of debris mitigation in space to a high policy goal and for being in the process of drawing up a detailed rule book for its spacecraft designers, launchers, and operators to avoid creating debris. The commercial sector was the unknown in this regard, particularly with reference to communications satellites. The matter was a vital one because over the years several satellites were lost for unknown causes and may have been victims of "space junk." (NY Times, May 17/94)
NASA announced that the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES)-8 had successfully completed basic engineering testing and was beginning to provide more precise data for improved weather forecasting. The older GOES-7 was to be shifted further west to cover storms approaching from the Pacific. (NASA Release N94-77; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 9/94)
An article on electronic navigation and the Global Positioning System (GPS) using 24 satellites described the advantages of GPS and its uses. The article reported that using GPS and a sophisticated flight computer aboard a 737 aircraft owned by NASA, more than 36 "hands-off" precision landings were completed at Wallops Island airfield in Virginia. (C Trib, Aug 7/94)
A dispute of possible long-term import with hundreds of millions of dollars at stake appeared to be brewing between NASA and the television industry over local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), pitting the satellite industry against proponents of this low-cost alternative to cable television. Further, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was approaching an auction of some airwaves for a new generation of wireless communications services. Charles Force, NASA Associate Administrator for space communications, stated that "It appears that there is a significant possibility for interference with LMDS from satellite uplinks; this was no secret to the FCC." He suggested a four-year delay in LMDS service to deal with interference in the disputed 27.5-to-30-gigahertz spectrum band. The FCC believed that LMDS can coexist with satellite use and was preparing to authorize nationwide deployment of LMDS. (LA Times, Jan 12/94)
China recently suffered a fire at its Xichang Long March launch facility, damaging a Fengyun II weather satellite and adjacent work areas. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
The Paris-based Euroconsult organization assessed world space markets through the year 2004. The European think tank studied U.S., Asian, and European space and communications companies, agencies, and analysts. It concluded that new communication programs would result in a $95 billion to $115 billion global market for satellites, ground stations, and launch services during the period and that U.S. industry was increasing its share of that market. (AvWk, Aug 29/94)
An article highlighted the benefits satellite reporting could provide for various earthly activities. An example given was the way in which Frank Lamb, president of Eastern Oregon Farming Company and Cropix, Inc., who had a grant from NASA's Earth Observation Commercialization Applications Program, used satellite observations to check on the health of plants in his Oregon farm by determining the rate of photosynthesis. The images enabled a farmer to detect problems such as irrigation-equipment failure, drainage problems, and pest infestation. Satellite images were also used by the South Florida Water Management District to update its maps and identify illegal tampering of wetlands, as well as to create maps of Midwest flood areas for damage and rebuilding plans. (USA Today, Aug 9/94)
The Hughes Network Systems telecommunication firm contracted with the Hawaiian corporation ITTI to install a high-speed satellite link dubbed "Teleport Asia" between the Eastern and Western hemispheres on the island of Oahu, with twin Earth stations facing toward Asia and North America. (W Times, Jan 19/94)
NASA agreed to launch in January 1996 South Africa's first satellite, Sunsat, which was developed at Stellenbosch University near Cape Town. A four-member NASA team evaluated the Stellenbosch project and offered the university a free launch in return for minor additions of U.S. equipment. Stellenbosch project leader Garth Milne said the satellite would deliver high-resolution multispectral stereo images of the Earth and would carry amateur radio equipment that would allow children to talk to the satellite. NASA structural engineer Marisa Achee said NASA was keen to launch Sunsat because it could carry a U.S. Global Positioning System receiver and a laser reflector needed to monitor variations in the Earth's gravitational field. The university was scheduled to control the satellite during its four-year life. (Reuters, Jul 29/94)
The government announced that it would allow companies to market sophisticated spy satellite technology worldwide. U.S. firms could build and operate for-profit satellite systems powerful enough to take photographs from 22,300 miles above the Earth and show objects on the ground as small as one square yard. (NY Times, Mar 11/94; USA Today, Mar 11/94; W Post, Mar 11/94; WSJ, Mar 11/94)
NASA announced that it had selected eight projects that could lead to new private sector applications of space-based and airborne sensing technologies. Named Earth Observations Commercial Applications (EOCAP) '94, the projects represented the fourth cycle in a continuing program designed to increase use of NASA-developed technology for gathering and analyzing valuable data about Earth and ocean resources through remote satellite or aircraft observations. (NASA Release 94-203)
The matter of space science research--its cost and its usefulness--was discussed in a feature article. Such research developed more or less as an afterthought, but it had already proved valuable in such ways as making precise measurements of the thickness of clouds and dust to enable automated weather satellites. Assessing the legitimacy of the high costs involved was more difficult, but valuable scientific findings had resulted, such as changing ideas about how different levels of compression at the top and bottom of the lung affected the way the lung functioned and contradicting expectations about how the circulation of blood in the body worked. (Boston Globe, Sep 19/94)
Systems Integration Group, TRW's Fairfax, Virginia-based subsidiary, was awarded a NASA contract for $173 million to manage a network of computerized ground stations receiving data from government satellites that observe the earth's environment and climate changes. (W Post, Jan 6/94)
China's space agency said that the April 2 blast that killed one person and injured 20 would not delay the launching of three foreign communications satellites from the Xichang Satellite Launching Center in southwestern China. The three satellites were manufactured by Hughes Space and Communications Company for Hong Kong and Australian customers. (NY Times, Apr 27/94)
Observations from Space Shuttles and other vehicles revealed a clearly visible line stretching for hundreds of miles across the Pacific Ocean. The dark green line, from one to several miles wide, was attributed by scientists to an abundance of microscopic plants that thrived where cold, nutrient-rich water from polar seas met warm equatorial currents. New observations of the interaction between these two currents were made from the NOAA-11 weather satellite and NASA's P-3 research aircraft flying 500 feet above the water. (NY Times, Oct 25/94; AP, Oct 31/94)
After the successful launch of a satellite called "Wind," NASA gave the manufacturer, Martin Marietta Astro Space, the go-ahead to build a second satellite called" Polar."  The purpose of both satellites is to measure the forces of solar wind. (Star-Ledger, Jan 6/95)
An international team of scientists have examined data from the Japanese/U.S. X-ray astronomical satellite �ASCA� which may confirm how cosmic rays achieve speeds near the speed of light. Enrico Fermi suggested a theory in 1949 in which charged particles are bounced between turbulent regions inside the shock front of a supernova explosion. Bouncing much like a ping pong ball between a table and a paddle as the paddle is brought closer to the table, a charged particle gains energies up to 100 trillion electron volts. The tell-tale clue to the discovery was the detection of two oppositely-located regions in the rapidly expanding remnant of the Supernova of 1006 AD. The ASCA satellite contains telescopes for simultaneously taking images and spectra of X-rays, allowing astronomers to distinguish between different types of X-ray emission from nearby regions of the same celestial object. ASCA was launched February 20, 1993. (NASA Release 95-208)
U.S. polar orbiting weather satellite programs are being combined to save money. Costs for the combined program will be split between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Defense Department. NASA will be in charge of developing the technology for the new systems. (AP, Aug 23/95)
NASA�s unmanned spacecraft Wind, patrolling interplanetary space 662,000 miles from Earth, detected a �giant magnetic cloud� on October 18. An updated �space weather alert� was issued to commercial satellite operators, electrical utilities and other organizations worldwide. The disturbance was speeding to Earth at over 2.1 million miles per hour. It produced a magnetic storm and auroral displays that persisted for two days. Future disturbances are anticipated as the 11-year sunspot cycle is expected to peak shortly after the year 2000. The Wind spacecraft was launched November 1, 1994. (NASA Release 95-202; Space News, Oct 30/95)
A satellite payload designed and built by college students was launched onboard a NASA launch vehicle. Shortly after launch the SURFSat-1 was separated from the primary payload and moved into a polar orbit. When the project began in 1987, six Caltech students were chosen to begin the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURFSat). Each summer a new group of undergraduates took over. Through 1994, 61 students have participated. The satellite has two experiments: one tests how Earth�s atmosphere affects the new Ka-band being implemented on NASA�s Deep Space Network, and the other tests ground stations supporting NASA�s new Space Very Long Baseline Interferometry project. The latter will be used to communicate with a Japanese spacecraft that will make radio astronomy studies of quasars and other objects at the edge of the universe. (NASA Release 95-204; Space News, Sep 4/95 & Nov 13/95)
A Japanese-German attempt to put a space capsule into orbit for five days of experiments failed, sending it tumbling through the atmosphere where it broke up and burned over the Pacific after two or three orbits. The $60 million "Express" satellite was supposed to land in Australia's outback Saturday for retrieval. (H Chron, Jan 17/95; Reuters, Jan 16/95)
Industry analysis by the Virginia firm Teal Group showed that almost 1,000 satellites, mostly for communications, will be launched during the next ten years. Most of these satellites will belong to mobile communications multi-satellite systems such as Motorola's Iridium and Space Systems/Loral's Globalstar. The most common destination for these satellites will be Earth low orbit. (Defense Daily, Jan 10/95)
The HST has discovered ozone on Jupiter�s satellite Ganymede, making it one of the solar system�s rare moons that have atmospheres. Ganymede�s ozone is produced when it passes through charged particles trapped in Jupiter�s powerful magnetic field. (AvWk, Oct 16/95)
Conestoga rockets are expected to be launched from Wallops Island, Virginia. These 52 foot rockets could bring life back to one of the earliest launch sites in the country. The rockets are produced by EER to launch satellites for global communication and high-technology navigation. Today�s launch was postponed due to hydraulic failure in two engines. (W Post, Aug 14/95 & Oct 11/95; W Times, July 20/95 & Aug 14/95; Space News, Jul 24/95 & Aug 28/95; LA Times, Oct 8/95; AvWk, Aug 28/95)
The Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) mission will be launched in October 1998. This mission was selected earlier in the year as part of an overall restructuring of the Explorer program. Beginning in 1958, the Explorer program provides Earth-orbiting satellites to conduct research in space physics and astrophysics. (NASA Release 95-206; Space News, Nov 27/95)
Scientists at the University of Texas at Dallas revealed their discovery of an ancient river channel buried beneath the Sahara Desert in Africa, publishing their findings in Science magazine. The discovery offered an answer to a question that had long perplexed the scientific community, why does the Nile River, as it flows through the world’s largest desert (in Sudan) make a huge, looping bend in its course? The Nile generally flows toward the north, except at the Great Bend’s turning, where the river flows toward the southwest for more than 200 miles (320 kilometers). After this detour, the Nile resumes its course toward the Mediterranean Sea. The researchers had used the images taken by the Spaceborne Imaging Radar C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR), which had flown with Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59 in 1994, to study the ancient structures in the Precambrian rock, guiding the river’s course. The SIR-C/X-SAR radar waves had penetrated the sand to reveal unseen structures, not visible without the satellite images. Diane L. Evans, SIR-C Project Manager at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), called the discovery “one of the most exciting discoveries from the SIRC/XSAR mission to date.” JPL was managing the program as a part of NASA’s Mission to Planet Earth initiative.(Robert J. Stern and Mohamed Gamal, “The Origin of the Great Bend of the Nile from SIR-C/X-SAR Imagery,” Science 274, no. 5293 (6 December 1996): 1696−1698; NASA, “Space Radar Unearths Secrets of the Ancient Nile,” news release 96-251, 6 December 1996.)
With the push of a button at GSFC, NASA discontinued use of the International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite, which had been in orbit since 1978. When NASA sent a signal to the satellite to empty its fuel, the satellite effectively went to sleep, spinning off into space. Although NASA had originally designed the satellite to spend only three years in space, scientists continued to use it to gather data far beyond the spacecraft’s anticipated lifespan. NASA ended control of the satellite to save between US$1 and US$2 million annually in operating costs. GSFC had operated the satellite as part of a three-way agreement with the European Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom. More than 2,000 researchers from around the world had made observations from the satellite, research that had directly led to the publication of more than 3,200 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals.
crew intended to retract the tether until the satellite was about 2 miles (3 kilometers) from the
to jam. The U.S.- Italian satellite had cost US$443 million to produce. The satellite, extended on
mission’s priorities was to place in flight the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS), which
other spacecraft. NASA planned to fly the satellite for 22 hours. To retrieve the satellite, the
Data gathered by the U.S.-French satellite TOPEX/Poseidon confirmed theories that a “full- blown El Niño condition” existed in the Pacific. Scientists believe that an El Niño forms when steady, westward-blowing trade winds weaken or reverse direction, altering typical, atmospheric jet-stream patterns around the world. TOPEX/Poseidon measured sea-surface heights and atmospheric water vapor to confirm the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s earlier prediction. Based on previous El Niño events, scientists predicted heavy rainfall for the western United States, mild winters in the east, and extreme droughts in Australia, Africa, and Indonesia.(NASA, “Independent NASA Satellite Measurements Confirm El Niño Is Back and Strong,” news release 97-200, 15 September 1997.)
NASA’s Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft captured a video of a “short-lived but extremely bright explosion in the atmosphere of the sun.” The explosion was 55,000 miles (89,000 kilometers) long, 200 miles (322 kilometers) wide, and traveled at a rate of 2 million miles (3.2 million kilometers) per hour. The explosions overlapped each other and “snapped,” releasing “vast amounts of energy” as solar flares. Solar flares cause magnetic disturbances that disrupt satellites and power supplies if directed at Earth. In April, NASA had launched the TRACE spacecraft, with a telescope 10 times more powerful than any other telescope focused on the Sun. The telescope studied the transitional region of the Sun’s atmosphere, between the relatively cool surface of the lower atmosphere, with temperatures of 6,000°C (11,000°F), and the corona or upper atmosphere, where temperatures reach 1.7 million°C (35 million°F). The telescope was able to photograph ultraviolet light and to show temperature variations using false colors.(Mark Prigg, “Photos Reveal Sun’s Power,” Sunday Times (London), 7 June 1998; Leonard Novarro for Reuters, “Solar Flare May Disrupt Worldwide Communication,” 8 June 1998.)
The PanAmSat-owned Galaxy IV, a five-year old communications satellite, “lost its bearings” so that its antennas were not directed toward Earth, causing the “worst outage in 37 years since communications satellites first entered service.” Most of the 45 million pagers in the United States were unable to function during the outage, which “severed electronic links vital to thousands of retailers, news organizations, and broadcasters.” PanAmSat officials said that an attitude-control mechanism failed for an unknown reason and a backup processor failed to turn on, causing the satellite to rotate. At that point, hundreds of thousands of satellite dishes in the United States lost contact with Galaxy IV.(Mike Mills, “Satellite Glitch Cuts Off Data Flow,” Washington Post, 21 May 1998.)
NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration awarded a US$423 million contract to Hughes Space and Communications of El Segundo, California, to manufacture and launch up to four weather-monitoring Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). The basic contract covered the manufacture and launch of two spacecraft. Separate fixed-price options for two additional spacecraft would cost US$190 million and US$185 million. The spacecraft would carry instruments to provide regular measurements of the Earth’s atmosphere, cloud cover, and land surfaces. Two spacecraft would also carry the Solar X-ray Imager and Space Environment Monitor instruments. These four spacecraft, known as GOES-N, -O, -P, and -Q were to continue, enhancing the services of the current GOES-I through -M series, a “mainstay of modern weather forecasting.” The GOES series provided meteorologists and hydrologists with “visible and infrared images of weather systems, and precise atmospheric soundings.” The positions of the spacecraft in orbit would allow scientists to monitor storms when they were first forming in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.(NASA, “Hughes Selected To Build Weather Satellites,” contract announcement release C98-B, 28 January 1998. 404 Robyn Suriano, “Atlas Launches on Fourth Try: Classified Craft Likely To Serve as Orbital Switchboard,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 January 1998.)
A month after its launch, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) began activating the weather satellite, Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-10 (GOES- 10), a backup to the failing GOES-9 satellite. The momentum wheels on GOES-9, similar to a gyroscope, which maintain the satellite’s stability, were “showing signs of impending failure.” GOES-9 was responsible for monitoring weather on the west coast of the United States. GOES- 10, placed in storage mode above the center of the country, would need about 30 days, moving approximately 1o of longitude each day, to move to the west coast location. GOES-10’s well- timed placement in storage mode would ensure data continuity, saving NOAA a 12- to 15-month wait for a time slot for launch, following the imminent failure of GOES-9.(Associated Press, “Failing Weather Satellite Replaced,” 10 July 1998.)
Satellites survived the annual Leonid meteor storm with no major damage. Astronomers had predicted the storm would be the most intense in three decades, because Comet Tempel-Tuttle had swung closer to the Sun in February, as it does every 33 years, creating a greater-than- average amount of comet dust. Scientists had feared that particles traveling at 43 miles (69 kilometers) per second could shred satellites’ solar arrays, damage sensitive instruments, or cause circuits to short.
PanAmSat Corporation announced the impairment of a critical subsystem of its Galaxy VII spacecraft. A spokesperson for the company said that engineers had not yet determined whether the problem was the same as that which caused the failure of the Galaxy IV spacecraft on 19 May. Both the primary and backup systems keeping the Galaxy IV correctly pointed toward Earth-bound controllers had failed, but although the Galaxy VII had lost its primary system, its backup system had continued to function properly. Hughes Electronics Corporation’s Space and Communications Company, the manufacturer of the two satellites, was investigating the failures. Both satellites were HS601 models, the world’s “best-selling large communications satellite,” with customers including the U.S. Navy, NASA, the government of Mexico, and communications companies throughout the world.(Robert Covington for Reuters, “Second PanAmSat Satellite Encounters Problems,” 2 July 1998.)
NASA announced that astronomers had located the “wayward” SOHO satellite after losing radio contact on 24 June, when a programming error on the ground caused its solar panels to switch positions. Two U.S. radio telescopes had located the satellite rotating slowly near its original position, approximately 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth. Engineers had calculated its exact location after NASA’s Deep Space Network in Goldstone, California, “intercepted the echo of a radio signal transmitted by the giant radio telescope of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center in Arecibo, Puerto Rico.” The spacecraft’s slow rotation on its axis indicated that it had incurred only minor damage and that its solar panels would soon face the Sun again.(Agence France-Presse, “U.S.-European Satellite Located by Engineers,” 28 July 1998.)
Officials from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported that they had placed GOES-8, the weather satellite responsible for monitoring the East Coast, in a “safe hold shutdown,” after it had developed problems with its attitude sensors. GOES-10 was then required to watch the entire country, although it could provide images only every 30 minutes, instead of every 15 minutes, as it did when each of the two satellites was able to monitor half of the United States. NASA officials were especially concerned about monitoring East Coast weather, because of worry that winds from Hurricane Mitch, located over the coast of Central America, could interfere with the upcoming launch of the Space Shuttle carrying veteran astronaut, U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr.(Randolph E. Schmid for Associated Press, “East Weather Satellite Shuts Down,” 28 October 1998.)
Hughes Electronics Corporation concluded its investigation into the 19 May failure of PanAmSat’s Galaxy IV satellite and the similar problems that later had affected two other satellites. Metallic crystals growing in space, “less than the width of a human hair,” had caused tin-plated electrical switches to short, disabling navigational devices that kept the satellites oriented toward Earth-based controllers. However, the investigation had failed to uncover the source of the failure of Galaxy IV’s backup system, which led to the widespread blackout on 19 May.(Aaron Pressman for Reuters, “Tiny Crystals Waylaid Satellites, Hughes Says,” 11 August 1998.)
Hughes Global Services Inc. announced the success of its salvage mission to a stranded Asia Satellite Telecommunications Company Ltd. communications satellite. The 3.8-ton (3,500- kilogram or 3.5-tonne) AsiaSat 3 had remained stranded in a useless orbit since its December 1997 launch. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had received US$200 million from insurers. The insurers had told Hughes Global Services to find a new customer, if the salvage mission was successful. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had originally intended AsiaSat 3 to provide television and telephone service in Asia, but the Russian-built launcher had malfunctioned, and the satellite’s orbit had gone awry, rendering it useless. Hughes Global Services had taken possession of the satellite, implementing a “seemingly improbable” mission to salvage the spacecraft. Hughes had sent the satellite around the Moon twice, using the Moon’s gravity to help correct the satellite’s orbit around the Earth, and declared the salvage mission a success, even though the satellite was not stationary, which would limit the number of customers who might lease or buy it.(Andrew Pollack for Associated Press, “Rescue Effort Puts a Satellite in Viable Orbit,” New York Times, 19 June 1998; Associated Press, “US Satellites,” 19 June 1998.)
NASA announced that experts from the ESA and Matra Marconi Space, the prime contractor for the SOHO spacecraft, had met at GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to assess the situation of the noncommunicating spacecraft and to analyze the satellite’s status in the event that ground controllers reestablished contact with it. Participants at the meeting named as cochairs of a joint inquiry board to investigate the incident, Professor Massimo Trella, the ESA’s Inspector General, and Michael A. Greenfield, Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters.(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Inquiry Board Co-Chairs Named,” news release 98- 118, 30 June 1998.)
NASA announced its selection of three very small satellites, each about 16 inches (41 centimeters) across and 8 inches (20 centimeters) high, to conduct the Nanosat Constellation Trailblazer mission, the fifth mission in NASA’s New Millennium program. NASA had developed the New Millennium program to test technology for future missions, with the goal of dramatically reducing the weight, size, and costs of missions, while simultaneously increasing science capabilities. NASA scheduled the US$28 million Nanosat Constellation mission to launch in 2003 as a secondary payload on an expendable launch vehicle.(NASA, “NASA Selects Miniature Spacecraft To Test Space Technology,” news release 99-95, 19 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-095.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
Brazilian space officials, having lost contact with their country’s Saci-1 satellite days after its launch, asked NASA to help them rescue the US$4.6 million satellite. Saci-1 had launched on 14 October from China along with another satellite, the CBERS-1, which the two countries had built jointly. Brazil asked NASA to photograph the satellite, check its condition, and devise a plan for its recovery. President of the Brazilian Space Agency Luis Meira Filho remarked that Brazil had not given “the satellite up for lost,” because space officials knew its location. The CBERS-1 satellite was functioning normally and had returned images of Brazil.(Reuters, “Brazil Asks NASA Help To Rescue Lost Satellite,” 21 October 1999.)
NASA announced the end of the scientific mission of its WIRE satellite, after the craft released into space its entire supply of frozen hydrogen, a critical element of the mission. Preliminary reports indicated that the satellite had released the primary telescope cover three days earlier than planned, exposing the telescope’s cryostat to sunlight. The sunlight had warmed the frozen hydrogen in the cryostat, which was supposed to maintain the telescope’s temperature, causing the hydrogen to vent into space at a much higher rate than planned. Ground controllers believed the fast venting of the hydrogen had caused the satellite to spin, but they did not yet know what had caused the release of the telescope cover.(NASA, “Wire Spacecraft Instrument Runs Out of Hydrogen,” news release 99-37, 8 March 1999.)
NASA announced that the WIRE Mishap Investigation Board had concluded that NASA’s Wide- Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) satellite had failed after its 4 March 1999 launch, “because of an incorrectly designed electronics box.” The premature firing of explosive devices⎯the pyrotechnics⎯had caused the instrument’s telescope cover to eject too early in the mission, thus exposing the instrument’s frozen hydrogen to the Sun. The frozen hydrogen was necessary to cool the telescope’s infrared detectors. The satellite had lost the frozen hydrogen within 48 hours of its launch, rendering the instrument incapable of carrying out its scientific mission. Darrell R. Branscome, Deputy Associate Administrator (Enterprise Development) for NASA’s Office of Space Flight and chairperson of the eight-member investigation team, emphasized that there had been no component failure, but “simply a case of a design error that allowed power to get to the explosive charges before it should have.” The board’s report also concluded that engineers had failed to identify the design errors in the circuitry controlling the pyrotechnical functions. Unlike the other systems in the satellite, the electronics box design had received no peer review.(NASA, “Investigation Finds Design Errors Caused WIRE Spacecraft Failure,” news release 99-74, 25 June 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-074.txt (accessed 11 February 2008).)
NASA announced that its new orbiting SeaWinds radar instrument, flying aboard the QuikSCAT satellite, was successfully tracking Iceberg B10A, which had broken off the Thwaites glacier of Antarctica in 1992, drifting into a shipping lane. Earlier in 1999, Iceberg B10A had disappeared when conventional methods of tracking sea-surface ice⎯ships’ radar, shipping reports, optical images from satellites, and microwave sensor data⎯were unable to track it. David G. Long of the SeaWinds science team at Utah’s Brigham Young University remarked that, although “a ship was dispatched to the iceberg’s last known position, we were unable to find it until we started receiving data from the SeaWinds instrument in July.” During its first pass over Antarctica, SeaWinds had spotted the iceberg, and the National Ice Center in Suitland, Maryland, had confirmed that the iceberg was B10A. Scientists had continued to track it as it moved through the Drake Passage and headed northeast between Tierra del Fuego, at the southern tip of South America, and the Antarctic Peninsula. At that time, the National Ice Center had issued an iceberg navigation warning to Argentina.(NASA, “New NASA Ocean Radar Watches for Breakup of Giant Iceberg,” news release 99-102, 3 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-102.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
Mario Dario Grossi, radio physicist and engineer, died at the age of 74 in Boston, Massachusetts. Grossi developed the concept of tethered satellites and the hardware to make them possible. Together with a colleague, Grossi had conducted most of his work at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Grossi had first approached NASA with his concept in 1972, and in 1982 NASA had issued a contract to build a system. In July 1992, NASA had tested the tether in space when astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-46 “reeled out a half-ton [450- kilogram or 0.45-tonne] satellite of the Italian Space Agency dangling on a spaghetti-thin cord 12 miles [19 kilometers] long.” The successful test had provided data that would assist engineers in applying the tether satellite technology to build space stations or in “operating instrument- laden satellites far from the [S]huttle.”(Wolfgang Saxon, “M. Grossi, 74; Created Tether for Satellites,” New York Times, 18 January 1999.)
In the second on-orbit failure of Hughes Electronic Corporation’s HS601-model satellite, the Spacecraft Control Processor (SCP) of Mexico’s Solidaridad I communications satellite malfunctioned, disrupting television, radio, and pager services. The first incident had occurred on the Galaxy IV satellite, causing similar communications disruptions in the United States during 1998. In the current malfunction, operators in Iztapalapa and Hermosillo received a series of alarms indicating that the only functioning SCP on board the Satmex-owned craft had turned itself off. The satellite had two SCPs on board and needed only one to carry out its communications relay properly, but Solidaridad I already was running on its backup SCP, having lost its first processor a year ago. Engineers suspected that the cause of the incident was the growth of a tiny crystalline structure that leads to electrical shorts. Hughes investigators had identified this type of malfunction in their satellites containing tin-plated relay switches and, therefore, had begun to use nickel-plated switches in new satellites to prevent future occurrences of such electrical shorts. However, Solidaridad I, designed for 14 years of service in space, had launched in 1993 before the conversion to nickel-plated switches. The Solidaridad series, comprising two satellites, provided service to all of Mexico, also extending to the southwestern United States, the Caribbean, and Central and South America. The malfunction led to the loss of educational television programming in 12,000 schools in Mexico, mostly in remote rural areas where some students rely entirely on televised courses. Satmex was transferring Solidaridad I users to the three other satellites in its fleet.(Justin Ray, “Satellite Failure Causes Communications Blackout,” Spaceflight Now, 29 August 2000. 280)
The board appointed to investigate the mishap that had damaged the High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) spacecraft in preflight testing announced its findings. The investigators had discovered that the computer controlling the vibration device had sensed an abnormally high level of static friction and had responded by delivering approximately 10 times the exertion of gravity suitable for the test. A slight misalignment of the shaker mechanism had proved just enough to throw off the preflight testing. The board had determined that the accident had been avoidable. Routine maintenance and a pretest of the testing device itself would have caught the problem before any damage had occurred. NASA planned for the HESSI satellite to undergo repairs at the University of California at Berkeley.(NASA, “Board Finds Cause of HESSI Mishap,” news release 00-80, 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “NASA Identifies Causes of Test Accident that Broke Spacecraft,” 12 May 2000.)
The National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Integrated Program Office (IPO) selected Raytheon Company to provide imaging-sensor instruments for the new NPOESS craft, which would replace the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Polar- Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellites (POES) and the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites. Under a contract valued at US$152.8 million, Raytheon would design, develop, and test the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) instrument and develop the algorithms to produce environmental data records from VIIRS data.(Associated Press, “Raytheon Awarded $152.8 Million Contract for Meteorological Satellite Imaging Sensor,” 28 November 2000.)
The Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000) officially commenced in South Africa’s Northern Province, with the gathering of scientists from 14 nations and six South African universities. NASA, alongside the University of Witwatersrand, led SAFARI 2000, their goal to “determine how the region’s natural ecosystems and human land use affect air quality and atmospheric conditions.” The initiative would use specially equipped planes to make four scientific flights each week, over a six-week period, through September 2000. A modern ER-2 version of the U-2 spy plane would fly directly under the Terra satellite as it passed over various regions of southern Africa, to verify the satellite’s data. Three other aircraft would also fly with the ER-2 “like a stack of pancakes,” with the ER-2 flying at about 65,000 feet (19,800 meters) to conduct remote sensing, a Convair 580 aircraft collecting air and gas samples just below the ER- 2, and two Aerocommander 690A aircraft conducting similar tests at between 5,000 and 12,000 feet (1,500 and 3,700 meters).(Justin Arenstein for Africa News Service, “Africa’s Biggest Science Experiment Kicks Off,” 14 August 2000; Africa News Service, “NASA Project Off to a Flying Start,” 14 August 2000.)
NASA made data from its Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) available to the public. ASTER, a general-purpose imaging instrument featuring 14 spectral bands, extremely high spatial resolution, and stereo-imaging capabilities, had launched aboard NASA’s Terra satellite in December 1999. One of ASTER’s primary goals was “to acquire a one-time cloud-free image of the entire land surface of Earth,” intended as a baseline image for monitoring environmental change.(NASA, “Terra Satellite’s ASTER Data Now Available to the Public,” news release 2000-124, 5 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/terra.html (accessed 7 April 2008).)
NASA announced that its Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS) had detected water vapor throughout interstellar space. However, in the very coldest areas, where temperatures are only 30° above absolute zero, the satellite had detected far less water vapor than most theories had predicted. In those areas, SWAS measurements had indicated water vapor concentrations of only a few parts per billion. Ronald L. Snell of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst remarked that the finding presented a “real puzzle to our understanding of the chemistry of interstellar clouds.” In warmer regions, such as those within star-producing gas clouds, SWAS had measured water concentrations as much as 10,000 times greater than in the coldest regions. The new results were the product of 18 months of observations using the compact radio observatory, launched in 1998 on a mission to “study the composition of interstellar gas clouds and their collapse to form new stars.”(NASA, “Cosmic Gas Clouds Yield Puzzling Concentrations of Water,” news release 00-126, 16 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-126.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
After detailing only a few computer glitches, which had occurred during the dreaded Y2K transition, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA had narrowly avoided a Y2K data flaw that might have redirected the orbit of its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. According to NASA’s Chief Information Officer, the software that transmitted the commands directing satellite orbits had automatically reverted to 1 January 1999 commands, when it should have used 1 January 2000 commands. Attentive operators caught the potential problem before the software had sent the faulty data to any satellites. Although the episode accentuated the seriousness of the Y2K computer transition, it was notable that, in spite of the risks, very few computer crashes actually occurred during the changeover.(Paula Shaki Trimble, “NASA Discovered Last-Minute Y2K Glitch,” Federal Computer Week, 4 January 2000. 859 NASA, “Mars Program Independent Assessment Team Begins Work,” news release 00-6, 7 January 2000.)
Iridium Satellite LLC announced that the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York had approved its bid to purchase the operating assets, property, and intellectual property of Iridium LLC. Iridium Satellite LLC would continue providing commercial satellite communication services to the U.S. government.(Iridium LLC, “Statement for Iridium Satellite LLC,” news release, 15 November 2000. 299)
The ESA signed a four-year contract with two industry groups⎯Sarcom, led by Spot Image of Toulouse, France, and the Emma consortium, led by Eurimage of Rome⎯granting the two groups “priority access to the Envisat radar remote-sensing satellite” scheduled for launch in 2001, as well as imagery from the ERS-2 spacecraft, already in orbit. About the new business relationship, a major policy shift for the ESA, Acting Envisat Mission Manager Günther Kohlhammer remarked that the ESA had realized that it needed to change so that it could develop new markets. The contract gave commercial orders for the satellite images priority over scientific requests, setting new limits on the type and number of users ESA would grant access to data without paying commercial prices.(Peter B. de Selding, “ESA Hands Radar Satellite Responsibility to Industry,” Space News, 30 October 2000.)
Gerard A. Kriss of Johns Hopkins University led a group of astronomers using NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) satellite to obtain the best observations to date of helium gas remaining from the Big Bang. The observations provided information about the universe’s architecture millions of years ago, giving empirical support for theories about how matter in the expanding universe had condensed into a structure that permeated space between galaxies. The FUSE satellite had observed the light of the distant quasar HE2347-4342, and scientists had used the data it produced to make comparative analyses of the light’s absorption by helium and hydrogen gas on its trajectory to Earth. The astronomers had compared the ionization of the helium and hydrogen, the result of the gases’ absorption of light, to determine the most likely source of the energy that had heated the universe during its early formation. They concluded that, most likely, a combination of quasars and newly formed stars had produced the ionization of helium and hydrogen gases. Moreover, the presence of helium, in regions with no hydrogen, supported the theory that the universe’s architecture resulted from extensive gravitational instabilities during the chaos after the Big Bang.(NASA, “New View of Primordial Helium Traces Structure of Early Universe,” news release 01-160, 9 August 2001; G. A. Kriss, “Resolving the Structure of Ionized Helium in the Intergalactic Medium with the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer,” Science 293, no. 5532 (10 August 2001): 1112–1116.)
Members of the Landsat 7 project, involving scientists from NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), announced that, in the course of mapping Antarctica, the team had discovered a giant new crack in one of the world’s largest ice sheets. The team believed that the crack, formed within the past five weeks, would result in the calving of the Pine Island Glacier, creating a major new iceberg within 18 months. NASA had obtained the image from the Landsat 7 satellite, which had passed over Antarctica 16 times daily since its 1999 launch.(NASA, “NASA Image Reveals Giant Chip Off the Antarctic Ice Block,” news release 01-50, 22 March 2001; Reuters, “Satellite Spies Crack in Antarctica Glacier, 23 March 2001.)
A group of scientists led by Liming Zhou of Boston University published research indicating that substantial portions of the northern hemisphere had experienced effects of global warming. The scientists, who were studying the responses of vegetation to temperature changes, had used satellite data collected from July 1981 to December 1999 and had found a persistent increase in the length of the growing season in the majority of vegetated areas in the northern latitudes of Asia and Europe. A similar trend was evident in North America, but in a relatively lower proportion of land area. The data had also revealed declines in vegetated area in Alaska, Canada, and some parts of Asia, which may have resulted from temperature-induced drought in those areas. In addition, the scientists discovered a statistically significant relationship between changes in vegetated area and increasing land surface temperatures, indicating that climatic changes may have led to changes in vegetative activity in much of the world.(NASA, “Earth’s Becoming a Greener Greenhouse,” news release 01-178, 4 September 2001; L. Zhou et al., “Variations in Northern Vegetation Activity Inferred from Satellite Data of Vegetation Index During 1981 to 1999,” Journal of Geophysical Research 106, no. D17 (16 September 2001): 20069–20083.)
NASA released new images gathered by the Terra satellite’s instrumentsClouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy System (CERES)which revealed shrinking glaciers, as well as the most accurate global radiation measurements ever captured. Launched in December 1999, Terra monitored most of the world’s major glaciers. The CERES instruments had captured the high- resolution images from 440 miles (708 kilometers) above Earth’s surface. Initial analysis of the new data had revealed that most glaciers had shrunk considerably since previously measured. For example, the glaciers in the mountains of Patagonia had receded about 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) over the course of 13 years. CERES had also provided the first complete year of radiation readings since 1987, capturing readings from the May 2001 heat wave, which had produced record temperatures in the United States.(NASA, “NASA’s Terra Satellite Captures a World of Sunlight and Heat,” news release 01-123, 21 June 2001; Kenneth Chang, “Spacecraft’s Supercamera Captures Earth in All Its Detail,” New York Times, 19 June 2001.)
Researchers from NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) published research indicating that, during the 20th century, the world’s average temperatures had increased, and the United States’ average temperatures had declined. Using data from satellites and 7,200 weather stations worldwide, NASA and NOAA scientists had found that the global mean surface air temperature had increased by 1oF (0.6oC) during the 20th century. However, temperatures had not increased consistently but had undergone successive periods of warming (from 1900 to 1940), cooling (1940 to 1965), and warming again (1965 to 2000). The evidence also indicated that these temperature changes had not been uniform throughout Earth. For example, although the average surface air temperature in the United States had increased during the latter part of the 20th century, it had remained at a level comparable to average U.S. temperatures during the 1930s. In addition, the researchers had discovered evidence that humans had influenced surface air temperatures on a local scale in large urban areas, suburbs, and even in small towns. However, the data also indicated that this effect had been of modest magnitude and might reflect problems with data measurement.(J. Hansen et al., “A Closer Look at United States and Global Surface Temperature Change,” Journal of Geophysical Research 106, no. D20 (2001): 23947–23963; NASA, “Satellites Shed Light On Warmer World,” news release 01-212, 5 November 2001.)
NASA announced that images provided by the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS), which NASA had launched in December 1998, showed new evidence that extra- planetary systems contain water. In particular, astronomers had studied the giant IRC+10216 star, also known as CW Leonis, and had located water vapor surrounding the celestial body. Scientists had never considered the giant star, located some 500 light-years from Earth, as a likely host of water because of its high levels of carbon. Gary Melnick of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics led the SWAS study, which concluded that the most viable explanation for the “substantial concentrations of water vapor” around the star was that the star’s gravity had pulled the water vapor from the icy surfaces of nearby comets. The discovery had broad implications for scientists’ theories about how Earth might eventually end. “We think we are witnessing the type of apocalypse that will ultimately befall our own planetary system,” said one SWAS researcher. “Several billion years from now, the Sun will become a giant star and its power output will increase five thousand fold. As the luminosity of the Sun increases, a wave of water vaporization will spread outwards through the solar system, starting with Earth’s oceans and extending well beyond the orbit of Neptune.”(Gary J. Melnick et al., “Discovery of Water Vapour Around IRC+10216 as Evidence for Comets Orbiting Another Star,” Nature 412, no. 6843 (12 July 2001): 160163; NASA, “Stellar Apocalypse Yields First Evidence of Water-Bearing Worlds Beyond Our Solar System,” news release 01-140, 11 July 2001.)
Scientists announced the first confirmed observation of the optical afterglow of a gamma-ray burst (GRB). GRBs are the most energetic phenomenon in the universe. NASA’s High Energy Transient Explorer (HETE) had observed a GRB―dubbed GRB 010921―occurring nearly 5 billion light-years from Earth in the constellation Lacerta. The astronomers had coordinated the HETE data with observations that Italy’s BeppoSAX satellite and ESA’s Ulysses spacecraft had captured, enabling them to find the afterglow in optical light and to measure its redshift―the warping of electromagnetic radiation by gravity. The measurement of the redshift helped them determine the GRB’s distance from Earth. The observation was a special opportunity to obtain information on GRBs. Scientists hoped that with additional observations they could begin to understand the causes of this frequent, but enigmatic phenomenon.(NASA, “NASA’s HETE Spots Rare Gamma-Ray Burst Afterglow,” news release 01-218, 7 November 2001; P. A. Price et al., “GRB 010921: Discovery of the First High Energy Transient Explorer Afterglow,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 2 (1 June 2002): L121–L125; G. Ricker et al., “GRB 010921: Localization and Observation by the High Energy Transient Explorer Satellite,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 571, no. 2 (1 June 2002): L127– L130.)
NASA formally accepted the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite–H (TDRS-H) from Boeing Satellite Systems. TDRS-H was part of a constellation of satellites that formed a communication- signal relay system, providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellites served the HST, the ISS, and other NASA programs. Boeing had built TDRS-H under contract from NASA, which had launched the satellite in June 2000. However, NASA had delayed its formal acceptance of the spacecraft, after Boeing engineers had found that the satellite’s multiple- access, phased-array antenna did not meet contractually specified performance standards. On 10 August 2001, NASA and Boeing had announced that they had tentatively agreed to a settlement and were finalizing negotiations for NASA to accept the satellite.(The Boeing Company, “NASA To Take Control of TDRS-H Satellite,” news release 10 August 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q3/nr_010810t.html (accessed 28 January 2010); NASA, “Media Kit: TDRS-J Mission,” http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/gsfc/earth/pictures/20021127tdrs_j/)
NASA launched the Kodiak Star from Kodiak Island in Alaska at 2:40 a.m. (UT), NASA’s first mission ever launched into Earth orbit from that location. The Kodiak Star’s payload consisted of four small satellites: PCSAT, PICOSat 9, Sapphire, and Starshine 3. The PCSAT and Starshine 3 would serve amateur radio operators; Sapphire carried a voice synthesizer to convert text messages into human voice; and PICOSat 9 would test electronic components and systems in space conditions. NASA had funded the Starshine 3, and the DOD had sponsored the other three satellites.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575; NASA KSC, “Kodiak Star Scheduled for Launch from Alaska Sept. 17,” news release 101-01, 22 August 2001.)
NASA and the USGS announced a partnership to acquire data from the Earth Observing-1 (EO- 1) satellite and to provide that data to the private sector for applications such as land-cover analysis, ecosystem monitoring, and petroleum prospecting. NASA and the USGS made the announcement one year after the launch of EO-1, a year in which the spacecraft’s nine breakthrough instruments had all successfully satisfied test objectives. The instruments included Earth-viewing technologies, such as a hyperspectral imager that could view Earth’s surface with unprecedented spectral discrimination and an Advanced Land Imager that could provide better views of Earth than NASA’s Landsat, at a lower cost. Under the terms of the agreement, NASA would maintain command and control of the EO-1, and the USGS would take orders for spacecraft data at prices set to cover the nearly US$5 million annual cost of operating the satellite, processing data, and interacting with customers.(NASA, “Technology Mission Accomplished, NASA Goes for More,” news release 02-12, 18 January 2002.)
Data from NASA’s Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) satellite provided support for a decades- old, unproven theory that winds converge in two large areas near Earth’s equator, driving ocean circulation south of the equator. The two areas, known as the northern and southern portions of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, are part of a belt circling Earth near the equator, where trade winds of both the northern and southern hemispheres converge. The region affects north-south atmospheric circulation, significantly influencing precipitation and temperatures in many regions of the globe. Previously, researchers had identified the double Intertropical Convergence Zone as a limited seasonal phenomenon. However, since 1969 the zone’s existence, location, and seasonality had remained controversial. The QuikSCAT data confirmed, not only that the double Intertropical Convergence Zone exists all year long, but also that it is more extensive than scientists had suspected. The finding provided important information about how Earth’s atmosphere and oceans interact near the equator, data that could assist scientists in climate modeling and weather forecasting.(NASA JPL, “Satellite Sees Double Zone of Converging Tropical Winds Around the World,” news release, 9 July 2002; W. T. Liu and X. Xie, “Double Intertropical Convergence Zones―A New Look Using Scatterometer,” Geophysical Research Letters 29, no. 22 (30 November 2002): 2072.)
With the aid of NASA’s High Energy Transient Explorer (HETE), scientists were able to capture the first images ever taken of an unusual gamma-ray burst (GRB) that signals the birth of a new black hole. With the exception of the Big Bang, GRBs are the most powerful type of explosion known. The bursts last for only a few seconds, yet their afterglows can last for days or even longer. However, scientists had been unable to detect an optical afterglow produced by a fast- fading type of dark GRB―until the HETE indicated that such a burst was occurring. NASA had created the satellite to alert ground-based observatories to GRBs. On 11 December 2002, HETE had detected a GRB and, within 22 seconds, had notified observatories of the event’s location. In the following minutes, ground-based telescopes captured images of the burst’s afterglow, which disappeared in 2 hours. The event was a rare subcategory of dark GRBs known as a transitional bursta burst with an afterglow lasting longer than that of the short-duration type, but shorter than that of a long-duration burst. Moreover, these transitional bursts are the rarest type of GRB. Scientists hoped the images would help them learn more about the causes of GRB in general, as well as providing specific data indicating the reason that dark bursts have no detectable afterglow.(NASA, “Scientists Catch Their First Elusive ‘Dark’ Gamma-Ray Burst,” news release 02-257, 23 December 2002.)
ESA reported research indicating that the universe might be older than scientists had previously estimated and that a common method of estimating the age of celestial bodies might be incorrect. A group of scientists had analyzed the XMM-Newton satellite’s x-ray observations of the distant but exceptionally luminous quasar APM 08279+5255 and found that the quasar contains three times more iron than the Sun. Because exploding stars release iron, which increases across the universe over time, the scientists had expected APM 08279+5255 to have less iron than Earth’s relatively older solar system. The scientists noted that the surprising quantity of iron in the distant quasar could be the result of an unknown phenomenon that produces iron very efficiently. However, they suggested that the more likely explanation for the finding was that the conventional method of measuring the age of celestial objects by estimating the objects’ redshifta property of the light emitted by such objectswas flawed.(ESA, “Is the Universe Older Than Expected?” ESA news release, 10 July 2002; Günther Hasinger, Norbert Schartel, and Stefanie Komossa, “Discovery of an Ionized Fe K Edge in the z=3.91 Broad Absorption Line Quasar APM 08279+5255 with XMM-Newton,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 573, no. 2 (10 July 2002): L77–L80.)
The International Astronomical Union announced that astronomers had found 11 new moons around the planet Jupiter. The discovery increased the total number of known satellites around Jupiter to 39, more than any other planet in the solar system. Using the Canada-France-Hawaii telescope, astronomers from Cambridge University and the University of Hawaii had first detected the moons in December 2001. At 1- to 2-miles (1.6- to 3.2-kilometers) across, the newly discovered moons were far smaller than some of Jupiter’s other moons, which are thousands of miles (or kilometers) wide. In addition, the astronomers had discovered that the satellites have irregular orbits and, unlike the planet’s largest moons, spin in the opposite direction of Jupiter. The moons’ irregular orbits around Jupiter indicate that they may have originally orbited the Sun.(Usha Lee McFarling, “11 New Moons of Jupiter Found,” Los Angeles Times, 17 May 2002; NASA JPL, “Astronomers Discover 11 More Small Moons of Jupiter,” news release, 17 May 2002.)
The National Weather Service Aviation Weather Center in Kansas City, Missouri, placed in operation a computer-based warning system called the Current Icing Potential (CIP), designed to alert aviation controllers to the potential for icing along flight routes. The National Center for Atmospheric Research had developed the warning system with funding from the FAA. The CIP used information from satellite data, ground observations, and other sources to produce information on the likelihood of airplanes experiencing icing along flight routes. The FAA had supported the development of the CIP to improve flight planning and aircraft safety.(Federal Aviation Administration’s R&D Review, Spring 2003, 2, 6, 11, http://www.airporttech.tc.faa.gov/RD/2003_spring.pdf (accessed 3 March 2009).)
U.S. Navy officials announced that the Navy had been using NASA satellite data in combat, the first time the military had done so. The officials stated that the Navy had used unclassified NASA data to help guide ships and planes engaged in combat operations in Afghanistan. Major media reported that members of Congress had voiced mixed reactions to the announcement, with some members expressing their concern that the cooperation between NASA and the military would overstep the bounds of NASA’s civilian charter.(Houston Chronicle, “NASA Satellite Guides Navy Warplanes, Ships,” 12 April 2002.)
Engineers succeeded in returning NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) spacecraft to full operational status. Some of the satellite’s guidance components had failed in December 2001, and engineers had feared that the mission would terminate prematurely. Mission engineers on Earth had been able to revive FUSE with a new, innovative guidance system, which used the satellite’s electromagnets to push and pull on Earth’s magnetic field, thereby pointing the satellite in the desired direction. Engineers had originally developed the innovative guidance system as a contingency for a failure of this type, but NASA had never before used the system to navigate a satellite with the accuracy required for scientific observations.(NASA, “NASA’s FUSE Satellite Lit Again,” news release 02-45, 6 March 2002; Johns Hopkins University Department of Physics and Astronomy, “Fuse Mission Status Report” (mission status report no. 56, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 25 March 2002), http://fuse.pha.jhu.edu/facts/ miss_rep56.html (accessed 10 August 2008).)
The U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) announced that it had awarded a five- year contract worth up to US$500 million to the Colorado-based companies Space Imaging and DigitalGlobe. Under the contract, which stipulated a base performance period of three years with two additional one-year options, NIMA agreed to purchase a minimum of US$72 million worth of data from DigitalGlobe and a minimum of US$120 million from Space Imaging during the first three years. The contract and accompanying agreements marked “the Pentagon’s strongest commitment yet to buy products and services from the U.S. commercial satellite imaging industry.” Space Imaging, based in Thornton, Colorado, operated the Ikonos satellite launched in September 1999, which was capable of distinguishing ground objects as small as 1 meter. DigitalGlobe, based in Longmont, Colorado, operated the QuickBird satellite, launched in October 1999, which, under certain conditions, was capable of distinguishing objects as small as 0.61 meter.(NIMA, “NIMA Partners with Remote Sensing Industry,” media release 03-05, 17 January 2003, http://www.nga.mil/NGASiteContent/StaticFiles/OCR/nima0305.pdf (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren Ferster, “NIMA Awards Lucrative Contracts to U.S. Satellite Imaging Firms,” Space News, 17 January 2003; Satellite Imaging Corporation, “About the Ikonos Satellite,” http://www.satimagingcorp.com/ satellite-sensors/ikonos.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Satellite Imaging Corporation, “About the QuickBird Satellite Sensor,” http://www.satimagingcorp.com/satellite-sensors/quickbird.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
NASA announced the successful implementation of new software in three computers controlling the precision pointing of NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscope Explorer (FUSE) satellite. In mid-April 2003, NASA had installed the software for the spacecraft’s Attitude Control Instrument Data System and the processor for the Fine Error Sensor guide camera, and testing of the new configuration had been ongoing since that time. George Sonneborn, FUSE Project Scientist at NASA’s GSFC, explained that the uploaded software would allow FUSE to operate with any number of gyroscopes, or none, in the event of gyroscope failure. Tests showed that FUSE could operate with no gyroscopes without experiencing any degradation in quality of scientific data and with only a slight loss of efficiency in scheduling observations. Before the new software installation, FUSE had required at least one operating gyroscope on each of its three axes to conduct normal scientific operations.(NASA, “NASA Team Gives Fuse Spacecraft Triple Brain Transplant,” news release 03-243, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03243_fuse_transplant.html (accessed 23 December 2008).)
NASA announced its selection of the Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) project for the next mission of NASA’s Medium-class Explorer (MIDEX) program. The mission would study the causes of auroras. THEMIS comprised five small satellites with identical suites of electrical, magnetic, and particle detectors. With a launch date set for 2007, NASA would place the craft in carefully coordinated orbits, where they would line up along Earth’s magnetic tail every four days, to track disturbances. THEMIS satellite data would combine with data gathered from a network of observatories across the Arctic Circle. NASA also announced that it had the opportunity to select an instrument for ESA’s Extreme Universe Space Observatory mission aboard the ISS, which would observe the blue light generated when high-energy cosmic rays collide with Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “NASA Selects Next Medium-Class Explorer Mission,” news release c03h, 20 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03h.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
JAXA officials announced that the chances of restoring the operations of ADEOS 2, known as Midori 2 in Japan, were extremely slight. JAXA had lost contact with ADEOS 2 on 25 October and had been unable to restore communications with the US$654 million craft. Analyses of the malfunction had provided little hope for recovery. ADEOS 2 had replaced the ADEOS 1 mission of 1996, which Japan had abandoned after 10 months when its solar panel had broken down as a result of a design fault. Japanese officials stated that they believed ADEOS 2 had not suffered exactly the same fate as its predecessor but, rather, had experienced a problem with its power circuitry. A JAXA spokesperson suggested that recent solar flares might have affected the craftone of the solar flares had been the largest in three decades.(Agence France-Press, “Japan Bids Adios to ADEOS Earth Observation Satellite,” 31 October 2003; Justin Ray, “Hope of Salvaging Japanese Environmental Satellite Fades,” Spaceflight Now, 31 October 2003.)
Telesat Canada selected Astrium, Europe’s largest space company, to manufacture a replacement for its Anik F1 satellitethe Anik F1R. Engineers had determined that the Anik F1, based on the 702 platform of Boeing Satellite Systems, was defective. Several of the Boeing-built 702 satellites were “afflicted with a solar panel malady” expected to shorten each craft’s operational lifetime. Telesat planned to base the Anik F1R, which would carry 24 C-band and 32 Ku-band transponders, on Astrium’s Eurostar 3000 platform.(Telesat, “Telesat Selects European Manufacturer for New Anik F Satellite,” news release, 4 February 2003, http://www.telesat.ca/news/releases/2003/03-02-e.asp (accessed 12 August 2008); Sam Silverstein, “Telesat Canada Selects Astrium to Replace Anik F1,” Space News, 4 February 2003.)
France’s Alcatel Space signed a US$148 million contract with South Korea’s state-operated KT Corporation to build South Korea’s first satellite with military capabilities. South Korea planned to place Koreasat 5 in orbit by early 2006. KT Corporation spokesperson Cho Chul-Je told the media that South Korea’s military would use military transponders on the satellite for communication and operation, but he declined to confirm reports that the craft would assist the military in collecting security information in Northeast Asia. The craft would also be equipped with commercial transponders. Koreasat 5 would replace Koreasat 2, which had launched in 1996, allowing telecommunications companies to expand mobile networks to Japan, the People’s Republic of China, Taiwan, and the Philippines.(Agence France-Presse, “French Company To Build South Korea’s First Military Satellite,” 8 June 2003.)
to 62.1 miles). Designed to last two years, the craft would orbit Earth 15 times each day, focusing on the chemical processes that control the distribution of ozone in the atmosphere.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, “Canadian Ozone Satellite Successfully Launched from Plane Off California Coast,” 13 August 2003.)
A NASA four-engine, P3-turboprop, “flying laboratory” airplane flew its last flight in a two- week-long series of flights scanning a section of Alaska’s coast. The scanning was part of a collaborative project between NASA, NOAA, and representatives from the University of Colorado and the University of Alaska at Fairbanks. The project, called Arctic 2003, had collected data about sea-ice variability for comparison with data that NASA’s Aqua satellite had collected. The Aqua had launched in May 2002 with a state-of-the-art radiometer for studying water systems. The P3 had carried equipment similar to Aqua’s radiometera Japanese- developed microwave scannerbut because it had flown closer to the ground than the Aqua, the P3 had been able to collect sharper images. P3 flights had traveled over Norton Sound, St. Lawrence Island, St. Matthew Island, Point Hope, and Barrow. In addition to the P3 and Aqua data, ground crews had traveled to some areas to collect samples of ice and snow.(Associated Press, “Flights Help Scientists Understand Sea Ice Changes,” 24 March 2003.)
A team of researchers led by scientist Marc L. Imhoff of NASA’s GSFC published research indicating that increasing urbanization in the United States had reduced the amount of fertile land available for agriculture. Using data from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) and NOAA’s polar-orbiting satellites, the scientists had discovered that cities covered 3 percent of the land area in the continental United States. Moreover, the team found that the urbanized areas were capable of producing an amount of food and fiber rivaling that produced on agricultural lands, which covered 29 percent of the land area in the continental United States. Furthermore, they found that the urbanized land areas had the potential to produce enough food to meet the caloric requirements of 16.5 million people, nearly 6 percent of the U.S. population. The authors explained that, throughout history, human settlement has tended to occur on lands best suited for growing food. The research results, which were consistent with this trend, strongly suggested that urbanization should occur in conjunction with agricultural and environmental considerations.(NASA, “Cities Built on Fertile Lands Affect Climate,” news release 04-059, 11 February 2004; Marc L. Imhoff et al., “The Consequences of Urban Land Transformation on Net Primary Productivity in the United States,” Remote Sensing of Environment 89, no. 4 (29 February 2004): 434–443.)
The State Council of the People’s Republic of China appointed Sun Laiyan as Administrator of the China National Space Administration (CNSA). Laiyan had become the CNSA’s Vice Administrator in 1999 and had served as Deputy Director of the Beijing Institute of Satellite Environment Engineering. Laiyan replaced Luan Enjie, who was retiring as head of the CNSA.(China National Space Administration, “Mr. Sun Laiyan Appointed as Administrator of CNSA,” news release, 12 May 2004, http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620682/n639462/54319.html (accessed 19 March 2009); China National Space Administration, “Resumes of Leaders: Prof./Dr. Sun Laiyan,” http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620681/n639436/53299.html (accessed 19 March 2009).)
Scientists published research demonstrating that changes in Earth’s gravitational field can affect the planet’s climate and weather. Experts described the findings as an important advance in climate research. Bryon D. Tapley of the University of Texas at Austin led the team of scientists, who had discovered that changes in Earth’s gravitational field are associated with changes in the distribution of water and ice masses. Their findings demonstrated that scientists could use satellite measurements of Earth’s gravitational field to measure changes in the distribution of Earth’s mass and to determine the causes of those changes―changes that included variations in climate and weather. In their analyses, the scientists had examined data from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), consisting of two spacecraft that measure variations in Earth’s gravitational field―a project of NASA and the German Aerospace Center.(NASA, “NASA’s GRACE Gravity Mission Weighs In on Earth’s Changing Climate,” news release 04-286, 9 September 2004; Bryon D. Tapley et al., “GRACE Measurements of Mass Variability in the Earth System,” Science 305, no. 5683 (23 July 2004): 503–505.)
Scientists reported that they had produced the first three-dimensional views of the large solar eruptions known as coronal mass ejections, or CMEs. CMEs, the most powerful eruptions in the solar system, can disrupt power systems, radio communications, and satellite links with Earth. Although uncertain of the origin of these eruptions, scientists know that CMEs occur when billions of tons of electrified gas explode from the Sun’s atmosphere into space at speeds of millions of miles per hour. The team had used data from ESA and from NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to construct the images, which they hoped would help scientists learn more about the structure of CMEs and the manner in which they affect Earth.(ESA, “First 3D View of Solar Eruptions,” ESA news release SNR 13-2004, 2 July 2004; Thomas G. Moran and Joseph M. Davila, “Three-Dimensional Polarimetric Imaging of Coronal Mass Ejections,” Science 305, no. 5680 (2 July 2004): 66–70.)
A NASA-funded study found that some climate-forecasting models might have incorrectly estimated future increases in Earth’s temperatures. Scientists Kenneth R. Minschwaner of the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology and Andrew E. Dessler of the University of Maryland had determined that some climate models might have incorrectly estimated the amount of water vapor that enters Earth’s atmosphere as the planet warms. For years, scientists had debated the extent to which water vaporthe most important heat-trapping greenhouse gas in Earth’s atmosphereinfluences Earth’s surface temperatures. Using data from NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, the scientists had found that, although the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere had increased with surface warming, the increase had not been as high as previous researchers had assumed. The findings also cast doubt on research suggesting that Earth’s temperatures would decrease because of a lack of water vapor in the atmosphere.(NASA, “Satellite Finds Warming ‘Relative’ to Humidity,” news release N04-090, 15 March 1990; New York Times, “Study Disputes Idea of Global Warming,” 18 March 2004.)
The European Union (EU) and the United States signed a cooperative agreement on their satellite navigation services―the EU’s planned Galileo system and the United States’ GPS. According to the agreement, the Galileo and GPS satellites would broadcast a common civil signal. They also agreed not to discriminate in commercial trade of satellite-navigation goods and services. In addition, the agreement stipulated that Galileo signals would not interfere with the efforts of the United States to prevent its adversaries’ accessing satellite-based positioning signals. European Commission Vice President Loyola de Palacio, Irish Foreign Minister Brian Cowen, and U.S. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell signed the agreement in Dublin, Ireland.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2004 Activities (Washington, DC, 2004), p. 95, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2004.pdf (accessed 7 April 2009); United States Mission to the European Union, “U.S., EU Reach Agreement on Satellite Navigation Services,” news release, 27 June 2004, http://useu.usmission.gov/Article.asp?ID=E195E969-EFF9-4EE3-8E7B-58D02983E7C3 (accessed 7 April 2009).)
Scientist Menglin Jin of NASA’s GSFC published research based on the first use of satellites to create a multiyear record of Earth’s land-surface temperatures. Jin had used remote-sensing data, which satellites had collected from 1981 to 1998, to develop an 18-year record of global land- surface temperatures more comprehensive and detailed than data derived from ground-station measurements. According to the satellite data, average global land-surface temperatures had increased by 0.43 ̊C (0.77 ̊F) per decade, whereas ground-station data had indicated an increase of 0.34 ̊C (0.61 ̊F). The different findings produced different measurements because satellites measure actual land-surface temperatures―also known as skin temperatures―and ground stations measure air temperatures 6.6 feet (2 meters) above land surfaces. However, Jin also noted regional variations in temperature changes, with the central regions of North America and Asia experiencing some declines in temperatures.(NASA, “Satellites Act as Thermometers in Space,” news release 04-121, 20 April 2004; Menglin Jin, “Analysis of Land Skin Temperature Using AVHRR Observations,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 85, no. 4 (April 2004): 587–600.)
A NASA study revealed that clouds that form from small haze particles do not reduce Earth’s temperatures as much as previous research had suggested. Scientists had thought that low-lying clouds cool Earth by reflecting sunlight away from the planet’s surface, and that the reflectivity of clouds increases as their volume of water increases. However, NASA scientist Andrew S. Ackerman led a group of researchers who found that polluted, low-lying clouds neither hold more water nor reflect more solar energy than do cleaner clouds. Using measurements from polar-orbiting satellites and from NASA aircraft flying through clouds, the scientists discovered that water tends to decrease in polluted clouds, rather than to increase. Because most predictions of climate change had incorrectly assumed that polluted clouds counteract greenhouse warming, this finding could significantly influence how scientists predict changes in climate.(Andrew S. Ackerman et al., “The Impact of Humidity Above Stratiform Clouds on Indirect Aerosol Climate Forcing,” Nature 432, no. 7020 (23–30 December 2004): 1014–1017; NASA, “NASA Finds Polluted Clouds Hold Less Moisture and Cool Earth Less,” news release 04-404, 23 December 2004.)
NASA and NOAA announced that the two agencies would extend the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) by five months, effectively reversing an earlier decision to terminate the weather satellite’s mission. NASA and NOAA also announced that they had requested the National Academy of Sciences to evaluate the utility of extending the satellite’s mission for an additional 18 months. Launched in 1997, the TRMM―designed to measure rainfall―was a joint project of NASA and JAXA. NASA and JAXA had originally planned for the satellite’s mission to last three years, but meteorologists and climate researchers, who continued to find the satellite’s data highly valuable, particularly for analyzing tropical storms, had advocated to prolong the mission.(Guy Gugliotta, “Weather Satellite Gets Reprieve for Hurricane Season,” Washington Post, 8 August 2004. 673 Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Plans Robotic Fix for Hubble,” Washington Post, 11 August 2004.)
vehicle manufacturing, satellite services, and remote sensingaffect economic activity, employee earnings, and the amount of employment in all major industry sectors. Based on data from 2002, the FAA had found that the commercial space-transportation industry had contributed US$95 billion to economic activity in the United States, including US$23.5 billion in employee earnings. The report also stated that demands for commercial space transportation and its products and services had resulted in the employment of nearly 600,000 people. In addition, the FAA had found that much of this economic impact was the result of increased demands for satellite services and ground-equipment manufacturing, which includes satellite-related hardware and consumer electronics used with satellite services.(FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation, “The Economic Impact of Commercial Space Transportation on the U.S. Economy: 2002 Results and Outlook for 2010” (study, Washington, DC, March 2004), 1–6.)
Scientists published the first direct evidence of one of the fundamental elements of Einstein’s theory of general relativity: an effect known as frame dragging. Frame draggingthe distortion of space and time around rotating celestial bodies, such as Earthoccurs because the gravity of those objects pulls space and time along with them. Ignazio Ciufolini of the University of Lecce in Italy and NASA scientist Erricos C. Pavlis of GSFC had measured distortions in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellites, LAGEOS and LAGEOS2, to obtain the evidence of frame dragging. They had discovered that, although irregularities in Earth’s surface account for some of the variation in the satellites’ orbits, the remainder of the variation is the effect of space-time distortions.(NASA, “As the World Turns, It Drags Space and Time,” news release 04-351, 21 October 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Theory of Relativity Evidence Found,” Washington Post, 22 October 2004.)
ESA and JAXA performed the first bidirectional, optical, interorbital communication, a form of communication in which satellites use lasers to transmit and receive commands and data over long distances. Laser-based communications have numerous advantages over communications using radio waves, including freedom from interference and higher data-transmission speeds and volumes. ESA and JAXA performed the communication between ESA’s Advanced Relay and Technology Mission satellite and JAXA’s Optical Inter-Orbit Communications Engineering Test Satellite. Previously, ESA and JAXA had conducted unidirectional, optical communications between their satellites, but this event was the first bidirectional form of this type of communication.(ESA, “Successful Optical Data Relay Link Between OICETS and Artemis,” http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMIJVVLWFE_index_0.html (accessed 27 July 2009); JAXA, “Toward the Era of Optical Communications in Space,” news release, 9 December 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/12/ 20051209_oicets_e.html (accessed 27 July 2009).)
Astronomers announced the detection of the most distant explosion ever observed, at approximately 12.6 billion light-years from Eartha gamma-ray burst (GRB) occurring after a massive star’s collapse and transformation to a black hole. The explosion, which astronomers had named GRB 050904, had occurred nearly 1.1 billion years after the Big Bang, which itself had happened 13.7 billion years ago. The astronomers used ground-based telescopes and NASA’s Swift satellite to detect GRB 050904’s emitted infrared light. Because the event had occurred so far away, the infrared light had just begun to reach Earth. However, the explosion was not the most distant object or event that astronomers had ever observed. Scientists had detected a quasar and a galaxy located 12.7 billion light-years from Earth.(Guy Gugliotta, “Satellite Detects Massive Explosion,” Washington Post, 13 September 2005; NASA, “Most Distant Explosion Detected, Smashes Previous Record,” news release 05-259, 12 September 2005.)
NASA announced it had accepted an invitation to join the National Invasive Species Council (NISC), a cabinet-level council established in 1999 to coordinate federal responses to harmful invasive species. As a member of the council, NASA would provide data acquired using Earth- observation spacecraft and predictive models to assist 12 other federal agencies’ efforts to combat invasive species nationwide. The council had extended the invitation because of NASA’s previous work monitoring invasive species: NASA had provided data, predictive models, and systems engineering to the USGS, information that had helped the USGS build predictive maps of invasive species in Utah’s Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. With NASA’s assistance, USGS had converted data from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer aboard NASA’s Terra satellite, as well as other data, to create predictive maps of plant species distribution. USGS had used the National Invasive Species Forecasting System to help improve the nation’s response to invasive species.(NASA, “NASA Research to Aid Federal Invasive Species Council Efforts,” news release 05-035, 2 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05036_Invasive_Species.html (accessed 19 August 2009). 739 Warren E. Leary, “Repair Costs for Hubble Are Vexing to Scientists,” New York Times, 3 February 2005; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Repair Could Hinge on Who Pays at NASA,” 3 February 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Options for Hubble Science, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 2 February 2005.)
NASA announced that scientists analyzing images from the its Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and from the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had discovered that Earth’s northern and southern auroras are not mirror images of each other, as previously thought. Images from the two spacecraft showed that auroras move and change, depending on the tilt of Earth’s magnetic field toward the Sun and on solar wind conditions. Knowing more about how auroras react to the solar wind could help scientists predict space weather. Timothy J. Stubbs of the Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics at NASA’s GSFC remarked that the analysis was the first to track the locations of the auroras using simultaneous observations, in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, of the auroras in their entirety.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Earth’s Auroras Are Not Mirror Images,” news release 05-089, 5 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05089_aurora_images.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched its Cartosat-1 Earth- mapping and remote-sensing satellite aboard a Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle-C6 (PSLV-C6) from the newly built launchpad at Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The 1.56-tonne (1,560-kilogram or 1.72-ton) Cartosat-1, the heaviest payload that the PSLV had ever ferried to space, carried two f/4.5 Panchromatic cameras, which together would enable the production of a stereoscopic image at a resolution of 2.5 meters (8.2 feet). ISRO planned to use the images to generate digital terrain-elevation maps, which would aid in assessing and monitoring land use, forest cover, and river flow. The launch vehicle also carried into orbit HAMSat, a 43-kilogram (0.043-tonne or 0.047-ton) microsatellite designed to relay amateur VHF radio communications.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619, 1 June 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx619.html (accessed 17 September 2009); K. S. Jayaraman, “India Launches Cartosat-1 Satellite,” Space News, 6 May 2005.)
NASA and NOAA announced their joint development of procedures to improve the accuracy of medium-range weather forecasts in the Northern Hemisphere. NASA and NOAA scientists had incorporated into weather prediction models the data from the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) on NASA’s Aqua satellite, improving the accuracy range of experimental six-day weather forecasts of the Northern Hemisphere by 6 hours. Observers called this improvement of 4 percent a significant development in weather forecasting. NASA had launched Aqua on 4 May 2002, enabling the AIRS to produce three-dimensional maps of air and surface temperature, cloud properties, and water vapor. Moreover, the instrument had a spectral resolution more than 100 times greater than that of other infrared sounders.(NASA, “NASA/NOAA Announce Major Weather Forecasting Advancement,” news release 05-231, 24 August 2005; NASA JPL, “AIRS: Overview,” http://airs.jpl.nasa.gov/overview/ overview/ (accessed 2 July 2009).)
NASA’s CloudSat meteorological satellite, which had launched on 28 April 2006, began sending early images, indicating that the satellite was observing all types of major cloud systems. CloudSat carried a millimeter wavelength radar called the Cloud-Profiling Radar, a type of radar never used before. Scientists had concluded that the new radar was penetrating through all but the heaviest rainfall. According to CloudSat Deputy Principal Investigator at JPL Deborah Vane, scientists were “no longer looking at clouds like images on a flat piece of paper, but instead [were] peering into clouds and seeing their layered complexity.” CloudSat’s radar had enabled scientists to observe for the first time clouds and snowstorms over the Antarctic, as well as providing new views of sloping, frontal clouds and thunderstorms over Africa, both as individual storms and as part of larger tropical storm systems.(NASA, “First Images from NASA’s CloudSat Have Scientists Sky High,” news release 06-234, 6 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_06234_CloudSat_First_Light.html (accessed 22 February 2010).)
A team of scientists, led by Eric J. Rignot of NASA’s JPL and Pannir Kanagaratnam of the University of Kansas Center for Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets, reported in the journal Science that, in the last 10 years, Greenland’s glaciers had doubled the rate at which they were losing ice into the Atlantic Ocean, from 96 cubic kilometers (23 cubic miles) per year in 1996, to 220 cubic kilometers (53 cubic miles) in 2005. Using interferometric synthetic-aperture radar data that Canadian Space Agency’s (CSA’s) Radarsat-1 and ESA’s Envisat Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar and Earth Remote Sensing Satellites 1 and 2 had collected between 2000 and 2005, the researchers calculated the volume of ice breaking off the edges of the glaciers and falling into the ocean. They attributed the change in glacial ice flow to an increase in global temperature, suggesting that the resulting melting water was making the undersides of the glaciers more slippery and accelerating the pace at which the glacial ice was sliding into the ocean. This study represented the most comprehensive data on glacial ice flow to date. Researchers noted that, based on this research, scientists might need to revise previous computer models predicting the rate of ocean-level increase.(Andrew Bridges, “Greenland Glaciers Dumping More Ice,” Washington Post, 17 February 2006; NASA “Greenland Ice-Loss Doubles in Past Decade, Raising Sea Levels Faster,” press release 06-066, 16 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06066_Greenland_ice_melting_ corrected.html (accessed 2 September 2010); see also Eric Rignot and Pannir Kanagaratnam, “Changes in the Velocity Structure of the Greenland Ice Sheet,” Science 311, no. 5763 (17 February 2006): 986−90.)
NASA announced that its Imager for Magnetopause-to-Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) satellite had ceased operations after a successful six-year mission. IMAGE had enabled researchers to study the global structure and dynamics of Earth’s inner magnetosphere (the area of space around Earth that is controlled by Earth’s magnetic field), as it responded to energy from solar winds. According to Barbara L. Giles, IMAGE Program Scientist at NASA Headquarters, “The IMAGE mission showed us space around the Earth is anything but empty, and that plasma clouds can be imaged and tracked just as we do from space for Earth’s surface weather.” The satellite had launched on 25 March 2000 and had provided data until December 2005, when its power supply subsystems had failed.(NASA, “Magnetospheres,” http://nasascience.nasa.gov/heliophysics/magnetosphere-ionosphere (accessed 7 December 2009); NASA, “NASA Magnetic Field Mission Ends,” news release 06-030, 20 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06030_IMAGE_quits.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
Scientists using data from NASA’s Swift satellite published research on a newly discovered type of gamma-ray burst (GRB), designated GRB 060614. GRBs, which result from the collapse of stars, are the most powerful explosions in the universe. NASA had launched Swift in November 2004 to study this phenomenon. The satellite had been the first to observe a curious new type of GRB, which exhibited properties of the two known types of GRBs—long- or short-duration GRBs. Long GRBs often last two seconds or longer, whereas short GRBs typically last less than two seconds. The 102-second duration of the newly observed GRB resembled long GRBs. However, the explosion lacked the telltale supernova that follows long GRBs and had the luminosity and radiation characteristic of short GRBs. Scientists remained uncertain whether the newly discovered GRB was a variation of the two known GRB types or an entirely different category of GRB.(Bing Zhang, “Astrophysics: A Burst of New Ideas,” Nature 444, no. 7122 (21 December 2006): 1010−1011, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v444/n7122/full/4441010a.html (DOI 1189735951; accessed 6 July 2010); NASA, “Swift: Mission Update,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/swift/ launch/index.html (accessed 6 July 2010).)
Scientists reported that the ozone outside of Earth’s polar regions had begun recovering in 1997. This finding provided evidentiary support for international efforts to limit ozone-depleting substances. Researchers led by Eun-Su Yang of the Georgia Institute of Technology had examined ozone data that NASA satellites and other instruments had collected over a 25-year period. They had discovered that ozone in Earth’s stratosphere—the layer of atmosphere from 11 to 50 kilometers (6 to 31 miles) above Earth’s surface—had declined in thickness from 1979 to 1997 and then had ceased depleting. The results confirmed that the 1987 Montreal Protocol—an international treaty banning the production of ozone-depleting substances—had helped stop the loss of ozone, especially in the part of the stratosphere 18 kilometers (11.2 miles) above the surface of Earth. That stratospheric region contains the greatest concentrations of the chemicals banned by the treaty. The researchers also found substantial improvement of ozone in the stratospheric region below 18 kilometers (11.2 miles); they hypothesized that this alteration could be the result of changes in atmospheric winds.(NASA, “NASA, NOAA Data Indicate Ozone Layer Is Recovering,” news release 06-300, 30 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06300_Ozone.html (accessed 15 March 2010); Eun-Su Yang et al.,)
The European Space Agency (ESA) and Galileo Industries S.A. of Brussels, a consortium of European space-hardware manufacturers, signed a €950 million (US$1.15 billion) contract for the construction of four Galileo navigation-system satellites, planned for launch in 2008. ESA had created Galileo as a civilian-controlled operation, designed to increase Europe’s strategic independence from the U.S. military’s Global Positioning System (GPS) and to provide a more precise navigational tool. The first experimental Galileo satellite, Giove-A, which ESA had launched on 28 December 2005, had transmitted the first Galileo navigational signals on 12 January 2006.(Agence France-Presse, “ESA, Galileo Industries Set Deal for First Four Galileo Satellites,” 20 January 2006; European Space Agency (ESA), “Contract for In-Orbit Validation of Galileo System,” press release 4-2006, 13 January 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_4_2006_p_EN.html (accessed 5 October 2009); ESA, “First Galileo Signals Transmitted by GIOVE-A,” press release 3-2006, 12 January 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ Pr_3_2006_ p_EN.html (accessed 5 October 2009); Peter B. de Selding, “Giove-A Permits Early Registration of Galileo Frequencies,” Space.com, 20 January 2006.)
Using data collected by NASA’s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) satellite, scientists announced the discovery of new evidence supporting the concept known as “inflation.” Proposed 25 years before WMAP, inflation theory attempted to explain the distribution of matter and energy in the Big Bang, the theoretical beginning of the universe. Inflation theory posits that, at the outset of the Big Bang, approximately 13.7 billion years ago, the universe underwent a rapid expansion. According to WMAP researcher David N. Spergel, “during this growth spurt, a tiny region, likely no larger than a marble, grew in a trillionth of a second to become larger than the visible universe.” The rapid inflationary expansion converted quantum fluctuations—short- lived bursts of energy at the subatomic level—into fluctuations of matter that ultimately enabled the formation of stars and galaxies. WMAP, first launched in 2001, was providing observations of the cosmic microwave background (CMB), the afterglow light produced when the universe was less than a million years old. The first WMAP data, released in 2003, had focused on the temperature variations of this light, providing an accurate age of the universe and insights into its geometry and composition. The new WMAP observations provided not only a more detailed temperature map, but also the first full-sky map of the polarization (the way light is changed by the environment through which it passes) of the CMB.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Glimpses Universe’s First Trillionth of a Second,” news release 06-097, 16 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06097_first_trillionth_WMAP.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Ker Than, “Astronomers Detect First Split-Second of the Universe,” Space.com, 16 March 2006, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/060316_wmap_results.html (accessed 12 July 2010); Dennis Overbye, “Astronomers Find the Earliest Signs Yet of a Violent Baby Universe,” New York Times, 17 March 2006.)
NASA’s DART (Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology) Mishap Investigation Board (MIB), chaired by NASA engineer Scott D. Croomes, released a summary of its findings and recommendations regarding the DART spacecraft’s failure to complete its critical technology mission objectives. The MIB did not make the complete text of the official report public because it contained information protected by U.S. International Traffic in Arms Regulations and Export Administration Regulations. NASA had designed DART, successfully launching it on April 2005, to rendezvous with MUBLCOM (Multiple Paths, Beyond-Line-of- Sight Communications) and to perform maneuvers in proximity to that satellite. However, less than 11 hours into the mission, DART had collided with MUBLCOM. The MIB concluded that an error in the spacecraft’s global-positioning receiver had prevented DART from accurately determining its distance and speed in relation to MUBLCOM. Because of the incorrect on-board navigational data regarding its velocity, DART had failed to take effective action to avoid a collision and had responded with repeated excessive thruster firings. Shortly after the collision, the craft had determined that its pressurized nitrogen gas maneuvering fuel was low, and had initiated preprogrammed departure and retirement maneuvers. The MIB also found that “a lack of training and experience led the [DART] design team to reject expert advice because of the perceived risks involved in implementing the recommendations.” This error had “led to inadequate navigation system design and testing.” The MIB reported that the DART team could have addressed many of DART’s shortcomings if the team had reviewed and applied the documented data and experience of previous missions.(NASA, “NASA Releases Accident Report Summary,” media advisory M06-081, 15 May 2006, http://www.nasa. gov//home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_M06081_dart_report.html (accessed 1 October 2009); NASA, “Overview of the DART Mishap Investigation Results,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/148072main_DART_mishap_overview.pdf (accessed 1 October 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA Releases Summary of DART Mission Mishap,” Space.com, 16 May 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060515_dart_mishap_summary.html (accessed 24 June 2010; Space Daily, “Lots of Little Errors Caused DART Spacecraft Mishap,” 17 May 2006.)
that climate warming was affecting Earth’s largest storehouse of ice and snow. Results of studies measuring the ice sheets covering Greenland and Antarctica indicated that Greenland’s ice sheets had experienced a net loss between 1992 and 2002—a reduction equivalent to 20 billion tons (18.14 tonnes or 18,143 kilograms) of water—along with a corresponding rise in sea level. The researchers had used a new satellite map showing the height of Greenland’s ice sheets, based on data that two ESA satellites had captured. They had compared it with NASA’s previous map of the edges of the ice sheets to determine the rate at which the thickness of the ice was diminishing. The survey documented for the first time the extensive thinning of the West Antarctic ice shelves, the increase in snowfall in the interior of Greenland, and the thinning at the edges of the ice shelves. Zwally remarked, “the contribution of ice sheets to recent sea-level rise during the decade studied was much smaller than expected, just 2 percent of the recent increase of nearly 3 millimeters a year.” NASA would continue to monitor the polar ice sheets using data from the Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite (ICESat), which had launched in 2003.(NASA, “NASA Survey Confirms Climate Warming Impact on Polar Ice Sheets,” news release 06-089, 8 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06089_polar_ice_sheets_melting.html (accessed 14 September 2009); see also H. Jay Zwally et al., “Mass Changes of the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets and Shelves and Contributions to Sea-level Rise: 1992–2002,” Journal of Glaciology 51, no. 175 (December 2005): 509−527.)
JAXA released the most accurate images yet taken of the Large Magellanic Clouds (LMC), pictures that had the potential to provide important new information about the formation of stars and galaxies. Collectively known as the Magellanic Clouds (MC), the LMC and the Small Magellanic Clouds (SMC) are galaxies that orbit the Milky Way. Because of the slow, active star formation in the two galaxies, astronomers regard them as excellent sites for studying the evolution of galaxies and stars. JAXA’s Akari satellite, also known as Astro-F, had captured multiple-wavelength images of the LMC as part of its mission to create images of the entire sky. The Akari images revealed stars forming within dust and gas clouds, numerous older stars outside of those clouds, and a distinct spindle-shaped cluster of stars in one area of the LMC. According to JAXA, the images of stars at different stages of their life cycles would help scientists study stellar evolution.(JAXA, “The Quest To Unravel the Mysteries of Galaxy Formation: Infrared Images of the Large Magellanic Cloud,” press release, 1 November 2006, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2006/11/20061101_akari_e.html (accessed 27 April 2010).)
France’s CNES launched the COROT (Convection, Rotation and planetary Transits) satellite on its mission to study stars and to discover exoplanets—planets outside of Earth’s solar system.
DARPA’s Orbital Express mission successfully executed a maneuver to demonstrate a satellite- servicing technique. Orbital Express consisted of a robotic servicer called ASTRO and a fuel depot and client satellite called NextSat. The mission aimed to demonstrate in-orbit refueling and servicing. The test marked the first time the two craft had maneuvered separately, flying apart at a distance of approximately 10 meters (33 feet). After the two craft had flown apart for 1 hour, ASTRO directed on-board guidance and navigation instruments to close in and to dock with NextSat, completing the mission’s objectives without input from ground controllers. The test was the third of nine increasingly complex procedures DARPA had planned for the mission.(Stephen Clark, “Orbital Express Duo Split Apart, Rejoin Autonomously,” Spaceflight Now, 7 May 2007.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a US$695 million contract to Boeing Satellite Systems of El Segundo, California, to design, develop, and fabricate two new Tracking and Data Relay Satellites—TDRS-K and TDRS-L. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would also integrate, test, ship, provide launch support, conduct in-orbit checkout operations, and provide sustaining engineering support for the satellites. In addition, Boeing would design, assemble, test, install, and verify modifications necessary to making the ground terminals at NASA’s White Sands Complex in New Mexico fully compatible with the new TDRS spacecraft design. The period of performance for the contract, which had a value of up to US$1.22 billion, could extend through April 2025 if NASA exercised its options. These included two additional spacecraft, TDRS-M and TDRS-N. The contract would extend the lifetime of the TDRS system, the primary source of voice, data, and telemetry for the Space Shuttle and ISS programs, and would provide those services for NASA’s Constellation Program.(NASA, “NASA Awards Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Contract,” news release C07-064, 20 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_C07064_TDRSS_Awards.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Clinton Parks, “Boeing Satellite Systems Wins $695 Million TDRS Contract,” Space.com, 21 December 2007.)
Orbital Express successfully captured the ASTRO servicing satellite, and its client spacecraft NextSat, after the two spacecraft had flown apart for nearly eight days. ASTRO’s primary sensor flight computer AC-2 had failed during a test on 11 May, causing the craft to lose its relative navigation. During the test, the pair of craft had undocked and separated as planned, moving apart to a distance of 10 meters (33 feet). After the failure of its AC-2 computer, ASTRO had behaved according to the protocol of its programmed fault-protection software, flying 120 meters (394 feet) away from NextSat to avoid inadvertently colliding with the satellite. However, thereafter, ASTRO had drifted approximately 6 kilometers (3.7 miles) away from NextSat, requiring ground observers’ intervention to help the two craft remate successfully. DARPA planned to conduct a technical review of ASTRO’s sensor- and navigation-performance lessons and to conduct an investigation into the cause of the AC-2’s failure. The technical review would assist DARPA in planning the remaining set of Orbital Express demonstration activities, scheduled for the following weeks.(U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, “Orbital Express Spacecraft Successfully Rendezvous, Remate,” news release, 21 May 2007, http://www.darpa.mil/news/2007/oe_remate.pdf (accessed 6 April 2010); Kelly Young, “Estranged Satellite Pair Reunited at Last,” New Scientist, 21 May 2007; Stephen Clark, “Computer Problem Interrupts Satellite Servicing Demo,” Spaceflight Now, 15 May 2007.)
NASA announced that it had tested the first nanotechnology-based electronic device to fly in space—the Nano ChemSensor Unit—demonstrating that the device known as a nanosensor could monitor trace gases inside a spacecraft. NASA had launched the device into orbit on 9 March 2007 as a secondary payload experiment on board the U.S. Naval Academy’s MidSTAR- 1 satellite. Scientists had conducted the sensor test on 24 May, successfully showing that the nanosensors could survive in space conditions, as well as in the extreme vibrations and gravity changes that occur during launch.(NASA, “NASA Nanotechnology Space Sensor Test Successful in Orbit,” news release 07-140, 18 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07140_Nanotech_Sensor_Test.html (accessed 13 April 2010); United Press International, “NASA Nanotechnology Tested in Orbit,” 19 June 2007.)
The Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) successfully launched four spacecraft aboard its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C7 (PSLV-C7), from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre at 9:24 a.m. (IST). The PSLV-C7 carried the 680-kilogram (1,500-pound) Cartosat-2, an Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellite; ISRO’s 550-kilogram (1,213-pound) SRE-1 (Space Capsule Recovery Experiment-1); the Indonesian microsatellite Lapan-Tubsat; and the 6-kilogram (13-pound) PehuenSat-1, an Argentinean nanosatellite. Cartosat-2, designed to provide scene-specific spot imagery, joined six IRS satellites already in service. ISRO planned to keep SRE-1 in orbit for 11 days before testing its reentry technology. While in orbit, the craft would conduct microgravity experiments. Lapan-Tubsat, the first Indonesian-built satellite, was a technology-demonstrator craft carrying two color cameras. The University of Comahue of Argentina, the Amateur
The People’s Republic of China ended its silence regarding a reported test of antisatellite technology, confirming that, on 11 January, China had fired a guided missile into space to destroy one of its own weather satellites. U.S. monitors had detected the test shot, and observers in the United States had protested, based on concerns that U.S. military satellites might be vulnerable to attack from China. China’s Foreign Ministry spokesperson Liu Jianchao stated that China had informed the United States and other governments about the classified test through diplomatic channels and had “emphasized that the use of anti-satellite technology” did not mean that China had “abandoned its opposition to the militarization of space.” The United States and Russia had tested antisatellite technology in the 1980s but had ceased those tests, partly because of concern that debris created during the tests could damage satellites in nearby orbits. Analysts stated that China’s test had created several hundred thousand debris fragments in a region containing as many as 125 satellites.
NASA and NOAA launched an Aerosonde Mk3, an unmanned aerial system (UAS), into Category 1 Hurricane Noel for the Aerosonde Hurricane Boundary Layer Mission, marking the first time they had successfully flown such an aircraft into the inner core of a hurricane. Launching from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility (WFF), the UAS flew into the eye wall of the hurricane at altitudes as low as 300 feet (91 meters). Winds reached 80 miles per hour (129 kilometers per hour) in the core of the storm. Flying for 7.5 hours inside the storm, the craft allowed scientists to make detailed real-time observations of areas known to be too dangerous for human-piloted aircraft. Combining mission data with data from recent NASA and NOAA field missions that had used conventional aircraft and satellites, scientists planned to develop a valuable new set of observations for air-sea interaction and tropical cyclone research.(Daily Times, “Wallops: Launch into Hurricane Friday Is Historic,” 6 November 2007.)
The ISRO SRE-1 space capsule reentered Earth’s atmosphere and splashed down in the Bay of Bengal at 9:47 a.m. (IST), successfully completing India’s first test of reusable vehicles and satellites. The SRE-1 had launched on 10 January. The Spacecraft Control Centre of ISRO’s Telemetry, Tracking, and Command Centre (ISTRAC) in Bangalore, India, guided the reentry of the craft, which splashed down at approximately 40 kilometers per hour (25 miles per hour). A U.S. Coast Guard ship recovered the craft and brought it to a container port, amid tight security. From that port, ISRO sent the SRE-1 to the launching station at the Sriharikota Space Centre, to determine how well the craft had carried out its microgravity experiments while in orbit.(Indo-Asian News Service, “India Brings Satellite Back to Earth,” 23 January 2007.)
NASA announced that images about the Japanese Hinode satellite, collected by NASA-funded telescopes, had provided new information about the Sun’s magnetic field and the origins of solar wind. Hinode’s high-resolution x-ray telescope had revealed a record number of x-ray jets—up to 240—in the corona at the Sun’s poles, contrary to previous research that had detected only a few such jets daily. Based on observation of these solar jets, a team led by solar physicist Jonathan W. Cirtain, of NASA’s MSFC, concluded that a magnetic reconnection occurring in the low solar corona was forming Alfvén waves and bursts of energized plasma in the x-ray jets. Alfvén waves form when convective motions and sound waves push magnetic fields around, or otherwise allow magnetic fields to change shape or to reconnect. Previously, researchers had been unable to observe Alfvén waves because of the limited resolution of available instruments. Yet, in their search to identify the forces responsible for the formation of solar winds, scientists had long considered Alfvén waves the leading candidate. Alfvén waves are capable of transferring energy from the Sun’s surface up through its atmosphere (corona) and into the solar wind. Cirtain explained that the team’s observations had revealed a clear relationship between magnetic reconnection and the formation of Alfvén waves in the x-ray jets, and that “the large number of jets, coupled with the high speeds of the outflowing plasma, lends further credence to the idea that x-ray jets are a driving force in the creation of the fast solar wind.” The team published its findings in the 7 December issue of the journal Science, a special issue focusing on Hinode.(NASA, “Spacecraft Reveals New Insights About the Origin of Solar Wind,” news release 07-264, 6 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_07264_Hinode_Waves.html (accessed 20 October 2010); Jonathan W. Cirtain et al., “Evidence for Alfvén Waves in Solar X-ray Jets,” Science 318, no. 5856 (7 December 2007): 1580−1582, http://www.sciencemag.org/content/318/5856/1580.abstract (DOI 10.1126/science.318.5856. 1571; accessed 1 December 2010).)
NASA released a study finding that, in 2005, the Arctic had replaced very little of the thick sea ice that it loses and replenishes annually. The findings complemented an earlier study showing a 14 percent decrease in perennial ice between 2004 and 2005. That study had provided the first reliable estimates of the annual variation of perennial ice replenishment at the end of summer. Ron Kwok of NASA’s JPL had used data, including data that NASA’s QuikSCAT satellite had collected, to study six annual cycles of Arctic perennial ice coverage. The results of the study indicated that only 4 percent of the thin, seasonal ice that had formed during the winter of 2005 had survived the summer, leaving perennial ice coverage in January 2006 14 percent smaller than in 2005. The 2005 replenishment was the smallest seen in any study to date. Kwok had also studied the 2005–2006 temperature records, comparing them with records dating back to 1958. The temperature records demonstrated a gradual warming trend during the first 30 years after 1958, with a rapid acceleration after the mid-1980s. Kwok remarked that “the record doesn’t show any hint of recovery from these trends,” adding that, “if the correlations between replenishment area and numbers of freezing and melting temperature days hold long term, it’s expected the perennial ice coverage will continue to decline.” Geophysical Research Letters published the study, “Near Zero Replenishment of the Arctic Multiyear Sea Ice Cover at the End of 2005 Summer,” in its 2 March 2007 issue.(NASA, “NASA Finds Arctic Replenished Very Little Thick Sea Ice in 2005,” news release 07-77, 3 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07077_Arctic_Sea_Ice.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Ron Kwok, “Near Zero Replenishment of the Arctic Multiyear Sear Ice Cover at the End of 2005 Summer,” Geophysical Research Letters 34 (2 March 2007): L05501−L05506, http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2007/2006GL028737. shtml (accessed 24 March 2010).)
NASA announced that, on 25 May 2007, its AIM satellite had captured the first occurrence that season of mysterious iridescent polar clouds. AIM had been the first satellite mission dedicated to the study of these unusual clouds, known as Polar Mesospheric Clouds (PMCs) when viewed from space and as noctilucent clouds (NLCs) when viewed from Earth. NLCs form in the Northern Hemisphere, beginning in mid-May and remaining through the end of August. They appear in the Southern Hemisphere between mid-November and March. AIM’s mission was to observe two complete PMC seasons over both poles, documenting for the first time the complete, complex life cycle of PMCs.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Captures First View of ‘Night-Shining’ Clouds,” news release 07-145, 28 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07145_AIM_First_Light.html (accessed 13 April 2010).)
A team of researchers comprising members from NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, the NSF, and the British Antarctic Survey unveiled a new map of Antarctica—the Landsat Image Mosaic of Antarctica—that scientists expected would revolutionize the study of the continent’s frozen landscape. The researchers pieced together more than 1,000 images, primarily selected from the Landsat observations of 1999−2001. The result was a realistic, nearly cloudless satellite view of Antarctica at a resolution 10 times greater than that of any previous image captured by Landsat 7. Robert A. Bindschadler, Chief Scientist of the Hydrospheric and Biospheric Sciences Laboratory at NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, explained that the map did not provide a mere snapshot of the continent, but rather a time-lapse historical record of how Antarctica had changed. The map would also enable scientists to observe changes unfold. Scientists anticipated that, among its uses, the map would help with planning scientific expeditions, because its higher resolution would enable researchers to interpret changes in land elevation in hard-to-access
NASA’s Swift satellite spotted the most distant GRB that scientists had ever seen. Swift’s Burst Alert Telescope first sighted the exploding star at 1:47 a.m. (EDT); less than 2 minutes later, Swift’s X-ray Telescope began to observe the GRB. A team of astronomers from around the globe examined light from the fading GRB in seven wavelengths, to determine its distance from Earth. The explosion’s shift toward the less energetic red end of the electromagnetic spectrum— a phenomenon known as a redshift—indicated its remoteness. Named GRB 080913, the explosion had occurred 12.8 billion light-years away from Earth, in the constellation Eridanus. Occurring when the universe was less than 825 million years old, GRB 080913 was 70 million light-years farther away from Earth than the most distant previously known GRB.(NASA, “NASA’s Swift Catches Farthest-Ever Gamma-Ray Burst,” news release 08-239, 19 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08239_Swift_GRB_discovery.html (26 July 2011).)
ESA’s first ATV, known as Jules Verne, undocked from the ISS at 23:29 (CEST). The ATV, which had launched on 9 March 2008, had carried 6 tonnes (6.6 tons or 13,227.74 pounds) of supplies to the ISS, including clothing, food, oxygen, propellants, water, and other dry cargo. The US$1.9 billion craft had remained docked at the ISS for six months, serving as an extra room. While there, the ATV had boosted the ISS’s orbit four times to counter residual atmospheric drag. Additionally, on 27 August 2008, the ATV had performed an avoidance maneuver to take the ISS out of the path of debris from an old satellite. Before Jules Verne’s departure, ISS crew members had loaded it with 2.5 tonnes (2,500 kilograms or 2.76 tons) of trash. ESA had scheduled the ATV to enter a controlled destructive reentry of Earth’s atmosphere on 29 September 2008.(ESA, “ESA’s ATV Successfully Undocks from International Space Station,” news release 36-2008, 5 September 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_36_2008_p_EN.html (accessed 26 July 2011); ESA, “Successful Re-entry Marks Bright Future for ATV,” news release 41-2008, 29 September 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_41_2008_ p_EN.html (accessed 26 July 2011); Tariq Malik, “European Cargo Ship Departs Space Station,” Space.com, 6 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5810-european-cargo-ship-departs-space-station.html (accessed 29 July 2011).)
For the first time since its 27 April 2008 launch, ESA’s satellite GIOVE-B transmitted navigation signals. GIOVE-B, a test craft for the Galileo global navigation system, successfully transmitted the common GPS-Galileo signal in a specific optimized waveform known as multiplexed binary offset carrier (MBOC), thus demonstrating that the GPS and Galileo systems could operate compatibly. Compared to GPS, Galileo would provide deeper penetration for indoor navigation and a greater level of accuracy in environments where multipath and interference occur. ESA officials would analyze the quality of the signal to ensure that it conformed to the system’s design specification, that it did not interfere with services on adjacent frequency bands, and that the environment did not affect the signal.(ESA, “GIOVE-B Transmitting Its First Signals,” press release no. 26-2008, 7 May 2008, http://www.esa.int/ esaCP/Pr_26_2008_p_EN.html (accessed 29 March 2011).)
Researchers led by Vassilis Angelopoulos of the University of California−Los Angeles (UCLA), announced in the journal Science that their team had demonstrated that magnetic reconnection in Earth’s magnetotail produces substorms that cause the aurora borealis to brighten and to move. Magnetic reconnection is a common phenomenon in which stretched magnetic lines suddenly snap into a new shape. Angelopoulos’s team made the discovery using data from a 26 February 2008 substorm. NASA’s Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms mission (THERMIS) had collected the data. THERMIS tracked the beginnings of substorms, using five satellites and 20 ground observatories to make synchronized observations every four days. Scientists were interested in studying the origins of substorms because they often occur in conjunction with strong space storms, which can interfere with human activities, such as radio communication and GPS signals.(NASA, “NASA Satellites Discover What Powers Northern Lights,” news release 08-185, 24 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08185_THEMIS.html (accessed 21 July 2011); see also Vassilis Angelopoulos et al., “Tail Reconnection Triggering Substorm Onset,” Science 321, no. 5891 (15 August 2008): 931−935.)
Israel’s state-owned Israel Space Industries (ISI) successfully launched a military reconnaissance satellite aboard an Indian Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle from the Sriharikota test site in India at 03:45 (UT). The 300-kilogram (661-pound) satellite TechSAT, or Polaris, carried a Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) developed by ISI’s subsidiary Elta Systems. The SAR had the capability of producing 1-meter (3-foot) resolution images at all times of day and in all weather conditions. News media reported that Israel’s Ministry of Defense, which had already assigned to the satellite a strategic-intelligence-gathering mission, would be the principal user of this technology—the first of its kind for Israel. The launch, repeatedly delayed because of weather and technical problems, marked the first satellite collaboration between Israel and India.(Barbara Opall-Rome, “India Launches Israeli Radar Satellite,” Space.com, 25 February 2008, http://www.space. com/news/080122-sn-israel-india.html (accessed 14 December 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 651.)
Virgin Galactic unveiled a unique new aircraft, the mothership for its commercial spacecraft, a very large composite plane named WhiteKnightTwo. Virgin Galactic would use WhiteKnightTwo to lift Virgin Galactic’s spacecraft, SpaceShipTwo, to approximately 48,000 feet (14,630.40 meters) above Earth. From that distance, the spacecraft could carry tourists to an altitude of 65 miles (104.61 kilometers). Virgin Galactic stated that WhiteKnightTwo also had other possible uses. Virgin Galactic could use the mothership to transport passengers from one destination on Earth to another, travelling at near orbital speeds. Furthermore, since the craft could provide short bursts of microgravity conditions, people would be able to use it to train for space travel. In addition, Virgin Galactic could use WhiteKnightTwo to launch satellites and uncrewed aerial vehicles and to carry large payloads.(Leonard David, “Virgin Galactic Unveils Space Liner Mothership,” Space.com, 28 July 2008, http://www.space. com/5665-virgin-galactic-unveils-space-liner-mothership.html (accessed 26 May 2011).)
Engineers completed thermal vacuum testing of the Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) at the Northrop Grumman facility in Redondo Beach, California. LCROSS was a NASA mission to search for water ice in a permanently shadowed crater in the Moon’s polar region. The satellite successfully completed the tests, which simulated the temperature variations in space, from highs of 230°F (110°C) to lows of -40°F (-40°C). After completing all final checkout tests, Northrop Grumman planned to deliver LCROSS to NASA’s KSC for integration on the Atlas V, as a secondary payload to Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO). The LCROSS mission was part of the Lunar Precursor Robotic Program at NASA’s MSFC.(NASA, “Moon-Bound NASA Spacecraft Passes Major Preflight Tests,” news release 08-156, 24 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08156_LCROSS.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
ISRO launched seven satellites, placing all seven in orbit within a period of 20 minutes, to mark ISRO’s first successful mission following the abrupt end of the Chandrayaan-1 project. The seven satellites, including ISRO’s Oceansat 2, launched from Sriharikota at 6:21 (UT), aboard India’s Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) C14, a 44.4-meter (145.67-foot) four-stage launch vehicle. The 960-kilogram (2,116-pound) Oceansat 2 carried three instruments. One of these was the Ocean Color Monitor (OCM), an eight-band multispectral camera, designed to capture data in the visible and near-infrared spectrum. The OCM would observe algae, fish populations, sediment distribution, and water pollution. Another instrument was the Ku-band Scatterometer, designed to operate at 13.52 gigahertz, covering a swath of 1,400 kilometers (870 miles). It would measure near-surface wind vectors over the ocean, for use in forecasting weather. The third instrument was the Italian-designed Radio Occultation Sounder for the Atmosphere (ROSA), which would observe distortions in GPS signals passing through the upper atmosphere. ROSA would build temperature and humidity profiles, determining the electron density in the ionosphere. The rocket also carried six nano satellites: two German Rubin satellites; Beesat, of the Technical University Berlin; UWE 2, of the University of Würzburg in Germany; ITU pSAT, of Istanbul Technical University in Turkey; and SwissCube 1, of the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in Switzerland.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 671; Associated Press, “ISRO Launched 7 Satellites in 20 Minutes,” 23 September 2009. 54)
ESA successfully launched its Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Explorer (GOCE), the first of seven planned ESA Earth Explorer satellites, aboard a Rockot/Breeze-KM launch vehicle from Plesetsk Cosmodrome at 14:21 (UT). ESA had designed GOCE to measure Earth’s gravitational field, so that ESA could use the data to create very high-resolution maps that would provide the baseline for measurements of ocean circulation and sea-level change. The 1,100-kilogram (2,425-pound) spacecraft was 5 meters long (16.4 feet long) by 1 meter wide (3.3 feet wide). GOCE had fixed solar arrays, designed to produce 1.3 kilowatts of power. To enable the craft to acquire the high-resolution measurements, ESA had designed GOCE to travel in a near-polar orbit at an altitude of only 263 kilometers (163.4 miles), rather than at the altitude of 600 to 900 kilometers (372.8 to 559.2 miles) typical for Earth-observation satellites. Mission managers remarked that, to their knowledge, nonmilitary satellites had never before operated in this orbit, an altitude that has significant atmospheric drag effects. To counteract the atmospheric drag, which could slow the spacecraft and potentially cause a premature end to the mission, GOCE had a unique arrowhead-like design that improved its aerodynamics. Additionally, ESA had designed the craft with a xenon-ion propulsion engine that would provide gentle thrust against the effects of the drag.
The Aerospace Industries Association (AIA) published a report titled “The Role of Space in Addressing America’s National Priorities,” which concluded that the United States could “no longer afford to treat its national security, civil, and commercial space capabilities separately.” Therefore, AIA recommended that President Barack H. Obama’s administration “develop a mechanism to look at our space capabilities as a single enterprise consistent with national goals and objectives.” The report suggested that, in developing its space initiatives, the United States confronts many issues that are not so clearly defined as the goals of its space programs— returning to the Moon or sending humans to Mars. Instead, the United States faces a host of complex challenges, such as protecting its satellites from hostile actions; easing export-control laws to facilitate the competitiveness of U.S. companies in the global marketplace for space hardware; and maintaining an experienced space industry workforce. To address these and related issues, the AIA report recommended that the Obama administration establish a national coordinating body to develop and execute a national space strategy and provide the funding necessary to continue critical multiyear space programs.(Aerospace Industries Association, “AIA Report Recommends Space Policies for New Administration,” news release 12 January 2009, http://www.aia-aerospace.org/newsroom/aia_news/aia_report_recommends_space_ policies_for_new_administration/ (accessed 7 February 2011); Andy Pasztor, “U.S. Faces New Space Race,” Wall Street Journal, 13 January 2009.)
NASA’s JPL announced that NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) had reached an agreement concerning priorities for outer-planet missions. NASA and ESA had merged separate concepts to create two missions—the Europa Jupiter System Mission and the Titan Saturn System Mission. NASA and ESA had decided to implement the Europa mission first, since it was the more technically feasible of the two missions. For the Europa mission, NASA and ESA would each provide one of two robotic orbiters. The probes would conduct studies of unprecedented detail of Jupiter and its moons Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. Launching in 2020 on separate vehicles, the probes would reach the Jupiter system in 2026, gathering data for at least three years. NASA’s probe would spend at least a year investigating Europa for signs of life and producing a global map, to prepare for a future mission that would land on Europa. Simultaneously, ESA’s probe would investigate the interior and the surface of Ganymede, to help understand the formation and evolution of the Jovian system. For the Titan Saturn System Mission, NASA would provide an orbiter, and ESA would provide a lander and a research balloon. The Titan mission, which required significant study and technological development to overcome several technical challenges, was not as far along in the planning stage. The agreement to pursue the missions was the culmination of years of debate, involving scientists, space professionals, and space enthusiasts, who had long found icy satellites like Europa intriguing. Scientists believed that satellites of this type—common in the outer solar system—have a potentially habitable environment.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA and ESA Prioritize Outer Planet Missions,” JPL news release 18 February 2009, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=2035 (accessed 7 March 2011); John Johnson Jr., “It’s All Systems Go for Europa,” Los Angeles Times, 19 February 2009.)
