China signed a contract with Teresat, Inc. of New York to launch its first satellite for an American firm. The contract called for a Teresat WestarVIS satellite to be launched into orbit aboard a Chinesemade rocket in the first half of 1988. (LA Times, Jan 29/87). During January: The American journal Aviation Week & Space Technology reported two serious Soviet setbacks in space that were not acknowledged by Soviet authorities. The magazine claimed that on January 29 the Soviets deliberately destroyed a Cosmos 1,813 military reconnaissance satellite they had launched on January 15, 1987. When the satellite malfunctioned upon reentry, its selfdestruction system was activated to prevent it from striking a populated area or from falling into western hands. Also according to this source, a Soviet SL12 Proton booster rocket failed during launching on January 30, 1987. Its fourth and uppermost stage failed to ignite and the debris from the rocket and communications satellite it carried fell out of orbit a day later. C Trib, Feb 7/87; NY Times, Feb 7/87)
NASA's last AtlasCentaur rocket was extensively damaged in a launch pad accident. A $4million fuel tank was destroyed when it was hit by a work platform. Four General Dynamics Space Division workers were treated for minor injuries. The launch of a military satellite, scheduled for liftoff aboard the AtlasCentaur rocket in the fall of 1987, was grounded indefinitely. (LA Times, July 14/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful than the American Space Shuttle. According to the Soviet Tass News Agency, the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central Asia, fired correctly but a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a "twostage multipurpose launch vehicle" capable of putting into orbit more than 100 tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could carry. (LA Times, May 17/87; C Trib, May 18/87; W Times, May 18/87)
NASA reported that an 18inch telescope, aboard a nineyearold orbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite, was monitoring the intense emissions of ultraviolet radiation from recently discovered supernova in the Large Magellanic Cloud, a neighbor galaxy of our own Milky Way. (NASA Release 8720) During February: NASA's latest space technology led to new discoveries about ancient civilizations. Using Earth Observation Satellite and Earth Resources Observation Systems imagery and the Landsat 5 satellite, which has an advanced multispectral sensor Thematic Mapper, NASA's Ames Research Center scientists made first attempts to study Maya civilization settlement patterns, environmental settings, and natural resource use. (NASA Release 8715)
A military satellite was lifted into orbit by a Titan 34D, the Nation's largest untended booster rocket. The launch from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base was the first successful launch of a Titan 34D rocket since February 1985. C Trib, Oct 28/87; LA Times, Oct 27/87; W Times, Oct 28/87)
NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) announced that a Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOESH) would be launched sometime after February 23, 1987. The satellite would provide cloud cover images and atmospheric temperature profiles, collect space environment data, and conduct an experiment for detecting emergency distress signals on the ground from a geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release
Robert Lovell and Fred Flatow, NASA search and rescue mission managers, were awarded the Yuri Gagarin medal by a space delegation from the Soviet Union. The awards were in recognition of their outstanding contribution to COSPAS/SARSAT, an international search and rescue program that uses satellites to locate people in distress. (NASA Release 8717)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
The 10ton Soviet satellite Cosmos1871 plunged harmlessly into the Pacific Ocean west of Hawaii. Soviet news agency Tass reported that the satellite, launched into a polar orbit on August 1, 1987, carried scientific equipment for space exploration. (B H&Sun, Aug 11/87; W Post, Aug 11/87; W Times, Aug 10/87)
NASA scientists announced that they have direct proof that exploding stars produce most of the 90odd chemical elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. These elements are part of the composition of planets and moons in the solar system and also are found in plants and animals on Earth. The findings came from observations and analysis of the gammaray emissions from radioactive cobalt produced in the Supernova 1987a explosion. The observations were conducted by the Solar Maximum Mission satellite, which had been studying the supernova since August 1987, and two balloonborne experiments flown in October and November from Alice Springs, Australia, as part of NASA's Fall Supernova Observations Campaign. (NASA Release 87185; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 17/87; P Inq, Dec 20/87; W Post, Dec 17/87)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
The Soviet Union launched a 20ton, selfcontained astrophysical observatory whose mission was to dock with the orbiting Mir Space Station. Viktor Blagov, the deputy mission director, said that the observatory would "open a new chapter" in human space flight and would become a key building block of a permanently habitable scientific space complex. When docked with the Mir Space Station, the 19footlong observatory, with a 13.6 foot diameter, would double the working space available and would create a sort of a "high rise" structure in space. (P Inq, Apr 1/87; W Times, Apr 1/87) h)0*0*0*During March: India failed to launch an augmented satellite launch vehicle, developed by the Indian Space Research Organization, when the vehicle malfunctioned and fell into the Indian Ocean. The launch from Sriharikota, India, was the first of four such planned launches, and was to have placed a stretched Rohini series scientific satellite into a low Earth orbit. (AvWk, Mar 30/87)
American and Soviet scientists agreed to joint effort in a wide range of space research. Their first joint project called for a launch of a Soviet "space zoo" satellite containing monkeys, rats, fish, and other living organisms. The 14day flight of this satellite was to provide Soviet and American scientists an opportunity to study the impact of weightlessness on the vital functions of animals. Some 26 other experiments were approved by working groups from the United States and the Soviet Union meeting for a weeklong scientific conference in Moscow. The joint project was the first to be conducted under the terms of a fiveyear space cooperation agreement signed on April 15, 1987, by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and U.S. Secretary of State George P. Shultz. (C Trib, Aug 11/87; LA Times, Aug 11/87; P Inq, Aug
According to a news release from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, NASA would manage a major international experiment on the use of satellites to study our environment. The experiment, part of the International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project, would employ over 100 scientists from more than 25 institutions to study the interaction between the land system and climate system. Over 25 ground measurement stations would be set up on the Konza Prairie in Kansas for the experiment. Six research planes and five Earthorbiting satellites would also be used. (NASA Release 8795)
NASA announced that it would launch a seventh Department of Defense Fleet Satellite Communications spacecraft from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida, no earlier than March 26, 1987. (NASA Release 8740)
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
NASA announced that in the next three years it would reduce Shuttle use by launching only 19 space flights. During the same time, it would launch 49 satellites on untended rockets. About 30 nonmilitary payloads originally planned to be carried into orbit by the Shuttle through 1995, will now be carried on untended rockets. NASA said that it would launch five science missions in 1989, some with international cooperation. Four of these missionsthe Magellan, to map Venus; the Hubble Space Telescope, in cooperation with the European Space Agency; and the ASTRO1 ultraviolet observatory and Galileo, in cooperation with Germany to make a comprehensive survey of Jupiter and its moonswould fly on the Shuttle. A fifth mission, the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) toh)"0*0*0*investigate cosmic background noise, was to launch on a Delta. Another scheduled Shuttle launch was the cooperative ESA/NASA Ulysses mission to observe the polar region of the Sun. From 1990 through 1995, NASA expected to accelerate deployment of other space science missions by fully utilizing expendable launch vehicles. For example, NASA anticipated Delta launches of a Roentgen Satellite in February 1990 and the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer in August 1991. (NASA Release 87158; LA Times, Oct 23/87; NY Times, Oct 23/87; W Times, Oct 23/87)
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)
General Dynamics Space system Division was awarded a contract by NASA and the Department of Commerce for expendable launch vehicle transportation services for meteorological spacecraft GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellites). The GOES spacecraft provided nearly continuous, highresolution visual and infrared imaging of weather systems over large areas of the Earth. (NASA Release 87156)
General Dynamic Corporation announced it had been awarded a contract to launch between one and three European satellites by the European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT). The 26nation European consortium selected General Dynamic's AtlasCentaur rockets for the launching of its satellites because of their cost and reliability. The agreement called for a launch of a EUTELSAT2 communications satellite in early 1990 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with options for two additional launches. (LA Times, Sept 26/87)
The Air Force announced that it would purchase 20 rockets from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for launching navigational satellites. Modeled on the existing rockets used by NASA, the Delta 2 medium rocket boosters would also be used commercially for launching communications satellites. (UPI, Jan 21/87; USA Today, Jan 22/87; NY Times, Jan 22/87; W Post, 22/87)
NASA announced that within hours of its discovery on February 24, 1987, NASA scientists were monitoring the Supernova 1987a with the Earthorbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) and the Solar Max Mission (SMM) spacecraft. Subsequently, as previously announced, NASA began monitoring the supernova with a network of ground antennas. The major supernova science program mounted by NASA and the intense, worldwide scientific interest in the supernova resulted from the fact that the discovery of Supernova 1987a provided scientists the opportunity to study not only the death of the star, but also the resultant rebirth of matter. The explosion, shock waves, and tremendous energies of Supernova 1987a were expected to provide direct evidence of the creation of heavy elements such as silicon and nickel. This marks the first time a supernova has been so close to the Earth and so bright since the 1604 supernova, when the telescope had not yet been discovered. The advantageous circumstances allowed scientists to study the supernova in all radiation wavelengths from nearly the moment of its explosion. Scientists expected that the array of instruments and the variety of NASA'sh)0*0*0*methods of monitoring the supernova would not only yield a new understanding of the chemistry and physics of the comet, but also potentially would provide a better understanding of the creation of The supernova program was expected to extend at least over the next 21/2 years. It would consist of multiple, continuous satellite observations, balloon and sounding rocket missions, aircraft flights, and radio observations. A special computer communications network would allow scientists from NASA, American and foreign universities, and other international scientific organizations to analyze the great amount of data generated by the In addition to the IUE and SMM spacecraft, managed and operated by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, a Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the Supernova 1987a. The IUE satellite provided data from ultraviolet observations and monitored the overall brightness of the supernova. It also was expected to help define exactly which star in the Large Magellanic Cloud exploded creating the supernova. The SMM satellite, a sunobserving instrument, was used to monitor the expected gamma ray emissions from the supernova. The Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the supernova for Xray emissions. NASA's Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), a C141 jet transport stationed in New Zealand, was also used in supernova observations to measure infrared energy. It was expected to be involved in a number of flights through the spring of 1989, using new and increasingly more sophisticated instruments. (NASA Release
The Transportation Department announced that it has granted approval for Martin Marietta Corporation to launch private communications satellites. Within hours of the announcement,h)0*0*0*Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization to launch two Intelsat6 satellites into orbit on Martin Marietta's Titan 3 rockets. Launchings were scheduled for 1989 and 1990. The agreement between two private companies to launch private communications satellites was the first instance of the implementation of the Reagan administration's space commercialization policy. (B Sun, Aug 11/87; W Times, Aug 11/87)
NASA launched a GOES7 weather satellite aboard a Delta rocket. The satellite was first placed into an elliptical orbit. Ground command was expected to arrest the satellite in a stationary orbit 22,400 miles above the Atlantic Ocean by firing a booster rocket. GOES7 joined the already orbiting GOES6 weather satellite to provide weather information and patterns in an areah)0*0*0*stretching from the eastern Atlantic to the midPacific Ocean. (B Sun, Feb 27/87; P Inq, Feb 27/87; W Times, Feb 27/87)
A Soviet rocket burned like a huge fireball as it reentered the Earth's atmosphere, lighting up the skies over a broad area of the West and Midwest. The rocket was used in the launching of Soviet communications satellite Raduga 21 on December 10, 1987. (C Trib, Dec 14/87; LA Times, Dec 14/87)
NASA selected five American principal investigators and five Italian scientists for a joint U.S.Italian Tethered Satellite System (TSS1) project. The TSS1, a deplorable subsatellite to be 'tethered' to the Space Shuttle via a retractable cable, was expected to lift aboard Columbia in the fall of 1990. (NASA Release
Soviet and Japanese scientists confirmed the first positive detection of Xrays from an exploding supernova. Soviet scientists, using Xray telescopes aboard the Soviet astrophysics module Kvant, made the detection on August 10, 1987. Japanese scientists, using smaller Xray instruments aboard their Ginga satellite, first observed the Xrays from the supernova on August 15, 1987. (W Post, Oct 4/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Chairman ofh)0*0*0*France's Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales JacquesLouis Lions signed a memorandum of understanding for a joint satellite oceanographic mission. The mission, called TOPEX/POSEIDON, which would chart ocean topography and observe ocean circulation on a global scale, was scheduled for a late 1991 launch. The TOPEX/POSEIDON mission would be part of the international World Climate Research Program. (NASA Release 8741)
The first anniversary of the Challenger disaster was remembered by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at a Challenger accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA's "commitment to move the Nation forward into a new era of space flight, one more stable, more reliable and safer than before." The Challenger crew, he added, "would be pleased to know that the NASA family and the Nation are carrying on in that spirit." President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, also saluted the seven "magnificent" Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87)
In an effort to reduce reliance on the U.S. Space Shuttle, NASA would rely more heavily on untended rockets, declared Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. He said that the primary goal was to "accelerate the deployment of the Nation's backlog of spacescience missions." NASA hoped to launch as many as five satellites and space probes by untended rockets by 1992. WSJ, May 18/87)
NASA announced that researchers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, had successfully tested a passenger vehicle satellite antenna. The newly developedh)0*0*0*antenna, designed to be mounted on the roof of a passenger vehicle, was expected to play an important role in NASA's mobile satellite experiment program. This program and other technologies were expected to lead eventually toward a mobile satellite communications system. The first success in the program was achieved when researchers, using an antenna on moving passenger vehicle, were able to track an inorbit satellite. (NASA Release
NASA announced that the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite would be launched on a Delta expendable launch vehicle in early 1989 rather than on the Space Shuttle in July 1988, as originally planned. The change in schedule was caused by the backlog of science payloads awaiting launch on the Space Shuttle as a result of the Challenger accident. Designed to study the "Big Bang," COBE would be launched into a 560statutemile, sunsynchronous orbit from Vandenburg Air Force Base in California. Because of the switch from the Shuttle to Delta, COBE would be reduced in weight from 10,500 pounds to 5,000 pounds and in size from 15 feet to 8 feet in diameter. Scaling down the spacecraft would also require that COBE be redesigned. (NASA Release 871)
NASA launched a PalapaB2P, an Indonesian communications satellite, on a Delta 182 from Launch Complex 17B, Eastern Space and Missile Center, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida. The satellite, intended to serve Indonesia's 13,677 islands, was placed into an elliptical orbit ranging from about 115 miles to 23,000 miles above the Earth. The PalapaB2P satellite, built by Hughes Aircraft Company, was to be used as a backup for a failing relay station already in orbit. (NY Times, Mar 21/87; B Sun, Mar 21/87; P Inq, Mar 21/87; NY Times, Mar 22/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
NASA selected General Electric Company, Space Systems Division, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and Harris Corporation, Government Communication Systems Division, Melbourne, Florida, to negotiate contracts for Phase I system design studies of the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) ground terminal. (NASA Release 8729)
A 15story high Ariane 3 rocket, carrying two communications satellites, was launched into an Earth orbit from Kourou, French Guiana. The successful launch marked the reentry of Western Europe into the commercial utilization of space after a 16month hiatus. LA Times, Sept 16/87; NY Times, Sept 16/87)
NASA announced that scientists and researchers from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, would conduct, on March 2326, the first in a series of tests related to development of the mobile satellite communications system. The test in Erie, Colorado, would be part of the Mobile Satellite Experiment program. (NASA Release 8738)
