Scientists studying data from the Magellan radar-mapping satellite around Venus concluded that Venus is not a twin of the Earth. Magellan has produced images 10 times sharper than any seen before of more than 97 percent of the planet's surface. Magellan's images show Venus to be as geologically active as the Earth, but whereas Earth's crust is shaped by continuous recycling, Venus' surface appears to evolve by building crust vertically as lava flows out of volcanoes or meteorite craters. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
NASA said the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite Conference '92, co-sponsored by NASA, Comsat Laboratories, Harris Corporation, and MITRE Corporation, scheduled for November 18-19 in Washington, D. C., would focus on pioneering communications technology developments to provide better service, lower cost, greater convenience, and improved reliability. The conference marked another of NASA's partnerships with industry in developing advanced technologies that create new markets and commercial applications. (NASA Release 92-206)
NASA's Tethered Satellite System Investigative Board released its report, presenting the panel's finding on problems which had prevented full deployment of the satellite during Space Shuttle mission STS-46. The report identified causes for four of five problems that occurred and made recommendations for actions to prevent similar occurrences in the future. (NASA Release 92-196; UPI, Nov 6/92)
Weather satellite officials at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration expressed concern about the heightened danger from hurricanes because of delays in modernizing the U.S. weather satellite system. The delays forced the use of antiquated and poorly positioned satellites that raised the risk of forecasting errors. Two hurricanes, Andrew and Iniki, showed the limits of the antiquated satellites. Replacement satellites were stymied by a series of technical failures, delaying the first launching from 1989 to 1994. In the meantime, the United States was borrowing surplus satellites from Europe. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Nov 15/92)
NASA announced that satellite measurements showed that the ozone hole over Antarctica was now the largest on record, being almost three times as large as the area of the United States. Measurements by the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer instrument aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite last Wednesday showed that the south polar territory under the depleted ozone area extended to about 8.9 million square miles, about 15 percent larger than the ozone hole measured in 1991. (NASA Relese 92-159; W Post, Sept 30/92; Time, Oct 5/92; AP, Sept 30/92; UPI, Sept 30/92)
NASA announced that astronomers using a new NASA satellite had detected a powerful, exotic object 2 billion light-years beyond the Milky Way Galaxy. The radiation source was observed by the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Spacecraft launched on June 7. (NASA Release 92-169)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA officials had scheduled an unprecedented spacewalk by three Shuttle astronauts to rescue a satellite. The agency decided to undertake the third and final three-man rescue attempt upon the request of Shuttle Endeavour's commander. (WSJ, May 13/92; USA Today, May 13/92; W Post, May 13/92; W Times, May 13/92; NY Times, May 13/92; LA Times, May 13/92; P Inq, May 13/92; AP, May 13/92; UPI, May 13/92)
NASA announced that the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) had resumed full science operations following the resolution of problems with the satellite's solar array drive. Flight controllers had turned off the satellite's instruments June 2 after observing that the solar array drive was not operating smoothly and that the solar array itself was not properly tracking the sun. UARS was launched September 12, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Discovery. It was designed to study the chemistry, dynamics, and energetics of the Earth's upper atmosphere, focusing particularly on ozone depletion. UARS was the first major satellite element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-117)
NASA's funding remained flat as Congressional appropriations committees completed work on NASA's 1993 budget. Although some high-profile programs such as the Space Station and a  constellation of environmental monitoring satellites emerged virtually unscathed, newer or less visible efforts suffered setbacks. An advanced series of tracking satellites, robotic missions to the moon, and a new generation of launchers were among the efforts put on hold for at least the next year. Spending on space research and technology was reduced by 13 percent. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
An Atlas 1 rocket tumbled out of control after one of two Centaur second-stage engines failed to ignite, destroying a cable television satellite in a $150 million failure for General Dynamics' commercial-launch business. It was the second catastrophic failure in seven flights for General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego, California, which was trying to overtake the European consortium Arianespace for control of the world's commercial launch market. Lost with the Atlas 1 was a  Galaxy 1R cable television relay station, a satellite built by Hughes Aircraft Company. (UPI, Aug 22/92; WSJ, Aug 24/92; LA Times, Aug 23/92)
The U.S. Defense Department announced that it had no further plans to use the Space Shuttle for major payloads after launch of a classified military satellite during a Shuttle flight in November. The Pentagon, which once had planned to be a prime user of the Space Shuttles, was to be relegated to a minor and occasional Shuttle customer. In place of the Shuttles, the Pentagon planned to rely much more heavily on expendable launch vehicles for military payloads. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA officials scheduled the next Shuttle launch for July 31, three weeks after the Shuttle Columbia returned from its record-breaking two-week mission. Atlantis' seven-day flight was slated to troll an Italian satellite on a 12-mile-long tether and to launch Eureca, a European satellite, on a one-year mission. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 26/92; W Times, Jul 27/92; NY Times, Jul 28/92)
Shuttle Columbia astronauts carried out experiments designed to ease reentry from space. They pedalled furiously on a stationary bicycle and floated in a depressurization sack to draw blood from the top of the body to the legs. They also grabbed an aluminum panel with the Shuttle's arm and swung it about the spacecraft's cargo bay to test a Canadian robotic vision system. A day earlier, they deployed the Lageos II geodynamics satellite. (NY Times, (Oct 25/92; W Post, Oct 25/92; P Inq Oct 24/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
Reuters reported that two telecommunications satellites worth more than 350 million dollars were placed into oribt for Japan and the Arab League after launch from a European base in French Guiana. (Reuters, Feb 26/92)
Albert Parry, 92, a professor emeritus of Russian civilization and language and founder and former chairman of the department of Russian studies at Colgate University, died in Los Angeles. In 1954, Dr. Parry warned in an article that the Soviets would soon be able to launch a space satellite, and in another article published in July 1957, he predicted the launching would occur on September 17. The Soviet Union launched Sputnik I on October 4. (NY Times, May 8/92)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
According to a released congressional study, a three billion dollar U.S. space agency satellite programme to monitor the environment would be useless without massive new computer technology. The study said that NASA would need the new technology to store and distribute the information its satellite programme gathers. The Earth Observing System (EOS) was designed to take continuous measurements of ozone depletion, global warming, polar ice melt, depletion of rainforests, and other environmental developments. But the study also indicated that the data collected by EOS would require vast new ways to store information and make available to a wide range of researchers. (Reuters, Feb 25/92; AP, Feb 25/92)
NASA managers set January 13 as the launch date for the first Shuttle mission of 1993. Designated STS-54, the flight was to have two primary objectives--deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-F) and astronomical observations of invisible x-ray sources within the Milky Way Galaxy with the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer. The crew was to be comprised of John Casper, commander, Don McMonagle, pilot, and three mission specialists, Mario Runco, Greg Harbaugh, and Susan Helms. (NASA Release N92-110; C Trib, Dec 23/92; AP, Dec 22/92; UPI, Dec 22/92)
The Shuttle Atlantis landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending a mission that deployed a European scientific satellite but that failed to complete an experiment with a tethered satellite. (USA Today, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 8/92; P Inq, Aug 9/92; W Post, Aug 9/92; The Sun, Aug 9/92; W Times, Aug 9/92; NY Times, Aug 9/92; CSM, Aug 10/92; WSJ, Aug 10/92)
NASA announced that its Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite had detected an object emitting extreme ultraviolet radiation located outside the Milky Way galaxy through interstellar dust and gas, once thought to block this source of radiation. EUVE also had detected a new source of extreme ultraviolet radiation coming from the corona of a star much like the sun located about 16 light-years from Earth. The EUVE satellite, now six weeks into a survey of the entire sky in extreme ultraviolet wavelengths, was intended to provide astronomers with their first detailed maps in multiple extreme ultraviolet energy bands. (NASA Release 92-138)
Shuttle Atlantis' astronauts unreeled a tethered satellite in a risky electrical experiment never before tried in space, but the effort immediately ran into difficulties. Four hours and about a dozen tries were needed to free the satellite from the Shuttle. Then the unreeling tether line jammed twice, and the satellite ended the day about 850 feet instead of twelve and one-half miles from the Shuttle. NASA added an eighth day to Atlantis' mission because of problems with the Eureca and tethered satellite experiments. (W Post, Aug 5/92; The Sun, Aug 5/92; LA Times, Aug 5/92; WSJ, Aug 5/92; USA Today, Aug 5/92; NY Times, Aug 5/92; P Inq, Aug 5/92; W Times, Aug 5/92; APn, Aug 5/92; UPI, Aug 5/92; C Trib, Aug 5/92; Time Magazine, Aug 17/92)
A 15-story unmanned Atlas rocket was launched into space with a military communications satellite intended to link the White House with U.S. forces around the world during nuclear attacks or other crisis. In peacetime, the $130 million satellite was to serve as a switchboard for the Defense Department personnel. (B Sun, Feb 11/92; AP, Feb 11/92)
The North American Air Defense Command said that it was tracking nearly 7,000 spacecraft and pieces of debris bigger than a square yard that were in orbit around the Earth. The proliferating use of satellites has resulted in a ring of several hundred of the spacecraft around the Earth's equator, most in low-Earth to mid-Earth orbit. As a result, concerns were being raised about possible interference from one satellite to another and about the need for adequate distance between satellites in view of plans for more satellites in the 1990s. (W Times, Jul 19/92)
A Russian space capsule containing a cut-glass replica of the Statue of Liberty and greetings from Russian President Boris N. Yelstin splashed down in the Pacific Ocean off Washington state. The Resource 500 satellite was billed as Russia's first private space launch and honored the 500th anniversary of the voyage of Columbus in 1492. (The Sun, Nov 23/92; P Inq, Nov 23/92 and Nov 25/92; W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; USA Today, Nov 23/92; UPI, Nov 23/92; LA Times, Nov 25/92)
Astronauts on the Shuttle Atlantis cleared a snag in the tether cord linking the Italian-built satellite to the Shuttle and safely reeled the satellite back into the Shuttle's cargo bay, averting the need for an emergency space walk. The satellite flew above Atlantis for 24 hours, never going higher than 850 feet on the tether, far short of the twelve-and-one-half mile target. Even though the experiment fell short of its goal of generating electricity with a tethered satellite, the exercise showed that tethered vehicles probably can be reliably controlled in space. (LA Times, Aug 6/92; P Inq, Aug 6/92; W Post, Aug 6/92; W Times, Aug 6/92; NY Times, Aug 6/92, Aug 9/92; USA Today, Aug 6/92; WSJ, Aug 6/92; APn, Aug 6/92, Aug 8/92; UPI, Aug 6/92, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 6/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
NASA announced that more than 200 scientists from 13 countries were participating in a science expedition, spearheaded by NASA, to investigate newly discovered concentrations of harmfull ozone over large regions of southern Africa and Brazil. The ozone pollution was recently uncovered by satellite analysis. (NASA Release 92-155)
U.S. scientists solved a 20-year-old mystery about the nature of Geminga, one of the brightest emitters of high-energy gamma rays in the sky. Using data from two different spacecraft, scientists now know that the power plant in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern of Columbia University and Dr. Stephen Holt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center reported that they had observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga using data from the German/American Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT). These observations firmly establish Geminga as a close cousin of the Crab and Vela nebulae, which also have pulsating neutron stars at their cores. The rotating neutron star produces focused beams of radiation much like the periodic flashing or pulsating lighthouse beacon. (NASA Release 92-69)
A task group looking into issues concerning future satellite rescue and repair said NASA should continue to perform such missions but only when they "produce genuine benefits to U. S. interests in view of the inherent risks to the Shuttle and its crew." The task force also recommended that NASA should charge higher fees for the risky and expensive work of retrieving commercial satellites with the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 92-197; The Sun, Nov 7/92; AP, Nov. 6/92; W Post, Nov 7/92; Space News, Nov 16-22/92)
NASA announced that a Board of Investigation had been formed to assess the problem of the fouled tether that prevented the successful release of the Tethered Satellite System during Shuttle Atlantis' just-completed flight. NASA officials said that any decision about reflight of the $380 million tether system would depend in part on a quick determination of what went wrong and how much it would cost to solve the problem. NASA set an August 28 deadline for the board to report its findings. (NASA Release 92-129; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92, Aug 17/92)
Chinese engineers blamed a faulty ignition circuit for botching the launch of an Australian communications satellite. Investigators checking the Long March-2E rocket that failed to blast off on March 22 found a fault in the ignition system circuits that led to an emergency engine shutdown. According to Chinese officials, the launch will be attempted again later during the year. (P Inq, Mar 30/92)
NASA set a December 2d launch date for the year's eighth and last Shuttle flight, a military mission, designated STS-53. Five astronauts, all military men, will release a classified satellite, thought to be a Lacrosse radar-imaging satellite from the Shuttle Discovery. Crew members are David Walker, commander; Robert Cabana, co-pilot; James Voss, Guion Bluford, and Michael Richard Clifford. (W Times, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
NASA set an October 22 launch date for Space Shuttle Columbia's satellite-delivery and research mission. The six-member crew was to release the Itlian Space Agency's Laser Geodynamic Satellite, or Lageos, then conduct spacecraft tracking experiments and mechanical and medical tests. (NASA Release N92-88; LA Times, Oct 7/92)
A U.S.-French satellite roared into orbit aboard a European Ariane 4 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. The $706 million Topex-Poseidon satellite carried a $30 million altimeter designed for NASA by Johns Hopkins University scientists to measure ocean topography to within 1.2 inches or less from 830 miles in space. During the next three to five years, scientists hoped to use the altimeter to make a comprehensive map of ocean currents, aiding the study of how they pump heat from the tropics to the poles. NASA said the research could eventually improve long-range climate forecasts and predict large-scale weather patterns, such as the El Nino warming trend in the eastern Pacific Ocean, and help in understanding the impact of green-house gases on climate. Also in the payload were a small South Korean communications satellite and a French technological satellite. (The Sun, Aug 10/92; USA Today, Aug 11/92; AP, Aug 10/92; LA Times, Aug 13/92)
NASA launched a rocket carrying a Japanese scientific satellite called "Geotail" that will swing by the moon and be flung by lunar gravity nearly a million miles into space. The satellite was intended to explore the effect of the solar wind on the tail of the magnetosphere, a comet- shaped region surrounding Earth and containing radiation belts. The $160 million, four-year mission was a joint project between NASA and the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science. (W Post, Jul 25/92; APn, Jul 24/92)
The Delta launch team at Cape Canavaral Air Force Station reported that the McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company group was gearing up for two launches in the next 25 days. The first, a mission to deploy an Indonesian communications satellite, and the second, a mission during which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer would be hurled into orbit, was scheduled for launch June 4, 1992. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
The Associated Press reported that Japanese space officials recently had travelled to Russia for two weeks of talks and tours of previously off-limits space facilities. During the trip, the officials discussed a space cooperation treaty that would grant Japan access to Russian manned spaceflight data for use in medical research and to remote-sensing technology for use on satellites. (AP, Aug 9/92)
A satellite launched to study oceans and global climate was maneuvered into position Monday for months of tests before beginning its mission. The Topex-Poseidon, the first major space mission conducted jointed by the United States and France, was launched August 10 from French Guiana. (AP, Sept 21/92)
Scientists from the United States and Australia announced completion of the Southern Ocean Waves Experiment. From June 6 through June 18, the scientists observed how ocean winds and waves affect one another off the coast of Australia. Project findings were expected to improve the reliability of ocean wave forecasting and to improve measurements from the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite. This satellite, a joint U.S./French venture, was scheduled for launch in August 1992 and was to study ocean topography and circulation, leading to better understanding of the oceans' role in global climate change. (NASA Release 92-109)
Congressional investigators said that the space agency's Earth-observing satellite program was flawed because of risky plans for gathering information from the satellites. (NY Times, Feb 27/92)
The Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science announced in Washington, D.C., that scientists from the United States, Japan, Russia, and Europe were mounting a coordinated, multi-mission effort in solar-terrestrial science during the next four years. The effort began with the launch of Japan's Geotail satellite in July 1992 and was to continue with the 1993 launch of NASA's WIND spacecraft and missions from Russia in 1993 and Europe in 1995. NASA's Interplanetary Monitoring Platform and Japan's AKEBONO spacecraft were to provide important data as well. (NASA Release 92-193)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
India launched a research satellite into orbit using local technology in what officials called an important milestone in the country's ambitious space program. The 750-foot rocket blasted off from an island off the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. Nine minutes into the flight, the $7 million rocket propelled a research satellite into orbit 280 miles above earth. The flight was pronounced a total success. (W Times, May 21/92)
A team of scientists using two satellites in orbit announced they had solved the puzzle of a mysterious source of high-energy gamma rays, located in the direction of the constellation Gemini and known as Geminga. According to a report in the journal Nature, the gamma rays were flowing from a spinning 300,000 year old  neutron star or pulsar. Scientists do not understand why Geminga favors gamma rays over other wavelengths. Two other bright sources of gamma rays already known to be pulsars, buried within the Crab and Vela supernova remnants, emit radiation in x-ray, radio, and optical wavelenghts. (W Post, May 26/92; P Inq, May 22/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed at Cape Canaveral, ending a 10-day journey during which the crew released a laser-reflecting satellite and tested a robotic eye. (NY Times, Nov 2/92; P Inq, Nov 2/92; W Post, Nov 2/92; W Times, Nov 2/92; AP, Nov 2/92; UPI, Nov 2/92; The Sun, Nov 2/92)
Astronaut Kathryn Thornton became the second woman to walk in space when she floated into the open cargo bay of Endeavour and tested techniques for building a Space Station. Thornton was accompanied by Thomas Akers, one of three men who had captured a wayward satellite the day before. (C Trib, May 15/92)
NASA scientists were baffled by a brownish discoloration, representing some kind of growth, on the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) satellite. The LDEF was retrieved by a Space Shuttle in January 1990. Whatever the growth, it had formed in space and despite high ultraviolet radiation and the corrosive power of atomic oxygen. (W Times, Sept 9/92)
NASA scientists began a new attempt to open the stuck antenna on the Galileo space probe by rotating the satellite to point the antenna toward the sun. They hoped the warmth would expand the metal fittings and release the stuck mechanism. If this maneuver fails, they were prepared to turn the antenna's electric motors on and off at rapid intervals to "hammer" the jammed mechanism in a final bid to overpower what they believed were stuck pins and pop open the antenna. (W Post, Dec 26/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; The Sun, Dec 26/92, Dec 30/92, Dec 31/92; USA Today, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; UPI, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; P Inq, Dec 31/92; W Times, Dec 31/92)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
Three American astronauts took a historic spacewalk using their gloved hands to make a last-ditch rescue of a wayward satellite. It was the first time so many astronsuts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands. All previous salvage operations had mainly used some type of high-technology hardware. At 230 miles above the Earth, the three astronauts of the Space Shuttle Endeavour grabbed the wobbling 4.5 ton, 17 foot satellite and stopped its rotation, holding it motionless for about a minute while sloshing fuel settled down. (NY Times, May 14/92; B Sun, May 14/92; USA Today, May 14/92; W Times, May 14/92; W Post, May 14/92; P Inq, May 14/92; AP, May 14/92)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported last week that Hermes, the ESA's spaceplane program, already scaled back to an unmanned demonstrator, would have to be downgraded to a technology development program because of budgetary constraints. On another project, ESA's scientists were evaluating data from a test of inter-satellite communications conducted by Eureca, ESA's large, retrievable satellite. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
The countdown for the December 2 launch of the Shuttle Discovery began, the 10th and allegedly the last Shuttle mission dedicated to U. S. Department of Defense work. Aside from releasing a secret military satellite, astronauts were to conduct a number of military experiments, such as testing a Shuttle laser system and releasing of metal balls to be tracked by space debris researchers. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 28/92 and Nov 29/92; W Times, Nov 28/92; Nov 29/92, and Nov 30/92; CSM, Nov 27/92; P Inq, Nov 30/92; USA Today, Nov 30/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
The Pentagon, bowing to congressional pressure, revealed the existence of the super-secret agency that buys and operates the nation's spy satellites and its other airborne espionage systems. The National Reconnaissance Office's mission is to ensure that the United States has the technology and spaceborne and airborne assets needed to acquire intelligence worldwide, according to the Pentagon. (P Inq, Sept 1992; C Trib, Sept 18/92)
Associated Press reported that a military satellite capable of guiding warplanes, ships and tanks with an accuracy of 50 feet or better circled Earth Monday after a ride on a Delta rocket. (AP, Feb 24/92)
The countdown began for the launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia on a research and satellite delivery mission. (NY Times, Oct 20/92; UPI, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, said it had won a $13.5 million contract from Brazil's civilian space agency to launch a remote-sensing and date-relay satellite in 1992. (W Times, Sept 2/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Astronauts had to wait more than two hours before debarking because of toxic fumes from a leaking thruster. The main mission, the deployment of a secret Pentagon satellite, occurred soon after launch in what was the last Shuttle mission for the U. S. military. The day before, the Shuttle had to swerve in orbit to avoid a four-inch piece of space junk, the third such incident in two years. (The Sun, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; UPI, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; NY Times, Dec 10/92; WSJ, Dec 10/92; P Inq, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 13/92; USA Today, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 11/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off on a secret mission for the Pentagon, carrying what analysts surmised was a spy satellite to monitor troop movements in Eastern Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. Several days of technology and medical experiments were also scheduled for the week-long mission. The launch was delayed 85 minutes while the sun melted a thick coat of ice from its fuel tank. This eighth and last Shuttle mission of 1992, the 52d for NASA's program, concluded NASA's busiest year since 1985, when nine Shuttles flew. It was also the last to carry a classified military cargo.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed an agreement with International Technology Underwriters (INTEC) to explore ways that the insurance industry can assist in financing human and robotic satellite rescue and repair missions. INTEC would also look at options for providing incentives in the construction of commercial satellites to make them easier to rescue and repair if problems develop. "We need to consider new approaches to salvaging satellites that will encourage the further commercialization of space, such as robotic rescues in high and lower orbits," Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-99)
During the Soviet period, Ukrainian scientists and industry were an integral part of the Soviet space program, which employed over 250,000 people. When the breakup of the Soviet Union fragmented its space program, Ukraine gained one of the world's most advanced aerospace industries, capable of producing everything from rockets to satellites. However, without the Soviet Union to pour money into space exploration, Ukraine was looking for new ways to keep its aerospace industry working. (LA Times, Apr 24/92)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
NASA ground controllers said they had reactivated two key scientific instruments aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and hoped to revive the other eight in coming weeks following two major glitches with the motors that drive the solar power array. The problems had sent the satellite into a quiescent safe mode June 1 and 2. The Microwave Limb Sounder, which helps measure ozone depletion, and the Cryogenic Limb Array Etalon Spectrometer, which has a limited lifetime, were restored to service.  (Space News, Jul 7/92)
NASA scientists at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco said that a NASA satellite had provided overwhelming evidence that industrial pollutants were responsible for the hole in Earth's protective ozone layer above Antarctica. The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, launched in 1991, also had produced evidence that the Antarctic ozone hole may act as a "sink," sucking in and destroying ozone from much of the Southern Hemisphere. (AP, Dec 10/92)
NASA announced that it expected to launch a radar satellite in August that would sweep above the Bering Sea off Alaska and beam down a detailed radar snapshot giving the location of every fishing vessel. The project was intended to be the beginning of a foolproof system to police the world's fishing grounds against pirate trawlers. NASA expected to spend $650,000 as its share of a program to transfer its sophisticated technology to commercial uses. (P Inq, Jul 9/92)
Lockheed Corporation formed a joint venture with Russian aerospace firm Krunichev Enterprise to market the Russian-built Proton rocket for commercial satellite launches, a move that could help make Russia one of the dominant forces in the world-wide commercial launch business. Lockheed was to be responsible for marketing the Russian rocket to Western customers and would provide payload integration. Rockets were to be launched from the Baikonur site in Kazakhstan. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; LA Times, Dec 29/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
NASA launched the first of its new, low-cost spacecraft, the Solar, Anomalous, and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer satellite (SAMPEX) aboard a four-stage Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The spacecraft was designed to study anomalous cosmic rays in an effort to improve understanding of the evolution of the sun, the solar system, and the Milky Way Galaxy. (NASA Release 29-102; The Sun, Jul 4/92; P Inq, Jul 4/92; W Times, Jul 4/92; W Post, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Company to build a data and information system for the Earth Orbiting System. The program, which would collect environmental data from satellites, was expected to cost NASA about $3 billion. (NASA Release C92-16; NY Times, Sept 30/92; WSJ, Sept 30/92; W Post, Sept 30/92; AvWk, Oct 5/92)
The Argentine weather service reported that the outer edge of the "ozone hole" has shifted for the first time to a populated island in Tierra del Fuego off the southern tip of the South American mainland. Data from NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer on the Nimbus 7 satellite confirmed that the area of depleted ozone extended for some 8.9 million square miles over the south polar region, an increase of about 15 percent from 1991, the largest ozone hole ever observed. (W Times, Oct 11/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; P Inq, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92)
The countdown began for the Space Shuttle Atlantis on a mission to test an Italian satellite linked to the Shuttle by 12 miles of electricity-generating cord. NASA officials said there was a 90 percent chance of acceptable launching conditions on July 31. (NY Times, Jul 29/92, Jul 31/92; CSM, Jul 29/92; UPI, Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; AP Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; The Sun, Jul 31/92; W Post, Jul 31/92; LA Times, Jul 31/92; P Inq, Jul 31/92)
The Air Force test-fired a new booster for the Titan IV rocket and said it was the second successful test since an explosion ruined a firing last year. The new booster would allow Titan IVs, which launch U. S. spy satellites, to carry heavier payloads. (AP Oct 16/92)
NASA launched a small satellite on a $19 million mission to help the Pentagon develop its strategic missile detection system. A Scout rocket lifted the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration-1 satellite into orbit. The satellite carried miniaturized cameras and sensors designed to detect an attack by medium-and short-range missiles. (W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; AP, Nov 21/92; P Inq, Nov 22/92)
The first meetings of the National Space Policy Assessment Task Group took place on October 1 and 2 in Washington, D. C. The group was considering policy changes to military, civilian, and commercial space efforts and ways to make them work more in tandem now that the Cold War had ended. At the meetings, government officials urged the group's members to privatize the weather satellite system, to call for revamping commercial space rules, and to decry missile proliferation. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
According to some scientists, recent observations by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) have shown exceptionally high levels of chlorine monoxide (CIO) at high northern latitudes, raising the possibility of enhanced ozone depletion over populated areas of the Earth. UARS's Microwave Limb Sounder (MLS) detected elevated levels of CIO over large areas of Europe and Asia north of about 50 degrees latitude. Dr. Joe Waters of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that high CIO levels were observed over Scandinavia and Northern Eurasia, including the cities of London, Moscow and Amsterdam. These CIO levels, approximately 1 part billion by volume, are comparable to levels observed within the Antarctic ozone hole. Waters said that sustained levels of CIO could lead to significant ozone destruction over the northern hemisphere and perhaps even lead to an ozone hole over the Arctic. (NASA Release 92-18)
The Eureca satellite that failed to enter proper orbit after being released from the Shuttle Atlantis responded to commands to boost itself into a higher orbit. The reusable satellite held experiments using shrimp eggs, seeds, crystals, bacteria spores, solar monitors, cosmic dust catchers, and a telescope. Its was slated to remain in orbit for several months before being retrieved and returned to Earth for study. (P Inq, Aug 7/92; LA Times, Aug 7/92; NY Times, Aug 7/92; W Times, Aug 7/92; USA Today, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 7/92; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
It was reported that Martin Marietta Corporation had abandoned the six-year venture into the commercial satellite launching business that it started in the summer of 1986, seven months after the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. The original plan was to build 20 Titan rockets for commercial launches. That number was reduced to 12, and the company charged $90 million to fourth-quarter earnings in 1988 for a reserve to help finance the launch venture. Martin eventually built only four commercial Titans, the last of which was scheduled for launch in September 1992, carrying a payload to map the surface of Mars and look for possible landing sites on that planet. (B Sun, May 8/92)
Loral Corporation became the first U.S. aerospace company to win government approval to buy advanced space technology from the former Soviet Union. The Defense Department authorized Loral's space systems division in Palo Alto, California, to import tiny electric satellite thrusters that are used to position satellites in space. Loral's Russian partners are Fakel Enterprises of Kaliningrad, which makes the so-called Hall thrusters, and the Research Institute of Applied Mechanics and Electrodynamics of Moscow. (WSJ, Apr 2/92)
Results from a recently completed U.S. multi-agency aircraft study indicated that the ozone shield of the Northern Hemisphere was increasingly vulnerable to depletion by man-made chemicals. Dr. James Anderson of Harvard University, the study's Mission scientist, and 80 other scientists of the second Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE II) used two NASA aircraft to examine the ozone-related chemistry and air motions of the lower stratosphere from early October 1991 through late March 1992. The extensive measurements, combined with satellite and meteorological data, provide the first detailed picture of the factors that drive changes in the Arctic ozone layer from fall, through winter, and into spring. (NASA Release 92-55; NASA Release 92-56)
During Space Shuttle Columbia's upcoming mission, scientists planned to test a theory which may have applications ranging from hurricane dynamics to superconductivity . The Lambda-Point Experiment was to study the strange behavior of helium at its critical temperature of 2.177 degrees above absolute zero. Other experiments were to study the effects of gravity on metals and semiconductors as they solidify on Earth and in orbit and vibrations in the Shuttle as the vibrations affect the other two experiments. The Shuttle crew was also scheduled to deploy the Laser Geodynamics Satellite, an Italian satellite to study the movements of the Earth's crust and other phenomena. (NASA Releases 92-175 and 92-176; LA Times, Oct 2/92)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
NASA announced that it had selected 31 experiments from the public and private sectors for inclusion in the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Program. Scheduled for launch in early 1993, this national communications facility was to operate as an orbiting testbed for the next generation of commercial communications satellites. A two-year experiment, the ACTS program was designed to offer a unique opportunity for commercial, governmental, and academic organizations to experiment with and to validate new communications satellite technologies. (NASA Release 92-134)
A spokesman for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization said a 23,000--pound rocket motor clamped to the marrooned Intelsat 6 satellite by the crew of Space Shuttle Endeavour fired fllawlwssly at 1:25 p.m. EDT while both were orbiting about 230 miles over Africa. The 122-nation consortium, based in Washington, owns and operates the $150-million satellite. (LA Times, May 15/92)
Two astronauts at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that they had evidence of planets or other bodies around eight stars they had studied in a star-forming region of the Milky Way Galaxy, 450 light years from Earth. The scientists, Drs. Kenneth Marsh and Michael J. Mahoney, said their discovery of unseen companions around low-mass stars in the Taurus-Auriga region of the Milky Way had resulted from the study of data from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in 1983 and data from ground-based observations acquired mostly from 1981-1983. (NASA Release 92-87)
Scientists reported that the eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines last June sent massive amounts of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, which in turn was contributing to erosion of Earth's protective ozone layer and to warming in the tropics. While the depletion could amount to 5 or 10 percent, the researchers expected the effect to be temporary.   Detailed observations of the ozone layer were being made by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite launched last year. (UPI, Aug 27/92)
Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis released the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, but it encountered immediate problems with its steering system and remained in too low an orbit. Engineers at the European Space Agency's control center in Darmstadt, Germany, struggled to understand the problem, hoping to boost the satellite into its proper orbit 320 miles above the Earth within  a day or two. (W Times, Aug 3/92; WSJ, Aug 3/92; The Sun, Aug 3/92; LA Times, Aug 3/92; NY Times, Aug 3/92; P Inq, Aug 3/92; APn, Aug 3/92; UPI, Aug 3/92)
Russia faced a new dispute over the famed Baikonur spaceport in Kazakhstan. Russian President Boris Yeltsin revealed that Kazakhstan had prevented the liftoff of a satellite at the Baikonur cosmodrome. "Kazakhstan was playing games. It wanted to show that there has to be a Russian-Kazakhstan agreement on Baikonur," Mr. Yeltsin said. Mr. Yeltsin said he would propose to Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev either joint financing of the famed spaceport, Russian purchase of the property, or a form of joint venture with the Kazakhstan republic. (W Times, Apr 30/92)
NASA reported that the TOPEX/POSEIDON satellite would be launched aboard an Ariane IV launch vehicle from the Guiana Space Center (CSG) in Kourou, French Guiana. The satellite, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, was to study ocean circulation and its role in regulating the global climate. (NASA Note N92-50)
Space Shuttle Endeavour touched down on Rogers Dry Lake, California, ending a historic, nine-day maiden voyage. The public's response to Endeavour's mission, which featured an unprecedented three-astronaut capture of a stranded communications satellite, was the most enthusiastic since the Shuttle program resumed in 1988, NASA officials said. A crowd of an estimated 125,000 turned out in the desert to watch the landing. (LA Times, May 17/92; P Inq, May 17/92; AP, May 16/92; W Times, May 17/92; B Sun, May 16/92; W Post, May 17/92)
NASA and several other U.S. and Canadian agencies announced selection of an international team of more than 200 scientists to study the relationships between northern forests and the atmosphere and how those relationships affect the global environment. The study, the Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study, was intended to conduct ground-based, air-borne, and satellite measurements in a four-year, $30-million program. NASA's component is part of Mission to Planet Earth, the agency's long-term effort to study the Earth as a global environmental system. (NASA Release 92-215)
Milton B. Ames Jr., 78, an aeronautical engineer who was mission director for the Pegasus satellite launches using Saturn rockets and who was a recepient of numerous NASA awards, died of heart failure at Mount Vernon Hospital, Alexandria, Virginia. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
The Tethered Satellite System Investigative Board presented an interim report on the cause of the failure of the tethered satellite experiment on the Shuttle Atlantis' mission earlier this month. Preliminary findings indicated that a bolt one-quarter of an inch in diameter got in the way of a reel of cord, causing it to jam. The bolt was part of a structural change made earlier this year to strengthen the tether system's attach points to withstand better the rigors of launch and landing, NASA said. Italian scientists hope to retry the experiment. A complete report was expected in about a month. (AP, Aug 29/92; API, Aug 28/92; UPI, Aug 28/92; NY Times, Aug 30/92; C Trib, Aug 30/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
NASA announced that a group of Alaskans had started a three-year experiment in the use of a small emergency radio transmitter known as a Personal Locator Beacon to communicate with a 10-year-old search and rescue satellite system that up to now had been used primarily for aircraft and ship emergencies. The locator beacon has the potential to save lives when used in emergencies in remote areas. The experiment was being carried out by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U. S. Air Force, and the U. S. Coast Guard. (NASA Release 92-115)
It was reported that in the upcoming flight of the Shuttle Endeavour, NASA would try for the first time to revitalize a crippled satellite while in orbit. During a four-day procedure, Endeavour's crew were to rendezvous with Intelsat 6, pull the satellite into the spaceship's cargo bay and mate it to a new solid rocket motor. Intelsat 6 then would be released and its rocket motor fired to send it into a 22,300 mile-hight orbit. The hope was that then, for the next 14 years, Intelsat 6 would relay trans-Atlantic telephone calls and television shows from Europe to North America and South America. (W Times, Apr 18/92)
NASA began assembling Space Shuttle Discovery for launch in December on a mission to deploy a secret Department of Defense satellite. Liftoff was scheduled for December 2, nearly a month behind schedule because of problems with a faulty steering engine. (P Inq, Nov 4/92; W Times, Nov 4/92)
In another article in Nature, scientists from NASA and Hughes STX Corporation in Lanham, Maryland, said that the uppermost part of Earth's protective ozone layer was about seven percent thinner in 1989 than it was in 1980. The conclusions were based on observations taken by the Nimbus-7 environmental research satellite launched in 1978 and refined by a calibration device on a Space Shuttle mission in October 1989. The new observations were consistent with previous projections of ozone depletion. (UPI Jul 9/92;
The United States and France recently announced plans to increase civil space program cooperation. The two countries said they were also prepared to invite Russia to join with them in new cooperative endeavors. The focus of this new cooperation was the monitoring of the global environment and bringing France and Russia in with the United States as major partners on the Mission to Planet Earth program. The August 10 launch of the U. S./French Topex-Poseidon ocean survey satellite laid the foundation for the U.S/French initiative. (AvWk, Aug 17/92)
Thomson Consumer Electronics, owned by the French electronics concern Thomson SA, said that it would help launch a satellite-to-home television broadcasting system through a venture with the Hughes Electronics division of General Motors Corporation. The system, called DirecTV, would be capable of providing more than 100 channels to 18-in-diameter outdoor satellite dishes. (B Sun, Feb 5/92)
A TRW unit was served with a whistle-blower lawsuit alleging that the firm made fraudulent claims for payments on government satellite contracts. The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, alleged that TRW's Space and Technology group in Redondo California Beach, used improper design standards for the spy, communications, and scientific satellites, then billed the government for the cost of correcting the errors. (LA Times, Mar 26/92)
A research arm of John Hopkins University was chosen to design a spacecraft intended to take the first close-up look at the kind of asteroid that could one day collide with Earth. Hopkin's Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, was given a $450,000 contract by NASA for preliminary work on the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous satellite, called NEAR. If NASA and Congress approved costruction of the compact $150 million spacecraft, it could begin orbiting an asteroid called "nereus" in January 2000. (B Sun, May 9/92)
It was reported that a Delta 2 rocket carrying a $65 million military navigation satellite was launched into space. The Global Positioning System "Navstar" satellite is the 12th in a globe-spanning network of such spacecraft that allow military forces on the ground, at sea and in the air to determine their location and altitude to within 53 feet anywhere in the world. After a flawless boost into space, the satellite was released into a preliminary orbit about 25 minutes after liftoff. On-board rockets were scheduled to fire later to put the satellite in a circular 12-hour orbit 12,5000 miles up. (UPI, Feb 23/92; B Sun, Feb 24/92; W Times, Feb 24/92; USA Today, Feb 24/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
NASA said that it was collaborating with Cray Research, Inc., of Eagan, Minnesota, to conduct joint research and development activities using the company's Cray T3D supercomputer. NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory expected to use the T3D system for applications that require high-power computers, such as turning planetary data from spacecraft into three-dimensional animations and analyzing Earth satellite data. (NASA Release 92-205; NY Times, Nov 17/92; WSJ, Nov 17/92; W Post, Nov 17/92)
NASA started a countdown toward test-firing the Space Shuttle Endeavour's main engines. Endeavour's three main engines were to be fired for 22 seconds. If all goes well, launch teams would begin preparing the Shuttle for a satellite rescue mission in early May 1992. (W Times, Apr 4/92; AP, Apr 4/92; UPI, Apr 6/92)
