NASA scientists published research challenging prominent theories about the growth of the gravitational field at Earth’s equator, a phenomenon that began in 1998. Researchers had suggested that atmospheric change, or the melting of glaciers and polar ice, had caused a geographic shift in the planet’s gravitational field, with a decline in upper latitudes and a corresponding increase in lower latitudes. However, NASA scientists Christopher M. Cox and Benjamin F. Chao discovered that the quantity, rate, and timing of atmospheric change and ice melt did not correspond to the magnitude and rate of gravitational shift. Based on their analysis of data that 10 satellites had acquired between 1979 and 2002, Cox and Chao found a more probable explanation of this phenomenon. The data suggested that the oceans had been rapidly transporting substantial quantities of water and ice from higher to lower latitudes, thereby shifting Earth’s mass and causing a corresponding alteration in the planet’s gravitational field from the higher to the lower latitudes. The scientists noted, however, that additional data and analysis were necessary to determine whether their interpretation of the data was correct.(NASA, “Satellites Reveal a Mystery of Large Change in Earth’s Gravity Field,” news release 02-147, 1 August 2002; Christopher M. Cox and Benjamin F. Chao, “Detection of Large-Scale Mass Redistribution in the Terrestrial System Since 1998,” Science 297, no. 5582 (2 August 2002): 831–833.)
In an article in the journal Nature, astronomers at ESA reported that they had found evidence indicating which specific type of stellar object produces gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), the universe’s most energetic phenomena. Prevailing hypotheses had posited that, either GRBs originate from the merger of two neutron stars, or they form from the collapse of one massive star, but researchers had discovered no conclusive proof to support either of these ideas. However, based on their analysis of the speed, temperature, and chemical elements of a GRB that had occurred on 11 December 2001, ESA astronomers found evidence supporting the latter hypothesis. The research team examined two sequential observations of the GRB, both taken by ESA satellites: the BeppoSAX satellite had made the first observation, and, nearly 11 hours later, the XMM-Newton satellite had made the second. The team had found large quantities of argon, calcium, magnesium, silicon, and sulphur, moving at 1/10th the speed of light. These findings supported the idea that a supernova explosion from a single massive star produces GRBs. If the merger of two neutron stars had produced the burst, astronomers would have expected the stars to produce large amounts of elements other than those observed―particularly iron―and to emit those elements at a slower velocity.(J. N. Reeves et al., “The Signature of Supernova Ejecta in the X-ray Afterglow of the γ-ray Burst 011211,” Nature 416, no. 6880 (4 April 2002): 512–515; ESA, “ESA’s X-ray Space Telescope Proves Supernovae Can Cause Mysterious Gamma-Ray Bursts,” ESA news release 22-2002, 4 April 2002.)
U.S. Navy officials announced that the Navy had been using NASA satellite data in combat, the first time the military had done so. The officials stated that the Navy had used unclassified NASA data to help guide ships and planes engaged in combat operations in Afghanistan. Major media reported that members of Congress had voiced mixed reactions to the announcement, with some members expressing their concern that the cooperation between NASA and the military would overstep the bounds of NASA’s civilian charter.(Houston Chronicle, “NASA Satellite Guides Navy Warplanes, Ships,” 12 April 2002.)
NASA successfully launched the third replenishment spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleet. The TDRS-J satellite launched aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:42 p.m. (EST). TDRS satellites comprised a communication-signal relay system providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing-Built NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release, 4 December 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021204s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
Two spacecraft comprising the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) launched on a single rocket vehicle from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome. The five-year mission’s main purpose was to map variations in Earth’s gravity field, using the GPS and a microwave ranging system to measure the distance between the mission’s two identical satellites―nicknamed Tom and Jerry. The two craft were to monitor each other while flying in a polar orbit 500 kilometers (311 miles) above Earth. This mission, to study measurements of gravity variations, could help scientists understand better the changes in the transport of mass around the planet. Changes in mass, such as ocean currents, ground-water storage, and mass within Earth, can affect climate and other aspects of the planet’s environment. The GRACE mission was a partnership between NASA and the Deutsche Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (the German Aerospace Center).(University of Texas Center for Space Research, “GRACE: Mission Overview,” http://www.csr.utexas.edu/grace/overview.html (accessed 11 August 2002); Warren E. Leary, “New Satellites To Map Gravity More Precisely,” New York Times, 19 March 2002.)
ESA reported research indicating that the universe might be older than scientists had previously estimated and that a common method of estimating the age of celestial bodies might be incorrect. A group of scientists had analyzed the XMM-Newton satellite’s x-ray observations of the distant but exceptionally luminous quasar APM 08279+5255 and found that the quasar contains three times more iron than the Sun. Because exploding stars release iron, which increases across the universe over time, the scientists had expected APM 08279+5255 to have less iron than Earth’s relatively older solar system. The scientists noted that the surprising quantity of iron in the distant quasar could be the result of an unknown phenomenon that produces iron very efficiently. However, they suggested that the more likely explanation for the finding was that the conventional method of measuring the age of celestial objects by estimating the objects’ redshifta property of the light emitted by such objectswas flawed.(ESA, “Is the Universe Older Than Expected?” ESA news release, 10 July 2002; Günther Hasinger, Norbert Schartel, and Stefanie Komossa, “Discovery of an Ionized Fe K Edge in the z=3.91 Broad Absorption Line Quasar APM 08279+5255 with XMM-Newton,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 573, no. 2 (10 July 2002): L77–L80.)
NASA successfully launched the second spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleetcalled the TDRS-9 or TDRS-Ifrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:59 p.m. (UT). The TDRS satellite system provided tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. In addition, the TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 581, 1 April 2002, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx581.html (accessed 31 October 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
The Earth observation satellite Aqua launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite Aqua was a component of the Earth Observing System (EOS), which also included the Terra satellite launched in December 1999. Aqua’s primary purpose was to acquire information about the effects of climate change on the water cycle. The satellite would also collect data to help scientists examine biological systems dependent upon water and improve long-term forecasts of weather and climate. Brazil, Japan, and the United States planned for their joint project Aqua to continue for six years.(NASA JPL, “Aqua Launched To Study Earth’s Water Cycle,” news release, 4 May 2002; Warren E. Leary, “NASA To View Interaction of Earth’s Water and Climate,” New York Times, 30 April 2002.)
The American Association for the Advancement of Science named Senior Research Scientist David Halpern of NASA’s JPL a fellow, in recognition of his work on air-sea interactions in tropical oceans and on satellite measurements of ocean-surface quantities.(NASA JPL, “JPL Researcher Honored by Largest Scientific Discovery,” news release, 28 February 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of Boeing’s Delta 2 expendable launch vehicle to launch medium-class payloads between 2006 and 2009. The selection was part of an existing NASA launch-services contract with Boeing that had a maximum value of US$1.2 billion, if NASA exercised all options. The procurement contract called for 12 definite launches, with options for an additional seven. Boeing’s rockets would launch both NASA’s payloads and NASA- sponsored payloads.(NASA, “NASA Picks Delta II To Launch Medium-Class Payloads,” news release C02-ii, 6 December 2002. 335 NASA, “STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 31 October 2008).)
The International Astronomical Union announced that astronomers had found 11 new moons around the planet Jupiter. The discovery increased the total number of known satellites around Jupiter to 39, more than any other planet in the solar system. Using the Canada-France-Hawaii telescope, astronomers from Cambridge University and the University of Hawaii had first detected the moons in December 2001. At 1- to 2-miles (1.6- to 3.2-kilometers) across, the newly discovered moons were far smaller than some of Jupiter’s other moons, which are thousands of miles (or kilometers) wide. In addition, the astronomers had discovered that the satellites have irregular orbits and, unlike the planet’s largest moons, spin in the opposite direction of Jupiter. The moons’ irregular orbits around Jupiter indicate that they may have originally orbited the Sun.(Usha Lee McFarling, “11 New Moons of Jupiter Found,” Los Angeles Times, 17 May 2002; NASA JPL, “Astronomers Discover 11 More Small Moons of Jupiter,” news release, 17 May 2002.)
Astronomer Riccardo Giacconi received the Nobel Prize in physics for research on cosmic x-ray radiation. Giacconi’s projects had included NASA-funded research leading to his discovery of cosmic x-ray sources. A professor at Johns Hopkins University, Giacconi had been the first scientist to discover a source of x-rays outside Earth’s solar system and the first to prove that the universe contained background radiation of x-ray light. In addition, many astronomers believed that x-ray sources Giacconi had discovered contained black holes. Giacconi had also been responsible for the conception and design of the first x-ray satellite and the first operating x-ray telescope. Together with Harvey Tananbaum, he had proposed the design of the x-ray telescope that eventually became NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory. Moreover, Giacconi had been the first Director of the Hubble Space Telescope Science Institute and the Principal Investigator for the Chandra Ultra-Deep Survey, which had obtained the deepest x-ray exposures with a millionth-second observation.(NASA, “Nobel Physics in Physics Awarded to Astronomer for NASA-Funded Research,” news release 02-197, 8 October 2002; Nobel Foundation, “Advanced Information on the Nobel Prize in Physics 2002,” news release, 8 October 2002, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2002/phyadv02.pdf (accessed 17 October 2008). 306 Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Military Influence To Grow at NASA,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 October 2002.)
The United States launched the fifth Milstar satellite on a Titan 4B-Centaur from Cape Canaveral, Florida, completing a fleet of communications satellites designed to provide government leaders and military troops with jam-resistant transmission nearly anywhere on Earth.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002 Activities (Washington, DC, 2002), p. 114, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2002.pdf (accessed 29 July 2002); Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002: The Year in Review,” NASA, http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2002/yearinrev/ 02YearReview.html (accessed 23 July 2002).)
NASA and the USGS announced a partnership to acquire data from the Earth Observing-1 (EO- 1) satellite and to provide that data to the private sector for applications such as land-cover analysis, ecosystem monitoring, and petroleum prospecting. NASA and the USGS made the announcement one year after the launch of EO-1, a year in which the spacecraft’s nine breakthrough instruments had all successfully satisfied test objectives. The instruments included Earth-viewing technologies, such as a hyperspectral imager that could view Earth’s surface with unprecedented spectral discrimination and an Advanced Land Imager that could provide better views of Earth than NASA’s Landsat, at a lower cost. Under the terms of the agreement, NASA would maintain command and control of the EO-1, and the USGS would take orders for spacecraft data at prices set to cover the nearly US$5 million annual cost of operating the satellite, processing data, and interacting with customers.(NASA, “Technology Mission Accomplished, NASA Goes for More,” news release 02-12, 18 January 2002.)
Boeing successfully launched its first Delta 4 rocket, which the U.S. Air Force would use in 2003 in the EELV program. The purpose of the EELV program was to develop reliable and cost- efficient launch capabilities for commercial and government payloads. The launch occurred at 5:39 p.m. (EST) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Delta 4, a “Medium+” configuration of Boeing’s five-member Delta 4 family of rockets, deployed Eutelsat’s (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s) commercial telecommunications satellite W5 into geosynchronous transfer orbit. During the next scheduled Delta 4 launch―the first mission for the EELV program―the Air Force planned to use a Delta 4 Medium rocket to deploy the DSCS III A3 satellite for the Defense Satellite Communication System.(The Boeing Company, “Successful First Launch for Boeing Delta IV,” news release, 20 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021120s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U. S. Air Force, “U.S. Air Force Fact Sheet: Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle,” http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/space/factsheets/eelv.htm (accessed 28 October 2008).)
ESA launched the environmental satellite Envisat on an Ariane-5 rocket. The primary mission of Envisat, designed to provide continuous monitoring of Earth’s atmosphere, ice caps, and land, was to measure sea color in coastal areas and in oceans. To perform this monitoring, Envisat was equipped with 10 optical and radar instruments, including the Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Medium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer. ESA planned for the satellite to orbit Earth every 100 minutes, examining each region of Earth once every 35 days.
NOAA’s Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES), NOAA-M, launched on a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA intended the satellite, which was renamed NOAA-17 upon reaching orbit, to collect meteorological data to improve weather forecasting. The satellite was the third in a series of five satellites collectively referred to as the POES system. NOAA planned to transmit the satellite’s data to its National Weather Service, as well as to organizations in other countries. Lockheed Martin Space Systems had built and launched the satellite for NOAA, with NASA’s GSFC managing the project and providing technical guidance.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 46; NOAA, “NOAA-M Environmental Satellite Successfully Launched,” 24 June 2002, http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories/s929.htm (accessed 18 August 2008); NOAA, “Polar Operation Environmental Satellite: Polar Orbiting Satellites,” http://www.oso.noaa.gov/poes/ (accessed 18 August 2008).)
Engineers succeeded in returning NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) spacecraft to full operational status. Some of the satellite’s guidance components had failed in December 2001, and engineers had feared that the mission would terminate prematurely. Mission engineers on Earth had been able to revive FUSE with a new, innovative guidance system, which used the satellite’s electromagnets to push and pull on Earth’s magnetic field, thereby pointing the satellite in the desired direction. Engineers had originally developed the innovative guidance system as a contingency for a failure of this type, but NASA had never before used the system to navigate a satellite with the accuracy required for scientific observations.(NASA, “NASA’s FUSE Satellite Lit Again,” news release 02-45, 6 March 2002; Johns Hopkins University Department of Physics and Astronomy, “Fuse Mission Status Report” (mission status report no. 56, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 25 March 2002), http://fuse.pha.jhu.edu/facts/ miss_rep56.html (accessed 10 August 2008).)
NASA announced the selection of TRW Inc. to lead the team to build the HST’s successor, a new space-based observatory planned to launch in 2010. NASA planned to call the new satellite the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), in honor of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Under the US$824.8 million contract, TRW and its partner organizations would build an observatory capable of viewing deeper into space than the HST. The telescope’s main mirror would unfold to a diameter of at least 20 feet (6.1 meters), thereby providing six times more light-gathering area than the HST, which had an 8-foot (2.4-meter) primary mirror. The telescope would also have instruments highly sensitive to infrared light, which would help astronomers understand the universe’s creation and evolution. In addition, NASA planned for the new telescope to orbit 940,000 miles (1.5 million kilometers) from Earth, within the second Lagrange point or L2, where a spacecraft maintains a balance between the gravity of the Sun and of Earth. Although the L2 orbit would be too far from Earth to allow astronauts to service the observatory, it would enable the observatory to cool to very low temperatures without the use of complex refrigeration equipment.(NASA, “NASA Announces Contract for Next-Generation Space Telescope Named After Space Pioneer,” news release 02-171, 10 September 2002.)
The first Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), the product of a long-term program designed to provide military and other satellites with enduring, reliable access to space, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Lockheed Martin had developed the rocket, called the Atlas 5. The EELV placed the European television satellite Hot Bird 6 in its preliminary orbit 31 minutes after its launch, and the satellite’s thrusters later maneuvered it into its final orbit. The EELV program had resulted from the U.S. government’s research into the 1986 Challenger disaster. The U.S. Air Force had reportedly paid Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company more than US$500 million each to design an EELV. The U.S. Air Force had requested an EELV that was an advanced version of existing rockets, rather than an entirely new system, estimating that, through 2020, the EELV could reduce the cost of placing military satellites into orbit by approximately US$10 billion. France-based Eutelsat (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization) owned the Hot Bird 6 broadcast satellite, which Alcatel Space had built.(William Harwood, “Into Space, A New Kind of Rocket,” Washington Post, 22 August 2002; Lockheed Martin, “Inaugural Atlas V Scores Success for ILS, Lockheed Martin,” news release, 21 August 2002, http://www. lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/InauguralAtlasVScoresSucceslForILSL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The National Weather Service Aviation Weather Center in Kansas City, Missouri, placed in operation a computer-based warning system called the Current Icing Potential (CIP), designed to alert aviation controllers to the potential for icing along flight routes. The National Center for Atmospheric Research had developed the warning system with funding from the FAA. The CIP used information from satellite data, ground observations, and other sources to produce information on the likelihood of airplanes experiencing icing along flight routes. The FAA had supported the development of the CIP to improve flight planning and aircraft safety.(Federal Aviation Administration’s R&D Review, Spring 2003, 2, 6, 11, http://www.airporttech.tc.faa.gov/RD/2003_spring.pdf (accessed 3 March 2009).)
Data from NASA’s Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) satellite provided support for a decades- old, unproven theory that winds converge in two large areas near Earth’s equator, driving ocean circulation south of the equator. The two areas, known as the northern and southern portions of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, are part of a belt circling Earth near the equator, where trade winds of both the northern and southern hemispheres converge. The region affects north-south atmospheric circulation, significantly influencing precipitation and temperatures in many regions of the globe. Previously, researchers had identified the double Intertropical Convergence Zone as a limited seasonal phenomenon. However, since 1969 the zone’s existence, location, and seasonality had remained controversial. The QuikSCAT data confirmed, not only that the double Intertropical Convergence Zone exists all year long, but also that it is more extensive than scientists had suspected. The finding provided important information about how Earth’s atmosphere and oceans interact near the equator, data that could assist scientists in climate modeling and weather forecasting.(NASA JPL, “Satellite Sees Double Zone of Converging Tropical Winds Around the World,” news release, 9 July 2002; W. T. Liu and X. Xie, “Double Intertropical Convergence Zones―A New Look Using Scatterometer,” Geophysical Research Letters 29, no. 22 (30 November 2002): 2072.)
Astronomers used images from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer to observe, for the first time, the life cycles of x-ray jets ejected from a black hole. Scientists considered x-ray jets an extremely important phenomenon to understand, because they could reveal information about the dynamics of matter that accumulates in intense gravitational fields. From 1998 to 2002, the two satellites had collected the images showing the progressive changes of two jets of high-energy particles emitted from a black hole, microquasar XTE J1550- 564. The images revealed that the jets had initially traveled at nearly half the speed of light, later decelerating and eventually disappearing. Astronomers were surprised to discover that the x-ray jet farthest from Earth was three times brighter than the jet that traveled closer to Earth, a finding that was not explained by existing models of x-ray jets.(NASA, “Chandra Discovers the History of Black Hole X-ray Jets,” news release 02-189, 3 October 2002; S. Corbel et al., “Large-Scale, Decelerating, Relativistic X-ray Jets from the Microquasar XTE J1550-564,” Science n.s. 298, no. 5591 (4 October 2002): 196–199.)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) announced its first successful launch of a satellite into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. ISRO launched METSAT, a meteorological satellite, from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India, using it own rocket, the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The new version of the PSLV reflected a significant enhancement of the rocket’s capabilities and a substantial improvement in ISRO’s overall launch capabilities. Previous versions of the PSLV had been capable of placing 900- kilogram (2,000-pound) satellites in a 900-kilometer (560-mile), polar Sun–synchronous orbit, whereas the PSLV-C4 had placed the 1,055-kilogram (2,325-pound) METSAT in a highly elliptical orbit with an apogee (the farthest point from Earth) of 34,700 kilometers (21,600 miles).(ISRO, “PSLV-C4 Launch Successful―Places METSAT in Orbit,” news release, 12 September 2002, http://www.isro.org/pressrelease/Sep13_2002.htm (accessed 3 October 2008); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA’s KSC launched the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) on a Pegasus XL rocket from a Lockheed L-1011 aircraft. The purpose of HESSI’s two-year mission was to analyze particle acceleration and explosive energy released in solar flares, using imaging and spectroscopic instruments. Solar flares can release in a few minutes, or even just a few seconds, an amount of energy nearly equal to that released by the explosion of 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT, disrupting communications satellites and power grids. Scientists at the University of California at Berkeley, which would manage the US$85 million mission, had designed the 645-pound (290-kilogram) probe.(Houston Chronicle, “New NASA Probe To Analyze High-Energy Flares from Sun,” 5 February 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
167Inside Wallops, “Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees,” 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement,” news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, “Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy,” news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad O’Connor, “Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader,” New York Times, 14 January 2002.)
With the aid of NASA’s High Energy Transient Explorer (HETE), scientists were able to capture the first images ever taken of an unusual gamma-ray burst (GRB) that signals the birth of a new black hole. With the exception of the Big Bang, GRBs are the most powerful type of explosion known. The bursts last for only a few seconds, yet their afterglows can last for days or even longer. However, scientists had been unable to detect an optical afterglow produced by a fast- fading type of dark GRB―until the HETE indicated that such a burst was occurring. NASA had created the satellite to alert ground-based observatories to GRBs. On 11 December 2002, HETE had detected a GRB and, within 22 seconds, had notified observatories of the event’s location. In the following minutes, ground-based telescopes captured images of the burst’s afterglow, which disappeared in 2 hours. The event was a rare subcategory of dark GRBs known as a transitional bursta burst with an afterglow lasting longer than that of the short-duration type, but shorter than that of a long-duration burst. Moreover, these transitional bursts are the rarest type of GRB. Scientists hoped the images would help them learn more about the causes of GRB in general, as well as providing specific data indicating the reason that dark bursts have no detectable afterglow.(NASA, “Scientists Catch Their First Elusive ‘Dark’ Gamma-Ray Burst,” news release 02-257, 23 December 2002.)
The U.S. Air Force chose Boeing Integrated Defense Systems to produce the first three satellites for the GPS IIF satellite program. The U.S. Air Force had designed the GPS IIF program to provide new capabilities for civilian and military GPS users―a new civilian signal within the protected Aeronautical Radio Navigation System frequency band and secure operational military codes for military aircraft. The Air Force had also intended the GPS IIF to be compatible with the U.S. Air Force’s Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV). Boeing had designed the GPS IIF to accommodate incremental technology upgrades, enabling the satellites to serve both the immediate needs of the GPS IIF program and the long-term needs of the planned next generation satellite system, GPS III.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Receives GPS IIF Production Approval,” news release, 11 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021111t.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U.S. Coast Guard)
After several unsuccessful attempts to contact the Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) satellite, NASA and Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory concluded that CONTOUR was lost. The objectives of the CONTOUR mission had been to maneuver to a distance of 60 kilometers (100 miles) from at least two comets, capturing high-resolution images and performing various compositional analyses of the comets’ near-nucleus-environment compositional material. NASA had launched CONTOUR on 3 July 2002 but had lost contact with the satellite on 15 August 2002 after a maneuver intended to shift CONTOUR from Earth orbit to an orbit in which it would encounter the comet Encke.(NASA, “Discovery Mission: CONTOUR,” http://discovery.nasa.gov/contour.html (accessed 31 October 2008). 103)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and U.S. Air Force Undersecretary Peter Teets jointly announced that NASA and the DOD would have closer links, beginning with the FY 2004 budget. Major media reported that the two officials had not provided specific details concerning the association between NASA and the DOD. Although O’Keefe remarked that the collaboration might not require a formalized plan, the two officials stated that NASA and the DOD would integrate research and development efforts on projects such as space-based radar, communications satellites, and the Strategic Launch Initiative (SLI) to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV) to replace the Space Shuttle.
ESA launched the International Gamma Ray Astrophysics Laboratory (INTEGRAL) observatory from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 10:41 a.m., local time12:41 a.m. (EST). ESA had designed the satellite, and Italy’s Alenia Spazio had developed it, with support from more than 30 European firms. INTEGRAL would study dense objects that are sources of high-energy radiation, such as neutron stars and black holes. Project scientists hoped that INTEGRAL would produce images that would help confirm the presence of black holes at the center of galaxies, beginning with the Milky Way. INTEGRAL had two main instruments for analyzing gamma-ray sources: the Spectrometer on INTEGRAL, or SPI spectrometer, and the Imager on Board the INTEGRAL Satellite, or IBIS imager. The spectrometer and imager had an extremely sharp angular resolution, enabling them to conduct spectral analyses with an energy resolution 40 times better than that provided by any previous satellite. INTEGRAL also carried an x-ray imager and a charged-coupled device (CCD) imager that operated within the visible spectrum waveband. Using the combined data from the four instruments, project scientists would be able to make simultaneous observations of high-energy phenomena, from visible light to gamma rays.(ESA, “Europe Opens a Window onto a Violent Universe,” ESA news release 66-2002, 17 October 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAKXQTHN6D_index.0.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
