Scientists published research demonstrating that changes in Earth’s gravitational field can affect the planet’s climate and weather. Experts described the findings as an important advance in climate research. Bryon D. Tapley of the University of Texas at Austin led the team of scientists, who had discovered that changes in Earth’s gravitational field are associated with changes in the distribution of water and ice masses. Their findings demonstrated that scientists could use satellite measurements of Earth’s gravitational field to measure changes in the distribution of Earth’s mass and to determine the causes of those changes―changes that included variations in climate and weather. In their analyses, the scientists had examined data from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), consisting of two spacecraft that measure variations in Earth’s gravitational field―a project of NASA and the German Aerospace Center.(NASA, “NASA’s GRACE Gravity Mission Weighs In on Earth’s Changing Climate,” news release 04-286, 9 September 2004; Bryon D. Tapley et al., “GRACE Measurements of Mass Variability in the Earth System,” Science 305, no. 5683 (23 July 2004): 503–505.)
Scientist Menglin Jin of NASA’s GSFC published research based on the first use of satellites to create a multiyear record of Earth’s land-surface temperatures. Jin had used remote-sensing data, which satellites had collected from 1981 to 1998, to develop an 18-year record of global land- surface temperatures more comprehensive and detailed than data derived from ground-station measurements. According to the satellite data, average global land-surface temperatures had increased by 0.43 ̊C (0.77 ̊F) per decade, whereas ground-station data had indicated an increase of 0.34 ̊C (0.61 ̊F). The different findings produced different measurements because satellites measure actual land-surface temperatures―also known as skin temperatures―and ground stations measure air temperatures 6.6 feet (2 meters) above land surfaces. However, Jin also noted regional variations in temperature changes, with the central regions of North America and Asia experiencing some declines in temperatures.(NASA, “Satellites Act as Thermometers in Space,” news release 04-121, 20 April 2004; Menglin Jin, “Analysis of Land Skin Temperature Using AVHRR Observations,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 85, no. 4 (April 2004): 587–600.)
NASA launched its Gravity Probe B (GP-B) on a Boeing Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 12:57 p.m. (EDT). NASA had designed the satellite to test two fundamental aspects of Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity. According to Einstein’s theory, time and space create a veritable fabric in space. When massive objects, such as Earth and other planets, distort the fabric of space, causing relatively smaller objects to move towards them, they create gravity. Einstein’s theory of relativity also states that large objects twist the fabric of space around them as those objects spin on their axes. Gravity Probe A, which NASA had launched in 1975, had tested the former part of the theory, and GP-B would test both aspects. GP-B contained some of the most accurate scientific instruments ever constructed, including the most precise gyroscopes ever built.
Scientists reported that they had produced the first three-dimensional views of the large solar eruptions known as coronal mass ejections, or CMEs. CMEs, the most powerful eruptions in the solar system, can disrupt power systems, radio communications, and satellite links with Earth. Although uncertain of the origin of these eruptions, scientists know that CMEs occur when billions of tons of electrified gas explode from the Sun’s atmosphere into space at speeds of millions of miles per hour. The team had used data from ESA and from NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to construct the images, which they hoped would help scientists learn more about the structure of CMEs and the manner in which they affect Earth.(ESA, “First 3D View of Solar Eruptions,” ESA news release SNR 13-2004, 2 July 2004; Thomas G. Moran and Joseph M. Davila, “Three-Dimensional Polarimetric Imaging of Coronal Mass Ejections,” Science 305, no. 5680 (2 July 2004): 66–70.)
Scientists announced research demonstrating that planets form according to a different process than scientists had previously thought. Comparing recent observations from NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) with data obtained earlier from other satellites, George H. Rieke of the University of Arizona at Tucson had led a team of scientists examining images of the dust clouds surrounding 266 stars of similar size. The prevailing theory of planetary formation held that small rocky planets collide to form larger planets, and the collisions produce a substantial quantity of dust, which steadily fades away over time. However, the team’s SST observations had significantly challenged that theory, revealing that some relatively younger stars have no surrounding dust clouds and that older stars tend to have large, bright discs of orbiting dust. The presence of dust clouds around the older stars indicated that planetary collisions continue far after initial planetary formation. The team concluded that planetary formation is a longer and more chaotic process than scientists had previously assumed.(NASA, “Astronomers Discover Planet Building Is Big Mess,” news release 04-347, 18 October 2004; John Noble Wilford, “A New Look at How Planets Are Formed,” New York Times, 19 October 2004.)
NASA researchers discovered a previously unknown property of Arctic sea ice, challenging conventional models of climate change that had incorporated data on Arctic sea ice. A group of scientists led by Ronald Kwok of NASA’s JPL had used satellite data from Canada’s RADARSAT and NASA’s ICESat to examine changes in Arctic sea ice. In the past, scientists had tended to examine data from ocean buoys to determine changes in Arctic sea ice, rather than using satellite data. The NASA researchers had discovered that, during 12-hour intervals, Arctic sea ice makes subtle, back-and-forth motions, which result in approximately 20 percent of ice growth during the Arctic winter. Although conventional models of the dynamics of Arctic sea ice had incorporated data regarding the ice’s motion, those models had not incorporated ice motion occurring during such brief periods and, thus, may have inaccurately simulated large-scale changes in the ice and underestimated the production of Arctic sea ice.(NASA, “NASA Arctic Sea Ice Study May Stir Up Climate Models,” news release 04-132, 22 April 2004; Ronald Kwok, H. Jay Zwally, and Donghui Yi, “ICESat Observations of Arctic Sea Ice: A First Look,” Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 16 (18 August 2004): L16401–L16405.)
The State Council of the People’s Republic of China appointed Sun Laiyan as Administrator of the China National Space Administration (CNSA). Laiyan had become the CNSA’s Vice Administrator in 1999 and had served as Deputy Director of the Beijing Institute of Satellite Environment Engineering. Laiyan replaced Luan Enjie, who was retiring as head of the CNSA.(China National Space Administration, “Mr. Sun Laiyan Appointed as Administrator of CNSA,” news release, 12 May 2004, http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620682/n639462/54319.html (accessed 19 March 2009); China National Space Administration, “Resumes of Leaders: Prof./Dr. Sun Laiyan,” http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620681/n639436/53299.html (accessed 19 March 2009).)
NASA scientists published research showing that the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the single most important factor in interannual rainfall variability throughout the world. The scientists had used data from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite to identify geographic areas with the greatest variations in rainfall between 1998 and 2002. After comparing the TRMM data with rainfall patterns over the previous 50 years, they had found that changes in the ENSO directly correlated with local changes in rainfall patterns around the world. The TRMM satellite, a joint project of NASA and JAXA, used microwaves to measure precipitation over the tropics.(NASA, “TRMM Satellite El Niño Holds the Reins on Global Rains,” news release 04-369, 8 November 2004; Z. S. Haddad et al., “Global Variability of Precipitation According to the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission,” Journal of Geophysical Research―Atmospheres 109, no. D17 (16 September 2004): D17103.)
NASA and NOAA announced that the two agencies would extend the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) by five months, effectively reversing an earlier decision to terminate the weather satellite’s mission. NASA and NOAA also announced that they had requested the National Academy of Sciences to evaluate the utility of extending the satellite’s mission for an additional 18 months. Launched in 1997, the TRMM―designed to measure rainfall―was a joint project of NASA and JAXA. NASA and JAXA had originally planned for the satellite’s mission to last three years, but meteorologists and climate researchers, who continued to find the satellite’s data highly valuable, particularly for analyzing tropical storms, had advocated to prolong the mission.(Guy Gugliotta, “Weather Satellite Gets Reprieve for Hurricane Season,” Washington Post, 8 August 2004. 673 Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Plans Robotic Fix for Hubble,” Washington Post, 11 August 2004.)
Japan’s Mobile Broadcast Corporation and South Korea’s Sun Kyung Telecom launched the Loral Mobile Broadcasting Satellite (MBSAT), which the two companies had designed to provide the world’s first digital multimedia broadband broadcasting system. The MBSAT, launched on a Lockheed Martin Atlas 3 rocket, carried a 40-foot-diameter (12.2-meter-diameter) antenna designed to provide audio, video, and data services to users of portable audio and visual devices in Japan and South Korea. International Launch Services (ILS), a U.S.-Russian private company, provided the launch services for the Japanese-South Korean joint venture.(Craig Covault, “Mobile Milestone,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 12 (22 March 2004): 35; International Launch Services, “About Us,” http://www.ilslaunch.com/about-us/ (accessed 18 March 2009).)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the station’s management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASA’s other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISS’s hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the station’s operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the station’s exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program,” New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Safety Problems Noted,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
Sirpa Häkkinen of NASA’s GSFC announced that a research team had discovered changes in the North Atlantic Ocean indicating significant changes in the ocean’s climate. Using data from several NASA and European satellites, the researchers had found a dramatic weakening in a particular current in the ocean, which circulates water between Ireland and Canada. The change in the current indicated substantial climate variability in high-latitude areas, but the research remained uncertain of whether or not the change related to global warming. However, the scientists emphasized that the North Atlantic Ocean region is key for analyzing climate and that changes in the ocean’s current could influence the circulation of the entire Atlantic Ocean system.(NASA, “Satellites Record Weakening North Atlantic Current,” news release 04-130, 15 April 2004; Sirpa Häkkinen and Peter B. Rhines, “Decline of Subpolar North Atlantic Circulation During the 1990s,” Science 304, no. 5670 (23 April 2004): 555–559.)
NASA launched an Earth-observation satellite called Aura from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 3:01 a.m. (PDT). The spacecraft was one of three satellites in NASA’s Earth Observing System (EOS)―the two others were Terra, which monitored land, and Aqua, which monitored the planet’s water cycle. NASA had created Aura to collect scientific data on global air quality, ozone recovery, and climate change, equipping the satellite with four instruments: the High Resolution Dynamics Limb Sounder, the Microwave Limb Sounder, the Ozone Monitoring Instrument, and the Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer. Project engineers hoped that the instruments would enable the spacecraft to collect the most detailed measurements to date of atmospheric pollution, climate change, and the ozone layer.(NASA, “Aura Launched, To Better Understand the Air We Breathe,” news release 04-217, 15 July 2004; Eric D. Tytell, “Satellite To Study Atmospheric Pollutants,” Los Angeles Times, 16 July 2004.)
vehicle manufacturing, satellite services, and remote sensingaffect economic activity, employee earnings, and the amount of employment in all major industry sectors. Based on data from 2002, the FAA had found that the commercial space-transportation industry had contributed US$95 billion to economic activity in the United States, including US$23.5 billion in employee earnings. The report also stated that demands for commercial space transportation and its products and services had resulted in the employment of nearly 600,000 people. In addition, the FAA had found that much of this economic impact was the result of increased demands for satellite services and ground-equipment manufacturing, which includes satellite-related hardware and consumer electronics used with satellite services.(FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation, “The Economic Impact of Commercial Space Transportation on the U.S. Economy: 2002 Results and Outlook for 2010” (study, Washington, DC, March 2004), 1–6.)
A NASA-funded study provided the first direct evidence that aerosols affect the absorption and release of carbon by ecosystems. Because carbon, in the form of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, acts as a heat-trapping greenhouse gas, the research team sought to identify the factors that influence carbon transfer between the atmosphere and soils. Led by Dev S. Niyogi of North Carolina State University, the scientists had used NASA satellite data to examine atmospheric aerosol content and carbon absorption in different ecosystems. They had discovered that high aerosol levels increase carbon absorption in croplands and forests but decrease carbon absorption in grasslands. The researchers suggested that this variation occurs because of the way that aerosols interact with different types of vegetation canopies to affect the dispersion of radiation from sunlight. In the dense vegetation canopies of croplands and forests, aerosols scatter sunlight in a manner that enables more radiation to reach a greater quantity of plant leaves and increases carbon absorption through plant photosynthesis. However, in the less dense vegetation canopy of grasslands, aerosols scatter sunlight in a manner that raises ground temperatures, causing the soil to release more carbon dioxide.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Tiny Particles in Air May Influence Carbon Sinks,” news release 04-394, 16 December 2004; D. Niyogi et al., “Direct Observations of the Effects of Aerosol Loading on Net Ecosystem CO2 Exchanges over Different Landscapes,” Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 20 (29 October 2004): L20506.)
NASA launched the Swift satellite from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA and an international team of participants had designed the spacecraft to detect and analyze gamma-ray bursts (GRBs)―ephemeral explosions that occur throughout the universe, usually far from Earth. GRBs may indicate a number of significant cosmological events, such as the collision of extremely dense celestial bodies or the formation of black holes. Swift was equipped with three telescopes to study GRBs, including the Burst Alert Telescope, which could detect and locate GRBs, and the X-ray Telescope (XRT) and Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope (UVOT), two telescopes that could study the bursts’ afterglows. Among the many participants in the Swift mission were the Italian Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Swift Satellite,” news release 04-382, 22 November 2004; New York Times, “NASA Starts Hunt for Celestial Bodies,” 21 November 2004.)
The European Union (EU) and the United States signed a cooperative agreement on their satellite navigation services―the EU’s planned Galileo system and the United States’ GPS. According to the agreement, the Galileo and GPS satellites would broadcast a common civil signal. They also agreed not to discriminate in commercial trade of satellite-navigation goods and services. In addition, the agreement stipulated that Galileo signals would not interfere with the efforts of the United States to prevent its adversaries’ accessing satellite-based positioning signals. European Commission Vice President Loyola de Palacio, Irish Foreign Minister Brian Cowen, and U.S. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell signed the agreement in Dublin, Ireland.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2004 Activities (Washington, DC, 2004), p. 95, http://history.nasa.gov/presrep2004.pdf (accessed 7 April 2009); United States Mission to the European Union, “U.S., EU Reach Agreement on Satellite Navigation Services,” news release, 27 June 2004, http://useu.usmission.gov/Article.asp?ID=E195E969-EFF9-4EE3-8E7B-58D02983E7C3 (accessed 7 April 2009).)
A NASA-funded study found that artificial surfaces in urban areas often cause temperatures to increase, enabling longer growing seasons in cities than in surrounding rural areas. Using data from NASA’s Terra satellite, a team of Boston University scientists led by Xiaoyang Zhang compared the growing seasons of 70 North American cities with those of adjacent rural areas. The scientists discovered that the growing season in urban areas lasted nearly 15 days longer than the growing season in rural areas. In addition, the data revealed that urban climates affect vegetation located up to 10 kilometers (6 miles) from urban land cover. According to the scientists, high concentrations of artificial surfaces in urban areas cause surface temperatures to be relatively higher in urban areas than in surrounding rural areas. In addition, the scientists suggested that their findings demonstrated how land use and other human activities affect Earth’s environment.(NASA, “NASA Plays Key Role in Largest Environmental Experiment in History,” news release 04-242, 27 July 2004; X. Zhang et al., “The Footprint of Urban Climates on Vegetation Phenology,” Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 12 (25 June 2004): L12209.)
The U.S. Air Force awarded the Boeing Company a US$472 million contract to develop a military satellite system capable of secure, high-capacity global communications for NASA, the U.S. intelligence community, and the DOD. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would lead a team of companies that would conduct risk-reduction and system-definition studies for the Transformational Communications MILSATCOM (Military Satellite Communications) Space Segment, which uses laser communications, advanced processors, and other advanced technologies to provide communications for airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The companies selected to conduct research on the project included Ball Aerospace, Cisco Systems, and Raytheon.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Awarded $472 Million for Next-Generation Military Satellite System,” news release, 23 January 2004, http//www.boeing.com/news/releases/2004/q1/nr_040123s.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
A NASA-funded study found that some climate-forecasting models might have incorrectly estimated future increases in Earth’s temperatures. Scientists Kenneth R. Minschwaner of the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology and Andrew E. Dessler of the University of Maryland had determined that some climate models might have incorrectly estimated the amount of water vapor that enters Earth’s atmosphere as the planet warms. For years, scientists had debated the extent to which water vaporthe most important heat-trapping greenhouse gas in Earth’s atmosphereinfluences Earth’s surface temperatures. Using data from NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, the scientists had found that, although the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere had increased with surface warming, the increase had not been as high as previous researchers had assumed. The findings also cast doubt on research suggesting that Earth’s temperatures would decrease because of a lack of water vapor in the atmosphere.(NASA, “Satellite Finds Warming ‘Relative’ to Humidity,” news release N04-090, 15 March 1990; New York Times, “Study Disputes Idea of Global Warming,” 18 March 2004.)
Scientists published the first direct evidence of one of the fundamental elements of Einstein’s theory of general relativity: an effect known as frame dragging. Frame draggingthe distortion of space and time around rotating celestial bodies, such as Earthoccurs because the gravity of those objects pulls space and time along with them. Ignazio Ciufolini of the University of Lecce in Italy and NASA scientist Erricos C. Pavlis of GSFC had measured distortions in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellites, LAGEOS and LAGEOS2, to obtain the evidence of frame dragging. They had discovered that, although irregularities in Earth’s surface account for some of the variation in the satellites’ orbits, the remainder of the variation is the effect of space-time distortions.(NASA, “As the World Turns, It Drags Space and Time,” news release 04-351, 21 October 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Theory of Relativity Evidence Found,” Washington Post, 22 October 2004.)
William H. Pickering, a former Director of NASA’s JPL, died at the age of 93. Pickering had begun his career at JPL in 1944 and had served as Director from 1954 to 1976. Soon after becoming Director of JPL, Pickering had led a project that had successfully launched the first U.S. satellite Explorer 1 into Earth orbit on 31 January 1958. During the remainder of Pickering’s tenure, JPL had launched the Ranger and Surveyor missions to the Moon and the Mariner missions to Mars and Venus. Pickering had received numerous awards during his lifetime: NASA had presented him with its Distinguished Service Medal, President Gerald R. Ford had awarded him the National Medal of Science, and the Queen of England had given him an honorary knighthood.(NASA, “NASA Remembers William H. Pickering, Former Director of JPL,” news release 04-094, 16 March 2004.)
A NASA study revealed that clouds that form from small haze particles do not reduce Earth’s temperatures as much as previous research had suggested. Scientists had thought that low-lying clouds cool Earth by reflecting sunlight away from the planet’s surface, and that the reflectivity of clouds increases as their volume of water increases. However, NASA scientist Andrew S. Ackerman led a group of researchers who found that polluted, low-lying clouds neither hold more water nor reflect more solar energy than do cleaner clouds. Using measurements from polar-orbiting satellites and from NASA aircraft flying through clouds, the scientists discovered that water tends to decrease in polluted clouds, rather than to increase. Because most predictions of climate change had incorrectly assumed that polluted clouds counteract greenhouse warming, this finding could significantly influence how scientists predict changes in climate.(Andrew S. Ackerman et al., “The Impact of Humidity Above Stratiform Clouds on Indirect Aerosol Climate Forcing,” Nature 432, no. 7020 (23–30 December 2004): 1014–1017; NASA, “NASA Finds Polluted Clouds Hold Less Moisture and Cool Earth Less,” news release 04-404, 23 December 2004.)
At a hearing held by the U.S. House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, officials from NASA and the Pentagon stated that they expect to work together on President Bush’s exploration strategy for Mars and the Moon, without altering the traditional divisions between the two organizations. According to officials, NASA and the Pentagon would cooperate on technical issues of concern to both agencies, including the development of lightweight fabrication systems and systems for unpiloted docking of spacecraft. The two agencies would also explore sharing launch systems, including NASA’s possible use of the Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rockets, which the Pentagon had developed to launch its own satellites. According to major media, House subcommittee members were interested in the possibility of saving money through the collaboration between NASA and the Pentagon, but they were also concerned about the possibility of the two agencies repeating their previous collaborative failures. As an example of such a failed collaboration, they cited the Advanced Launch System project, a collaborative project between the two agencies during the 1980s and 1990s.(Mark Carreau, “NASA, Military To Work Closely on Space Effort,” Houston Chronicle, 19 March 2004. 190)
A team of researchers led by scientist Marc L. Imhoff of NASA’s GSFC published research indicating that increasing urbanization in the United States had reduced the amount of fertile land available for agriculture. Using data from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) and NOAA’s polar-orbiting satellites, the scientists had discovered that cities covered 3 percent of the land area in the continental United States. Moreover, the team found that the urbanized areas were capable of producing an amount of food and fiber rivaling that produced on agricultural lands, which covered 29 percent of the land area in the continental United States. Furthermore, they found that the urbanized land areas had the potential to produce enough food to meet the caloric requirements of 16.5 million people, nearly 6 percent of the U.S. population. The authors explained that, throughout history, human settlement has tended to occur on lands best suited for growing food. The research results, which were consistent with this trend, strongly suggested that urbanization should occur in conjunction with agricultural and environmental considerations.(NASA, “Cities Built on Fertile Lands Affect Climate,” news release 04-059, 11 February 2004; Marc L. Imhoff et al., “The Consequences of Urban Land Transformation on Net Primary Productivity in the United States,” Remote Sensing of Environment 89, no. 4 (29 February 2004): 434–443.)
