NASA Administrator Janies E. Webb stated that President Kennedy had ordered a thorough review of the Nation’s space programs. During February: Acoustic test chamber for recording sound of rocket operations and to study human stress limits completed at Environmental Simulation Laboratory, Naval Missile Center, at Pacific Missile Range.
In a speech before the National Press Club, NASA Administrator Webb reviewed NASA’s program and outlined the interest in the rendezvous-in-space technique for staging flights to the Moon and nearby planets.
NASA Agena B management meeting was held at Marshall Space Flight Center with representatives from MSFC, NASA headquarters, AFSSD, LMSD, JPL, and GSFC.
Dr. Joseph F. Shea was appointed Deputy Director for Systems Engineering, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA headquarters, reporting to D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA’s Director of Manned Space Flight. Dr. Shea came to NASA from Space Technology Laboratories.
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced creation of a new Office of Programs to be headed by D. D. Wyatt, and the renaming of the Office of Administration under Albert F. Siepert.
The Freedom 7 Mercury capsule in which Alan B. Shepard, Jr., made the first suborbital space flight, was presented to the National Air Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. In his presentation, NASA Administrator Webb said: “To Americans seeking answers, proof that man can survive in the hostile realm of space is not enough. A solid and meaningful foundation for public support and the basis for our Apollo man-in-space effort is that U.S. astronauts are going into space to do useful work in the cause of all their fellow men.” “Such flights as those of Freedom 7 are not stunts. They are not antithetical to sober scientific and technological research. Interpreted properly, these dramatic events can add much to public understanding and excite creative interest in extending the base on which public support must rest.”
NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric signed letter of understanding confirming the national launch vehicle program, the integrated development and procurement of space boosters by NASA and DOD. It was agreed that neither DOD nor NASA would initiate the development of a launch vehicle or booster for use in space without written acknowledgment of the other agency.
NASA Administrator Webb, speaking to the American Rocket Society, said NASA scientists “are going to consider the rendezvous technique with great care before going ahead with Nova.” Decision on whether to give priority to the rendezvous technique would probably be made by the end of 1961, he said.
NASA-DOD Large Launch Vehicle Planning Group in session since August 1 to study the policy, management structures, and requirements of launch vehicles beyond the size of Saturn. Meeting in NASA headquarters, the group was headed by Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin, technical assistant to the Associate Administrator of NASA.
NASA Administrator Webb, in congressional testimony, pointed out that the Tiros cloud-cover program was known to the entire world, involved no surveillance, and promised great benefit to all nations. He pointed out that data from Tiros satellites had been made available to all, including the Soviet Union.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory briefed NASA headquarters on the Venus radar tracking experiment, after 2 months of intensive study begun on March 10.
NASA Administrator Webb announced that location of the new Manned Spacecraft Center would be in Houston, Tex., the conclusion of an intensive nationwide study by a site selection team. The Manned Spacecraft Center would be the command center for the manned lunar landing mission and all follow-on manned space flight missions. This announcement was the third basic decision on major facilities required for the expanded U.S. Range and the establishment of the spacecraft fabrication center at the Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans, La. Center at the Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans, La.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy stated that “we are spending as much money and devoting as large a percentage of scientific personnel, engineering, and all the rest, as we possibly can to the space program. We are constantly concerned with speeding it up. We are making what I consider to be a maximum effort.”
USAF Dyna-Soar System Project Office personnel visited NASA headquarters for review of technical and management programs.
NASA postponed its projected manned orbital flight from December 1961 until early in 1962 because of minor problems with the cooling system and positioning devices in the Mercury capsule, Dr. Hugh Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, said in a Baltimore interview. “You like to have a man go with everything just as near perfect as possible. This business is risky. You can’t avoid this, but you can take all the precautions you know about.”
In his second state of the Union message President Kennedy reported to Congress regarding the space program: “With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we [United States] are strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may not. * * * Now is the time to take longer strides— time for a great new American enterprise—time for this Nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement which in many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth.” President Kennedy set forth an accelerated space program based upon the long-range national goals of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth; early development of the Rover nuclear rocket; speed up the use of Earth satellites for worldwide communications; and provide “at the earliest possible time a satellite system for worldwide weather observation.” An additional $549 million was requested for NASA over the new administration’s March budget requests; $62 million was requested for DOD for starting development of a solid-propellant booster of the Nova class.
William J. O’Sullivan, Jr., of Langley Research Center awarded the Second NASA Invention and Contribution Award for conception and development of the inflatable space vehicle. Proposed in January 1956 to the U.S. IGY Committee, O’Sullivan’s invention led to two successful NASA experiments, Echo I and Explorer IX, and U.S. Patent No. 2,996,212, entitled “SelfSupporting Space Vehicle ” issued to the NASA Administrator in behalf of the United States on August 15, 1961.
NASA established a Management Council to ensure the orderly and timely progress in the manned space flight programs. The Council, composed of senior officials from NASA headquarters, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Manned Spacecraft Center, and chaired by D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, would meet at least once a month to identify and resolve problems as early as possible and to coordinate the interface problems.
National Rocket Club President H. A. Timken announced proposal to Secretary of the Treasury Dillon to consider a special series of savings bonds and savings stamps to finance the U.S. space program, to be known as series S bonds for space.
NASA planned to spend $6 million on expansion of its Langley facilities in this fiscal year, according to Representative Thomas N. Downing after a conversation with NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Representative Downing said he was satisfied that the lower peninsula area of Virginia would not suffer financially when the Space Task Group moved to Houston, Tex.
Varvarov, in Soviet newspaper, Ekonomicheskaya Gazeta, denounced the U.S. space program as using outer space for military purposes and cluttering the cosmos with an unnecessarily large number of satellites. Especially critical of the Discoverer series, the article said: “* * * the United States, pursuing an intensive arms race, is setting up an elaborate system of cosmic military intelligence communications and navigation. * * * Actually, this is banditry on an international scale. * * *”
Voice message sent from Washington to Woomera, Australia, by way of the Moon. NASA Deputy Administrator Dryden spoke on telephone to Goldstone, Calif., which “bounced” it to the deep space instrumentation station at Woomera. The operation was held as part of the official opening ceremony of the deep space instrumentation facility site in Australia.
At NASA press conference following President Kennedy’s call to Congress for an accelerated space program, NASA Administrator Webb pointed out that the long-range and difficult task of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth before the end of the decade offered a chance to beat Russia.
In speech on “Scientists and Engineers in the Space Program,” Albert F. Siepert, NASA Director of Administration, outlined NASA’s basic policies on personnel. He pointed out that of NASA’s some 20,000 employees, only 4,000 had come to NASA through individual appointments, the remainder on transfer of organizations intact to NASA. NASA’s personnel utilization practices, Siepert said, were as follows: (1) Don’t use a scientist or engineer when another skill will do as well; (2) classify a man’s skills by what he actually does, rather than how he was formally trained; (3) provide professional entrance into the Federal civil service through an examination which is work centered rather than academically oriented; (4) take on-the-job training and education seriously; (5) encourage professional recognition outside the agency; and (6) recognize that job satisfaction depends upon the man’s continued interest in his work as well as his take-home pay.”
In speech at the American Rocket Society, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated: “If I could get one message to you it would be this: The future of this country and the welfare of the free world depend upon our success in space. There is no room in this country for any but a fully cooperative, urgently motivated all-out effort toward space leadership. No one person, no one company, no one Government agency, has a monopoly on the competence, the missions, or the requirements for the space program. It is and it must continue to be a national job.”
At the request of Senator Paul H. Douglas, the membership of the American Astronautical Society was polled by the University of Illinois Observatory as to their opinion regarding the “scientific value” of the U.S. space program to land on and return one or more men from the Moon.
NASA Administrator Webb accepted one of the three President’s Safety Awards for accident prevention during 1960. He pointed out that NASA’s activities involved test flying of experimental aircraft, untried highly explosive fuels, high-voltage electricity, and highly pressurized air and superheated temperatures, in addition to rocket and spacecraft tests and launching and the operation of two nuclear reactors and a cyclotron.
February report of the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences was released recommending exploration of the Moon and planets “as the official goal of the U.S. space program and clearly announced, discussed, and supported.”
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a speech in Cleveland that the United States would follow its first manned orbital flight in January 1962 with similar manned orbital flights every 60 days. These would gather data on effects of weightlessness, needed to determine the pacing of the two-man flight program later on. Mr. Webb also forecast the launching of 200 sounding rockets, 20 scientific satellites, and 2 deep-space probes in 1962.
NASA headquarters announced that it was making a worldwide study of possible launching sites for Moon vehicles; the size, power, noise, and possible hazards of Saturn-Nova type rockets requiring greater isolation for public safety than presently available.
NASA began negotiations with French Commission for Spatial and Scientific Research for conducting a cooperative Franco-American space program.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, speaking in Denver before the American Association for the Advancement of Science, said: “The sheer magnitude of the manned lunar exploration program, amounting as it will to $3 billion or more [in fiscal year 1963], represents a significant application of the Nation’s resources. These billions of dollars will be spent in the laboratories, workshops, and factories of the Nation and thus constitute a significant factor in the Nation’s employment and economy generally. The personnel in the space program are not all scientists and engineers but come from every walk of life. “The ultimate and practical purpose of these large expenditures is twofold: (1) Insurance of the Nation against scientific and technological obsolescence in a time of explosive advances in science and technology; and (2) insurance against the hazard of military surprise in space.”
At Cape Canaveral with the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, Secretary of Labor Goldberg made public President Kennedy’s message praising the voluntary, no-strike, no-lockout pledges covering labor-management relations at missile and space sites. The President’s message stated that “the Nation cannot afford the luxury of avoidable delay in our missile and space program. Neither can we tolerate wasteful and expensive practices which add to the great financial burden our defense effort already places on us.”
In an interview in U.S. News & World Report, NASA Administrator Webb stated that “the kind of overall space effort that President Kennedy has recommended * * * will put us there [on the Moon] first.” This achievement, costing between $20 and $40 blliion, “probably toward the $20 blliion level * * * wlli be most valuable in other parts of our economy.” Mr. Webb said that the U.S.S.R. did have an advantage in being able first to orbit a multimanned spacecraft around the Earth and also around the Moon.
In response to questioning by the House Science and Astronautics Committee, Associate NASA Administrator Seamans repeated the general estimate of $20 to $40 billion as the cost for the total effort required to achieve a lunar landing, that an all-out program might cost more, and that 1967 could be considered only as a possible planning date at this stage of such a complex task.
NASA Administrator Webb issued a statement concerning the 2-year Mercury manned space flight program, which said, in part: “NASA has not attempted to encourage press coverage of the first Mercury-Redstone manned flight. It has responded to press and television requests, with the result that over 100 representatives of the press, radio, and TV are now at Cape Canaveral. * * * We must keep the perspective that each flight is but one of the many milestones we must pass. Some will completely succeed in every respect, some partially, and some will fail. From all of them will come mastery of the vast new space environment on which so much of our future depends.”
Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences submitted its recommendation of February 10-11 that “scientific exploration of the Moon and planets should clearly be stated as the ultimate objective of the U.S. space program for the foreseeable future.” During March: Announced that National Institutes of Health scientists were growing organisms found inside of a meteorite that fell at Murray, Ky., around 1950; first reported instance of living material, perhaps extraterrestrial, grown in a laboratory. ...	■ In an experiment at Boeing, biologist J. D. McClure spent 26 hours in a sealed environment with atmosphere recycled through algae to retain 21 percent oxygen content.
Reactor-in-flight-test system (Rift) study, a part of the NASA-AEC program on nuclear rockets, was briefed by contractors at NASA headquarters.
In address at George Washington University, NASA Administrator Webb stated that the exploration of space was an important part of man’s “driving, restless, insatiable search for new knowledge.”
Life Sciences Laboratory established by NASA at Ames Research Center to augment, lead, direct, encourage, and coordinate biomedical research related to the space program.
In a brief ceremony, a bust of Samuel P. Langley was presented by Paul Garber, Curator of the National Air Museum, to the NASA Langley Research Center, during which Dr. Langley’s first demonstration of mechanical flight with his “Aerodrome” model in 1896 and his scientific contributions to astrophysics (i.e., the thermopile and the bolometer) were reviewed by Garber and Deputy NASA Administrator Dryden.
NASA conducted a press conference for foreign correspondents attending the IAF Congress, pointing out that some 40 nations are now participating in NASA programs or are obtaining NASA help for their respective space programs. Director of the Office of International Programs, Arnold Frutkin, pointed out that growing space research cooperation would soon include a university training program in which 100 foreign students would work at American universities on peaceful space experiments.
NASA Administrator Webb, appearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, requested $60 million additional for fiscal year 1962 for the acquisition of 80,000 acres adjoining Cape Canaveral for launching facilities for the expanded space program.
NASA has assembled an outstanding management team for its stepped-up assault on space, NASA Administrator Webb told the Aero Club of Washington. Citing Associate Administrator Seamans, Deputy Associate Administrator Dixon, and Director of Manned Space Flight Holmes as examples, Mr. Webb added: “These men, and many others associated with them, know the technical side of aeronautics and space and are all experienced in the management of large activities. Each has demonstrated a personal earning capacity far beyond what the Government is able to pay for their services. Each is thoroughly famlliar with the opportunities and problems associated with our most important technical military weapon system development efforts. It is fortunate for this Nation that men with these high qualifications and such experience are willing to forego large earnings in industry and a more normal personal and family life to supply the leadership needed in our national space effort.”
D. Brainerd Holmes was appointed NASA’s Director of Manned Space Flight Programs. As general manager of RCA’s Major Defense Systems Division, Holmes was project manager for the ballistic missile early warning system (BMEWS).
Deputy NASA Administrator Dryden sent an explanatory letter to Chairman Robert S. Kerr, of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on the broad scientific and technological gains to be achieved in landing a man on the Moon and returning him to Earth. Dr. Dryden pointed out that this difficult goal “has the highly important role of accelerating the development of space science and technology, motivating the scientists and engineers who are engaged in this effort to move forward with urgency, and integrating their efforts in a way that cannot be accomplished by a disconnected series of research investigations in several fields. It is important to realize, however, that the real values and purposes are not in the mere accomplishment of man setting foot on the Moon but rather in the great cooperative national effort in the development of science and technology which is stimulated by this goal.” Dr. Dryden pointed out that “the billions of dollars required in this effort are not spent on the Moon; they are spent in the factories, workshops, and laboratories of our people for salaries, for new materials, and supplies, which in turn represent income for others * * *. The national enterprise involved in the goal of manned lunar landing and return within this decade is an activity of critical impact on the future of this Nation as an industrial and military power, and as a leader of a free world.”
New organization of NASA headquarters became effective, which established four major program offices (Manned Space Flight, Space Sciences, Advanced Research and Technology, and Applications), and provided center directors with direct line to the Office of the Associate Administrator.
Largest known rocket launch to date, the Saturn 1st stage booster, successful on first test flight from Atlantic Missile Range. With its eight clustered engines developing almost 1.3 million pounds of thrust at launch, the Saturn (SA-1) hurled water-filled dummy upper stages to an altitude of 84.8 miles and 214.7 miles down range. In a postlaunch statement, Administrator Webb said: “The flight today was a splendid demonstration of the strength of our national space program and an important milestone in the buildup of our national capacity to launch heavy payloads necessary to carry out the program projected by President Kennedy on May 25. We in NASA deeply appreciate the contribution by the military services and American industry in achieving this important milestone. * * *” Development of Saturn had begun under Advanced Research Projects Agency auspices in 1958.
President-elect Kennedy received report of special nine-man committee on the national space program. Chairman of the committee was Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner of MIT.
Reported that the DOD-NASA Golovin Committee was near agreement on hybrid solid-and-liquid fuel rockets for Dyna-Soar. Golovin Committee had been meeting for 3 months to work out families of large rockets for overall national space program.
First anniversary of Marshall Space Flight Center as a NASA center, and NASA Administrator Webb visited the Huntsville facility.
Executive order of the President suspended the 8-hour limitation on construction workers in NASA. It stated that “a clearly leading role in aeronautical and space achievement has become a vital national objective,” and that it was essential to conduct the space program “with a major national commitment of manpower, material, and facilities,” and “with all possible speed and efficiency.”
NASA Deputy Administrator Dryden and Soviet Academy of Sciences official Dr. Leonid I. Sedov both appealed for greater international cooperation and exchange of information in the peaceful exploration of space in their speeches at the opening of the 12th World Congress of the International Astronautical Federation.
First invention award under the authority of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 given to Dr. Frank T. McClure of the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins for his satellite Doppler navigation system, the $3,000 award being presented by NASA Administrator Glennan at NASA headquarters.
NASA announced decision to launch manned lunar flights and other missions requiring Saturn and Nova class vehicles from expanded Cape Canaveral facilities. Based upon national space goals announced by the President in May, NASA plans call for acquisition of 80,000 acres north and west of AFMTC, to be administered by the USAF as agent for NASA and as a part of the Atlantic Missile Range. Decision followed intensive NASA-DOD survey for launching facilities, including trajectory advantages, overflight or booster impact hazards, air and water transportation, instrumentation support, and cost, time, and land availability advantages. Expansion of Cape Canaveral was noted as first of three major steps in accelerating the U.S. space program, the remaining two steps being a manned space flight research center, and a booster fabrication and test facility.
The national space program portends a major technological advance for mankind, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the New Orleans Chamber of Commerce. Comparing its potential to that of the invention of the steam engine, Dr. Seamans noted: “Two aspects of such major advances are characteristic. First, the practical results are largely unforeseeable, primarily because they develop on broad fronts and, frequently, in unsuspected directions. Second, the concentration of effort required does not diminish effort expended on other frontiers of knowledge, but rather spurs such activities. For example, despite fears that space technology would monopolize the scientific effort of this country, such fields of activity as oceanography, geophysics, and the physics of high-energy particles have greatly increased since the national space effort has become a serious one.”
NASA Administrator Webb, speaking at the 20th American Assembly, said the accelerated space program was necessary or else “we would see the Russians, with the advantage of their advance position in booster thrust, stay continuously ahead. * * * The cost over the 10 years of the accelerated program will very probably be less than if it were stretched out over 15 years.”
James E. Webb was sworn in as NASA Administrator.
Administrator Webb announced major organizational changes and top-level appointments in NASA. Keyed to the Nation’s accelerated civilian space program, changes provided clearer focus on major programs, and provided center directors with a louder voice in policymaking and program decisions. Effective November 1, major headquarters program offices would be headed as follows: Ira H. Abbott, Director of the Office of Advanced Research and Technology; Homer E. Newell, Director of the Office of Space Sciences; D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight; and an Office of Applications Programs with no director yet named. Thomas F. Dixon was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator. Abe Silverstein was named Director of the Lewis Research Center and Robert R. Gilruth, Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center.
