Congressman George Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke on the House floor in acknowledgment of successflli Soviet space flights of vostok iii and iv. Senator Alexander Wiley acknowledged the event on the Senate floor and pointed to need for advancing the U.S. space program.
Rodney D. Steward was named RL-10 rocket engine program manager at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Steward replaced William D. Brown, who resumed full-time duties as deputy chief, Engine Management Office, msfc.
In testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, nasa Administrator James E. Webb indicated that decision on the number of orbits, three or six, planned for the next Mercury flight had not been decided and that the selected pilot-astronaut would also be announced soon. On the relationship between civilian and military space activities: “President’s [space] policy has been, in accordance with the law, to develop the space program as a civilian peaceful effort to the fullest extent possible, but always pressing with the kind of technology that would permit us to move rapidly in the military field if we were required to do so. It is a little bit like ‘keep your powder dry’ with respect to the military side ...” Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric stated to the Committee that dod “was interested in developing the technology” but we [dod] have as yet no approved program for the development of a manned orbital system.” Gilpatric said that dod was “very conscious of the need to take out technological insurance” so that the U.S. could be “prepared and not surprised” in the event that the U.S.S.R. attempted to make “hostile use of space.”
In special ceremony at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and Walter Williams, Director of Operations for Project Mercury, were both awarded nasa Distinguished Service Medals by nasa Administrator Webb at the direction of President Kennedy.
Problem of communications blackout during spacecraft re-entry ionization has been surmounted, according to Boeing Co.’s X-20 Project Manager A. M. Johnston and engineers at Radio Corp. of America. RCA-developed equipment using higher radio frequencies would penetrate the blackout sheath 99 per cent of the time during which it engulfed a spacecraft.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced three-year grant to Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, Tex., for development of advanced scientific experiments in lunar, planetary, and space exploration. Major operating division of grcsw was Southwest Center for Advanced Studies (scas), which would “provide research organization structured specifically to design new space experiments and to provide the scientific guidelines for engineering them.”
nasa Administrator Webb announced that the Mission Control Center for future manned space flights would be located at Manned Spacecraft Center (msc), Houston, Tex. The Center, including its computer complex, communications center, flight simulation facility, and flight operations displays, would be operational by 1964 for Gemini rendezvous flights and later Apollo lunar missions.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before a subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Appropriations, said that 32 candidates for astronaut positions had been selected from the 200 applicants, and that by September 1 nasa would select 10 of these men to enter astronaut training.
nasa press conference at nasa Hq. on the tandem Russian orbital flights of vostok iii and iv. Participants: nasa Administrator James E. Webb; Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden; Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director, Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes. Mr. Webb paid tribute to the Russian accomplishment as “demonstrations of a very real technological capacity, an ability to plan and engineer and build and fly vehicles that can carry man for extended periods of time. . . . They do have significance.” Dr. Dryden felt that the flights essentially conformed to the stated Russian objective, “to subject two men to identical space exposures, and weightlessness . . . plus . . . longer duration, which is needed to do this.” Dr. Seamans noted that “as far as guidance accuracy is concerned, what they achieved is roughly comparable to what we achieve in our Mercury flights. To me the significant element here is that on the second flight they were able to take off within a limited period of time . . . countdowns can be protracted for one reason or another.” Mr. Holmes said he was not surprised at the Russian flights: “I think we would be selling the Russians pretty short if we didn’t feel that a year after they launched a Vostok on a booster that could lift that kind of a weight, something of the order of 10,000 pounds, that they couldn’t indeed perform in this fashion.” Asked whether the nasa manned space flight program could be accelerated, Mr. Webb answered that the booster program could be accelerated with a crash program spending another $1 to $2 billion a year. “You can get more done. It wlli be done inefficiently. We believe we have a program [now] that marries all of the considerations in an effective way . . .” To the question of who wollid first land on the moon, Mr. Webb replied, “I think we will make the manned lunar landing and return before they do.” As to future Russian capability, Dr. Dryden said: “there is a possibility that the Soviets can do circumlunar flight before we can. I once said there is a fifty-fifty chance, certailliy no better than that, that we collid do that as early as they can. It is for this reason, in fact, that our national goal was set at the lunar flight because this does require another booster on the part of the Russians as well as ourselves. “Ever since the Space Agency has been formed we have been waiting for this other shoe to be dropped. People have told us every month, the Russians are going to produce this big booster in the next few months. Now four years have gone by and they have not yet shown us this big booster. To the best of our knowledge they have developed lighter-weight nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles rather than bigger space boosters. This is not to say that they may not be doing this. All I am saying is that they will require a bigger booster to land men on the moon.”
U.S. and U.S.S.R. announced in U.N. their bilateral agreement to cooperate in space exploration programs of weather observation, magnetic-field study, and satellite communications. In meteorology, agreement called for experimental phase extending through 1964 “during the development of experimental weather satellites” by both countries; second phase would begin approximately 1964-65 with coordinated launchings by both countries of weather satellite system for operational use. In magnetic survey, agreement called for U.S. and U.S.S.R. each to launch a satellite equipped with magnetometers during International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), 1964-65. Both countries agreed to use the intervening years to continue their own magnetic measurement research and to exchange the data obtained. In satellite communications, agreement called for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to cooperate during coming year in communications experiments via U.S. passive communications satellite Echo A-12. Future negotiations would consider cooperative efforts in experimental system of active-repeater satellites. Agreement provided that “the results of these cooperative experiments would be made freely available to all interested states,” U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Adlai Stevenson said. Agreement was product of Geneva negotiations between U.S. team headed by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and Soviet team headed by Prof. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, conducted in spring of 1962.
Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, defended the U.S. space program in speech on floor of the House. Arguing that Soviet vostok in and iv manned orbital flights did not justify changes in the U.S. program, he said: “Certainly I will not stand here and say that more and better military space programs should not be undertaken. What I do say is that a considerable effort in this field has long been underway and that the Monday-morning quarterbacks whose teeth start chattering after every Russian ‘spectacular’ might exhibit a bit more faith in those who have the actual responsibility for the defense of the country. . . . “[We should not overlook] . . . the fact that the Soviets have now demonstrated two important capabilities: First, that they have sufficient launch facilities and rocket reliability to launch two manned spacecraft within a short time, and second, that they have the ability to time launches with great precision. These capabilities are an important step toward the development of the rendezvous and docking technique which will be of great value in achieving many advanced objectives in space exploration, some of which may have potential military value. “These, I think, are the formidable implications of their recent feat. But these implications are no reason for us to put our program in a constant state of flux, with projects starting, stopping, and shifting in response to each new Soviet development. Our undertaking is gigantic, immensely complex. It cannot be assembled and disassembled and redesigned and reassembled without losing its direction and momentum, and the space contest itself. . . . “There is a suggestion that the military services should duplicate work now in progress under the civilian agency. There is nothing particularly military about solutions to problems involved in the effects of long-term weightlessness, radiation, and isolation. The capabilities of both civilian and military research agencies should be brought to bear on these problems in a coordinated manner. “On the record, then, it appears that the critics of our space program are not asking that we do twice as much—but that we do everything twice. I do not think the economy will take that, but even if it would—it just does not make sense. “And how about the reciprocal use of the knowledge we are gaining? Science knows no exclusive applications technologically speaking, what is developed by civilians can be used militarily and vice versa. . . . “It seems farily well established that the real cause of all this squabble about the military-in-space stems from an inhouse difference of opinion within the military establishment. The problem is not that our civil space program is retarding the military. On the contrary, it is enhancing it and will continue to do so in the future. The problem is that the military space enthusiasts have not been able to obtain all the green lights they want from their bosses. ... I am confident the controversy will be resolved in time—and expeditiously, I hope.”
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., returned to his hometown, Oradell, N.J., for triumphal welcoming ceremonies in honor of his successful MA-8 six-orbit space flight for nasa Project Mercury, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Cdr. Schirra with the nasa Distinguished Service Medal.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. technical representatives held the first of a series of talks on the possibility of joint cooperation in space research and exploration. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, represented the U.S.; Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, represented the U.S.S.R.	.	.
Back in Washington after two-day tour of U.S. space facilities, President Kennedy held news conference. Asked why decision was made to extend U.S. atmospheric nuclear tests, the President said: “There are two reasons. One is that, as you know, because of the blow-up in the pad at Johnston Island and because of the earlier failures of the communication system in the missile, we were not able to carry out these tests which were . . . among the most important, if not the most important of our series. “So we are going to finish those. In addition, as a result of the earlier tests of this Dominic series, there were certain things learned which we would like to prove out. “So we have agreed to a limited number of tests in concluding the Dominic series, and also we have taken some steps to prevent a repetition of the incident which caused an increase in the number of electrons in the atmosphere, by lowering the altitude and the yield so that lunar flights will not be further endangered.” Asked whether U.S. position of refraining from competition with U.S.S.R. military space vehicles would condemn U.S. to second place in the mllitary field, President Kennedy replied: “No, Mr. Alexander. As I said last week, in the first place we are spending $1.5 billion a year on our military space program. What is the key for the success both of peaceful exploration of space as well as the military mastery of space are large boosters, effective control of the capsule, and the ability to rendezvous, and all of the rest, so that there is an obvious usefulness if the situation should require, military usefulness for our efforts, peaceful efforts, in space. “In addition, as you know, very recently we determined to go ahead with the Titan III, which gives the United States Air Force a very strong weapon if that should become necessary. So that the work that nasa is doing on Saturn and the work the Air Force is doing on Titan and the work being done on the Apollo program and Gemini and the others, all have a national security factor as well as a peaceful factor. . . . “I think the United States is attempting, and this Administration, as you know, is making a very massive effort in space. As I said, we are spending three times what we spent last year in space, and more in this year’s budget than the eight previous years, so that this is a tremendous effort, $5.5 billion as well as the money that we are spending for the military use of space. “As I say, the size of the booster and the capsule and the control all would have, if the situation required it, a military use. We hope it does not; we hope that space will be used for peaceful purposes. That is the policy of the United States Government, but we shall be prepared if it does not; and in addition, as I said from the beginning, both the Soviet Union and the United States have a capacity to send a missile to each other’s country with a nuclear warhead on it, so that we must keep some perspective as to where the danger may lie. But the United States, in the effort it is making both in the peaceful program and the military program, all of this will increase our security if the Soviet Union should attempt to use space for military purposes.” Asked if he were hopeful that U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative ventures in space exploration were likely in the near future, he replied: “No. As you know, Dr. Dryden had some conversations in Geneva with regard to the matter, and some progress was made, but it is limited in its scope and we would hope more could be done and more, perhaps, could be done if the atmosphere between the two countries should be improved.”
Howard Simons reported that many U.S. space experts feel that the U.S.S.R. has reshaped its space program from a few, spreadout “spectaculars” to a more orderly scientific program. While spectaculars have not been abandoned, it was thought the bulk of the program would be conducted with smaller, cheaper rockets for more useful scientific objectives and with more international cooperation. This was considered to be a victory for Soviet scientists over military and political planners who had favored the spectaculars.
nasa announced award of facilities grants to five universities, first such grants awarded by nasa. Worth a total of $6,410,000, the grants were to provide research facilities for activities in space-related sciences and technology to universities making “substantial contributions” to the U.S. space program: University of California, Berkeley; University of Chicago; Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; State University of Iowa; and Stanford University.
Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told the press that “since the orbiting of the Soviet twin Cosmonauts, the agitation [among members of the Senate, professional military societies, and the trade press] borders on panic and constitutes a threat to a program which is not only very important but complex and carefully planned. ... I have been a consistent advocate of a mllitary capability in space for the United States second to none, but I see no reason why our military requirements cannot be met without hamstringing or jeopardizing the civil space program. . . . There has been so much misinformation and misimpression generated about our space program, both the civil and military aspects, that I can no longer remain silent. The record has to be set straight and I intend to do it.” He said he would deliver a major speech on the House floor later this week, when he would place the space program into “balanced perspective.”
nasa announced that Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., University of North Carolina sociologist, had been named Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, effective September 1. Dr. Simpson had been Executive Director of the Research Triangle Committee of North Carolina, a regional development organization, since 1956. As a representative of the social sciences, he would bring them into working relationship to nasa’s physical science effort, and underline nasa’s awareness of the social and economic impact of the space program. Dr. Simpson succeeds Dr. Hiden T. Cox who resumed his post as Executive Director of the American Institute of Biological Sciences on July 1.
Walter C. Williams, associate director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, defended orbital flights by astronauts that apparently are duplicates of previous flights, saying that the only way the U.S. can have a space program in depth is to repeat some of the operations. He stated that new data were gathered from each flight, replying to critics of the second manned 3-orbit spaceflight mission (MA-7).	_
nasa would begin an education program in the fall of 1962 to provide financial support for 10 doctoral candidates in science and engineering at each of 10 U.S. universities, nasa Administrator dames E. Webb announced to the Institute of Environmental Sciences in Chicago. Students would receive a stipend of $2,400 per year, expenses up to $1,000 per year, and the university would be reimbursed for tuition, fees, and other expenses. Grants would be for one year, renewable to a maximum of three years. Mr. Webb said nasa expected the program “will increase considerably in years to come.”
H. Douglas Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., aerospace technologists at nasa Langley Research Center, awarded $1,000 for invention of Horizon Scanning Active Attitude Orientation of Stabilized Space Vehicles. James S. Albus, engineer at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, awarded $1,000 for his invention of a Digital Solar Aspect Sensor. Invention awards of less than $1,000 were made to following nasa employees: William H. Kinard and Sidney A. Batterson, Langley Research Center; Estin N. Baker, Jess S. W. Davidsen, Ralph L. Mossino, and Gilbert G. Robinson, Ames Research Center; Wilhelm Angele, Marshall Space Flight Center.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced first nationwide conference of scientists and educators would be held in Chicago November 1-3 to study the relationship between nasa and universities in meeting national space goals.
nasa's Manned Space Flight Management Council held meeting at nasa Headquarters.
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, said in an interview in General Electric Forum that the U.S. space program would be paying for itself within another 10 years. “The real payoff does not lie in mining the Moon or in bringing gold back from the Moon, but in enriching our economy and our science in new methods, new procedures, new knowledge, and advanced technology in general.”
In prepared press statement, Astronaut John H. Glenn commented on September 13 televised remarks by Astronaut Walter Schirra, and said: “I will continue to support his flight [Astronaut Schirra’s orbital flight MA-8] just as well as I possibly can. . . . I don’t want to add any more statements to a situation that has all the aspects of a tempest in a teapot. Scheduling of my time for maximum benefit from a technical and national space program standpoint has been continually reviewed by both Dr. Gilruth and the management of nasa.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, stated there was no real controversy over Col. Glenn’s position in the space program or on other questions raised by Cdr. Schirra.
usaf witnesses before the Senate Military Appropriations Subcommittee testified under questioning that dod budget was not adequate in all areas. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, said that funds should be provided for “at least 100 more Minuteman icbm’s” than in present budget, and that he favored a “little more emphasis” in the military space program on early-warning systems. Secretary Eugene Zuckert indicated that he favored development of the RS-70 as a full-fledged weapon system.
Bell Telephone Laboratories announced the formation of a new corporation, Bellcom, Inc., to supply system engineering support to nasa’s space program. The new corporation would be owned jointly by at&t and Western Electric Corp.
Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz said in San Francisco that Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s “extraordinary intransigence” was responsible for deadlocked negotiations with the International Association of Machinists which resulted in two-day strike (iam strikers returned to work today). Three-man board of inquiry appointed by the President began their investigation of the “union shop” conflict. During November: In letter to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Administrator James E. Webb advised Congress of plans to reprogram $10,426,000 in FY 1963 funds to begin construction of facllities at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr). Of this sum, $1,717,000 was needed for Little Joe launch-complex construction; $9,084,000 was for site development and support facilities. During November: Goodyear Aircraft Corp. announced development of tunnel to simulate conditions encountered by satellites, missile nose cones, and recovery packages during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere.
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, writing on the U.S. space program in The Saturday Evening Post, stated that he did “not see the need for continuing this effort of such a fantastically expensive crash program. . . . “Why the great hurry to get to the moon and the planets? We have already demonstrated that in everything except the power of our booster rockets we are leading the world in scientific space exploration. “From here on, I think we should proceed in an orderly, scientific way, building one accomplishment on another, rather than engaging in a mad effort to win a stunt race.”
In speech to the Oregon Department of Planning and Development, nasa Administrator James E. Webb pointed out that “one of the dominant features of our age is the snort time lag between scientific discovery and practical applications.” The practical benefits of the U.S. space program would, he said, be early derived in three major ways: (1) satellites will be put to work on a global basis to report the weather, transmit messages and worldwide television programs, and to serve as electronic lighthouses in the sky; (2) in pushing our space program, we are making many technological advances which can be utilized to improve industrial processes and raise our standard of living; and (3) the money we spend on space activities stimulates business in general and our industrial pioneering in particular.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the U.S. “can be the leader in the establishment of a communications satellite system to serve the communications needs of the world, thus demonstrating our technical capabilities and our desire to utilize these capabilities for the benefit of all mankind. ... I urge that the Committee report the blli favorably.”
At Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearing on the Administration’s FY 1963 budget request for the space program, Dr. Harold Brown, dod Director of Research and Engineering, testified that dod is “developing the technologies which contribute to military and unmanned orbital systems able to rendezvous with satellites and then land at pre-selected locations on earth.” Dr. Brown assured the committee that dod has “no intention to pre-empt those areas which are within the proper purview” of nasa.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, described use of instruments in space exploration, in address at 17th annual Instrument-Automation Conference and Exhibit, New York: “There are three main areas. The first is that of observations of spacecraft by instruments on the ground, and the processing of [such] data. . . . The second area is that of measurements made by instruments in the spacecraft on the space environment . . . and on performance of the equipment m the spacecraft. . . . The third area consists of similar measurements of the performance of the rockets and the acceleration, vibration, and noise environment which they impose on the spacecraft. . . .”
Monetary awards for patentable inventions were made to nasa employees under provisions of the Incentive Awards Act of 1954 as follows: George A. Smith of nasa Ames Research Center; Arlen F. Carter, George P. Wood, and Adolf Busemann of nasa Langley Research Center; David G. Evans, Warner L. Stewart, Edward F. Baehr, H. Allen, Jr., C. C. Ciepluch, E. A. Fletcher, Samuel Stein, David M. Straight, and John W. Gregory of nasa Lewis Research Center; William J. D. Escher and Thomas L. Greenwood of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before the National Association of Broadcasters in Chicago, cited nasa’s space sciences program as “a quest for fundamental knowledge” without which the applied science and technology “would soon run dry. . . . Suppose we had laid out a program five or six years ago, directly tied to manned space flight. We would never have discovered the Great Radiation Belt, which . . . constitutes one of the severest manned-space flight problems we face.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at press conference and luncheon announcing Chicago and Midwest Space Month, said: “ . . . I would like to stress one of the most challenging opportunities of the Space Age for American business—and for the consumer. In designing, building, testing, and flying space hardware we are searching for and creating new materials, lubricants, manufacturing processes, and techniques. We are stressing miniaturization, quality control, and foolproof automatic operation over long periods of time. We hope that many of these new products and new techniques can be put to good use on earth as well as in space and that the benefits they yield for business and the American consumer will eventually pay a substantial portion of the cost of the space program. We do not know what new products or uses may develop from space activities of the next few years. But we are hoping that businessmen throughout the country will be watching closely for profitable possibilities. And this is one way in which close contacts between business and the scientific community will pay off. The university can act as a transmission belt to make this accumulation of new technology available to industry . ... ”
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, was awarded the McCurdy Medal, honoring nasa for “outstanding contributions to the world in the field of science,” at the Canadian International Air Show, Toronto.
Speaking at general aaas meeting in Philadelphia, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy nasa Administrator, supported the thesis that science has developed most rapidly in an environment of a national social need, most often for national defense or health. In an atmosphere of highly motivated and widely supported national activities, science and scientists have received enhanced support over broad areas as well as in narrow specialties: Benefits of this have far outweighed unbalances. Such has been our national experience in the technologies of aeronautics, com munications, radar, nuclear energy, and now space. In such periods, the number of free scientists supported to work on problems of their own selection is greater than in the absence of social pressures, although admittedly there is a still greater expansion of team effort. Dr Dryden said: “. . . It is our aim in nasa to administer the [space] program in such a way as to strengthen science and engineering broadly, to strengthen our universities and our industrial base, in fact to add to our national strength in every possible way. As regards the problem under discussion, nasa has undertaken as a goal the support of about 4,000 graduate students per year in 150 qualified universities to do our part in increasing the supply.”
nasa Flight Research Center released photographs of a mysterious floating object taken during Maj. Robert M. White’s July 17 record-breaking flight of the X-15. Pictures, extracted from llim taken by movie camera in tail of X-15, showed gray-white object of undetermined size tumbling above and behind the aircraft, nasa officials reported that it was “impossible to identify or explain the object’s presence at this time.”
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, addressed NASA-University Conference on the Science and Technology of Space Exploration, Chicago: “During the first four years of the existence of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 157 sounding rockets, 55 satellites, and 9 space probes have been launched and have yielded a tremendous amount of information in all of the areas of interest. Many hundreds of research papers have appeared in the open scientific literature and a considerable portion of the scientific community, both national and international, has become involved in the effort to make the most of the opportunities afforded by the space program for the conduct of important research. It is hoped that the university community will continue to find new and challenging opportunities and wlli continue to increase and strengthen its participation which has already become a major element in the success of the program so far.”
West Side Association of Commerce (N.Y.C.) presented National West Side Award to nasa. In accepting the award, nasa Administrator James E. WTebb said: “Except in war time, no large national effort has had such a rapid buildup as the space program over the past five years. The end of the buildup is not in sight, but the rate is slowing down and is keyed to the policy . . . that this is a fast paced, driving, prudently managed and efficiently conducted program, but is not a crash program. . . . “In my view, we are entering a period when our national decisions and the debates which accompany them will not so much relate to whether and when we can achieve pre-eminence in space, but the rate at which we should proceed beyond the time when this pre-eminence is achieved—beyond the time when we have begun manned exploration of the moon. . . . “It is the contribution of all the forces, in industry, government, and the universities, under the leadership which President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson have given the program, that gives us the basis for the pre-eminence we have in most fields in space and the pre-eminence we will shortly have in all.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Assistant Administrator Hiden T.	Cox, and other nasa speakers addressed the annual convention of the American Association of School Administrators. Mr. Webb said: “Space science and space exploration have become an integral and vital part of a great industrial and technological revolution which is now taking place in our own country and throughout the world . . . [the] rapid rate of change as much as the change itself is one of the dominant facts of our time.” Dr. Cox outlined nasa’s program of educational services to meet the needs of education in and for the Space Age.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the National Conference of the American Society for Public Administration in Detroit, said: “No new department or agency in the recent history of the Executive Branch of the Federal Government was created through the transfer of as many units from other departments and agencies as in the case of nasa. Three and one half years ago, nasa did not exist. Today nasa comprises approximately 20,500 employees, ten major field centers, and an annual budget approaching the $2 billion mark.”
Senator Howard W. Cannon spoke on the Senate floor on the need for an enlarged military space program. “. . . the major emphasis being placed by present U.S. space efforts has been on the purely scientific exploration of space and on its civilian applications, in priority above and indeed to the detriment of development of vitally needed military capabilities in space. If continued, this could prove to be a fatal mistake .... Unfortunately the present direction of our national efforts in space gives little or no assurance that attention is truly directed to the development of our military capabilities .... Clearly, we ought to have an energetic development program underway, adequately supported with funds, to find means to defend ourselves against attacks that could come from hostile orbiting space vehicles.” Senator Cannon listed several “minimum essential required space capabilities:” (1) near-space operations using manned maneuverable vehicles “capable of self-defense and having the capability of conducting offensive, defensive, and passive support missions;” (2) a standard military-civilian space launch system; (3) unmanned satellites for military communications missions; (4) improved tracking, control, and detection facilities (5) space-located facilities for r&d; (6) space-located bioastronautics research by means of a manned orbiting satellite.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Committee on Commerce, supported the President’s blli setting up a commullications satellite corporation and approved of the Senate amendments, except for a caution on the one that wollid direct the fcc to encourage communications common carriers to build and own their own ground stations. Mr. Webb summarized nasa's responsibllities under the blli: (1) to advise fcc on the technical characteristics of the system; (2) to advise fcc on the technical feasibility of attaining the desired technical characteristics; (3) to coordinate its space communications r&d work with that of the corporation; (4) to furnish launching facllities, vehicles, and services in connection with the development and operation of the system; (5) to furnish other services on a reimbursable basis; and (6) to advise the Secretary of State on technical feasibllity of the system providing communications service to a particlliar point in the world.
nasa witnesses appeared before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on communication satellites system. Deputy nasa Administrator Dryden stated that the U.S. wollid nave operational satellite commullications within five years.
U.S.S.R. announced it had launched mars i, a 1,970-lb. space probe on seven-month flight to Mars. Launched with an “improved booster” into parking orbit around the earth, mars i was hurled into escape trajectory when vehicle engines re-ignited. Tass reported mars i was flying as planned on its course toward Mars. “All systems are functioning normally and orders sent to the station [i.e., probe] are well received and obeyed.” Main tasks of the probe were interplanetary exploration, establishment of interplanetary space radio communications, photographing the Martian surface and relaying the photographs back to earth by radio. “Telemetric, measuring, and scientific instrumentation will be automatically activated in conformity with the flight program by radio commands from the earth,” Tass said. The flight had been preceded by an unsuccessful launch attempt the previous week, unidentified dod sources said, (nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated in September that two Soviet attempts to launch Mars probes had failed in October 1960.)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced establishment of nasa’s Northeastern Operations Office, to be located in the Boston, Massachusetts, area. The office will coordinate nasa’s liaison with university and business contractors in the northeast United States.
White House announced President Kennedy would visit military and civilian missile and rocket installations at Cape Canaveral, Fla.; Huntsville, Ala.; Houston, Tex.; and St. Louis, Mo., on September 11-12. President Kennedy would be accompanied by Vice President Johnson, Secretary of Defense McNamara, nasa Administrator Webb, bob director David E. Bell, and several Congressmen. Purpose of trip was “to study the work being done in this most important area and in connection with the preparation of the fiscal year 1964 budget. . . .”
Vincent Johnson, nasa Centaur program manager, reportedly said nasa would spend an additional $33 million to accelerate slipping Centaur launch vehicle development, nasa would divert funds from other programs rather than request supplement from Congress. During August: First full-scale model of 3-man Apollo spacecraft underwent preliminary ocean drop-testing off California coast and was shipped to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center for further testing. J. Thomas Markley, Apollo project engineer for nasa, described all spacecraft structural tests thus far as “successful.”
In speech to ias-nasa Manned Space Flight Conference at St. Louis, General Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, said that if the Soviets attain a “really significant breakthrough in space technology, they may be able to deny other nations access to space—even for purposes of scientific research. . . . We must have necessary strength to ensure that space is free to be used for peaceful purposes.” Schriever said that “both the military and civilian aspects of our space program are vital, and both must be pursued with urgency. They share a common aim—• the security and well-being of the United States.”
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, writing in the General Electric Forum, said that there were unique military problems in space that a civilian space program never could solve. “The Air Force wlli make orbital flights much sooner than previously planned,” he wrote.
Representative Chet Holifield, Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, declared in speech that “moon madness” is starving scientific programs other than space exploration. He predicted budgetary troubles for atomic energy programs because of “greater priority” of space programs. November 27-December 9: Four launchings of Centaur rockets took place from the Argentine Rocket Range, Chamical, as part of worldwide program of simultaneous measurements of winds and turbulence in the ionosphere by means of sodium-cloud experiments. The Argentine launchings were joint cooperative effort of French National Committee on Space Studies and the Argentine National Commission on Space Research.
Maj. Gherman Titov in San Francisco press conference continued to chide U.S. space program. He said that if he was asked to join a U.S. astronaut in a cooperative space mission: “I would be a bit afraid because there have been quite a lot of failures in your program.” And, he remarked, the MR-3 capsule was “not even good enough for flying in orbit.”
nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, addressed National Industrial Conference Board, Chicago, on economic implications of manned space flight program: “ ... In a significant, though incidental way, the space program is already enriching and will continue to enrich our country. It is causing a rapid advancement of industrial technology and the stimulation of our economy. The billions of dollars required for the space effort are not being spent on the moon; they are being spent in our factories and laboratories—for salaries and for new materials and supplies, which in turn represent income for others. “Already the space industry is a major industry. It is creating new job opportunities at all levels of skills and abilities. It is improving standards of living. “New economically beneficial breakthroughs will be made in many fields. A successful space program will require major and rapid advances in the uses of energy and the development of new materials, fabrics, and lubricants—the very forces that are basic to economic growth. “Space research and development is already producing corollary benefits in the form of new products, new methods, and new industrial processes which can be employed in the manufacture of countless articles for human use. The surface has probably barely been scratched. . . . “The development of space science and technology will undoubtedly strengthen our whole industrial base and serve as effective insurance against technological obsolescence. ...”
In speech to the American Astronautical Society, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, submitted that Russia could match the U.S. in space “only if we place short-run convenience ahead of our nation’s future. . . . There are those who seem to take for granted that a country like Soviet Russia, with less than half the per capita income of the United States, can afford a major successful space program, while we can not. That is, at best, ridiculous, and, at worst, deliberate sabotage.”
Dr. Ivan A. Getting, President of Aerospace Corp., told National Rocket Club in Washington that the U.S. space program had been plagued from the beginning by an artificial “dichotomy” that assumed peaceful activities in space were “pure” and military activities were “evil.” “We know, all the world knows, that we have no intention of exploiting space for reasons of aggression. But now the Russians are demonstrating to the world that their space exploits are straightforward demonstrations of raw military power. . . . “We in the United States need to reaffirm our traditional position—but with pride instead of seeming shame—that our presently great military strength is the most potent force in the world and that it is working 24 hours a day to help keep the peace. ...	_ “If our strength is to be maintained we must have the military tools that are best suited to help keep the peace . . . operational however and whenever and wherever necessary—in space, in the atmosphere, under the seas, or even underground. “We need to restate the historic peacetime military role of sharing in exploring the frontiers . . . now in space . . . and that this sharing be on a basis of both cooperation and also some healthy competition. ... “We must recognize that many practical space missions have both military and civilian uses; that the exploitation of space for these missions necessarily involves both the development and continuing operation of these systems, and that as a consequence, each should be evaluated on the basis of how it can be realized most effectively from the standpoint of overall national benefit. “It will take our best efforts in an overall unified plan. But to assure success there must be no dichotomy in space any more than has been in any other worthwhile national undertaking ))
The Senate passed nasa authorization for FY 1963 (H.R. 11737) of $3,820,515,520. Amendments submitted by Senator William Proxmire to require competitive bidding on space projects and to establish a presidential commission to study the impact of the space program upon the nation’s manpower were both defeated by lopsided votes. Senate authorization restored $116 million cut by the House.
Reported that Secretary of Defense McNamara was not surprised by the Soviet double-orbiting of vostok iii and iv, and that he did not consider the flights as cause for changing the U.S. military space program.
U.N.’s reorganized 28-nation Committee on the Peacefil Uses of Outer Space opened its meetings with the reelection of Dr. Franz Matsch of Austria as chairman and his subsequent riling that the committee woild make decisions by “consensus” rather than by vote. U.S. delegate was Francis T. P. Plimpton; his deputy was Richard N. Gardner, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Orgailzation Affairs. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, was Plimpton’s technical adviser. Dr. Homer Newell of nasa and Leonard C. Meeker of the State Department were alternate representatives. Congressional advisers were Senators Howard W. Cannon and Margaret Chase Smith, and Representatives James G. Filton and George P. Miller. U.S.S.R. representative was Platon D. Morozov. V. Dobronravov, member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and space expert, was his scientific adviser.
Congressman Bob Wilson of House Armed Services Committee, addressing the Institute of World Affairs, recommended establishment of a U.S. Military Space Academy. He said he was “deeply concerned over the tendency of our space program to emphasize the experimental and scientific and de-emphasize the military aspects of space. . . . The Air Force has started a limited program to train spacemen for the future. It should be expanded into a full-fledged space manpower program. Perhaps a ‘fourth service’ should be set up to train men in astronautics, hypersonic aerodynamics, the physiological and psychological aspects of flight.”
NASA-wide conference reviewing nasa’s Future Applications Program was held in headquarters to review best means of increasing application of technological advances derived from the space program to commercial and industrial purposes.
In speech at Lubbock, Texas, Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said that Armed Forces Day 1962 has a special meaning: “It means John Glenn and our rising capabllities in space. It means our desire to share space for peaceful purposes with the rest of the world. And it underscores our determination to see to it that no nation is disfranchised in space . . . “The primary purpose of our arms has always been peace, not war . . . “Space is the new measure of our problems as well as our opportunities. The principal responsibilities for the nation’s space program are vested in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Air Force. We work together as a team, not rivals. And together we are doing the spadework for the space technology of tomorrow. “Today, space is still free and open. It must stay that way. We can not allow it to be pre-empted tomorrow for use as a military staging area by those who hope to dominate the world. “I believe with President Kennedy that space is a great opportunity as well as a great task. ...”	_
nasa Administrator Webb named Franklyn W. Phillips, Assistant to the Administrator (October 1, 1958-present), to establish and direct nasa’s Northeastern Operations Office in Boston, Mass. Phillips served as Acting Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council from January 1959 to February 1960.
Deputy nasa Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden accepted invitation to become an Honorary Fellow of the British Interplanetary Society, an honor only accorded to eight persons who have rendered major services to astronautics over a number of years.
In address at dedication of the nasa Space Exhibit at the Seattle World’s Fair, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said that “our entire space program now costs each American about 30 cents a week. During the next few years we plan to spend about 50 cents a week per person on space. “However, our space program and its by-products will stimulate a sharp increase in the nation’s productive output which in turn will increase our gross national product, our income, and the Federal Government’s intake . . . “. . . we are hopeful of achieving fruitful cooperation with the Soviet Union in such fields as communications, weather forecasting, mapping the earth’s magnetic fields and space medicine. “We feel that cooperation in outer space may establish a firm basis for greater mutual understanding—which in turn will help in our efforts to obtain disarmament . . . “The responsibility to cooperate also lies heavily on the other great space power—the Soviet Union. I am able to tell you in a spirit of cautious optimism that the Soviet Union appears to realize that—in outer space, at least—there may be something to be gained by cooperatingwith the rest of humanity.”
Senator Estes Kefauver (D-Tenn.) announced nasa proposed patent regulations would “flout the clear legislative intent underlying the nasa Act of 1958.” Urging nasa not to adopt the regulations he contended they would impede the space program, increase monopoly “in an already concentrated industry,” and give private industry the fruits of research financed publicly. Franz Olson, of Aerospace Industries Association, said at the nasa hearing that proposed patent waiver regulations would lead to an increase in inventions through “the proven incentives of the patent system.” Senator Russell B. Long (D-La.) charged the patent proposals would give “patent monopolies” to the industry on developments resulting from publicly financed research. Senator Long said Monopoly Subcommittee of the Senate Small Business Committee would conduct hearings on the proposed regulations in January.
U.S.S.R. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet declared April 12, anniversary of the first Soviet space flight, to be a national annual holiday in Russia. In announcing ceremonies for Cosmonautics Day m the Soviet Union, Leonid Korneyev reviewed the U.S.S.R.’s space program from its beginning in April 1932, with the formation of a group to study jet propulsion. Between 1932 and 1941, Korneyev pointed out, the U.S.S.R. had developed 118 different liquid-fuel rocket engines.
James A. Martin, nasa X-15 Program Manager, in letter to the Washington Evening Star clarified the method of computing mach number in high-speed flight. “Mach number is a direct function of atmospheric temperature at the altitude at which the vehicle is flying. This temperature varies from day to day for the same altitude. Because of this, it is possible that the same number of feet per second at the same altitude can be more or less than a given Mach number.” He pointed out that on November 9, 1961, Major Robert White flew the X-15 to speed of 6,005 feet per second; on June 27, 1962, Joseph Walker flew to 6,020 feet per second, at about the same altitude as Major White. However, because of differences in atmospheric temperatures for the two days, Major White attained higher mach number (M 6.04) than Walker (M 5.94).
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in published interview: “People talk too much about crash programs and too little about sustained support. These space programs take time. A decision you make today on some engineering or scientific aspects of our space program may take anywhere from four to five years before it takes the form of hardware. “When you make a wrong decision now, the payoff, good or bad, could come five years later, not sooner than that. We can’t work miracles overnight. . . .”
U.S.S.R. made unsuccessful attempt to launch Venus probe, the launch vehicle falling to achieve escape trajectory and remaining in parking orbit, NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported in Sept. 5, 1962, letter to Congress.
First NASA-University Conference on the Science and Technology of Space Exploration held in Chicago, with 1,181 educators and scientists representing nasa Headquarters, nasa field installations, and other Government agencies, as well as more than 300 colleges and universities.
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, and the nasa astronauts were honored at Explorers Club’s Night of Exploration dinner in New York. Addressing the club on nasa programs and goals, Mr. Webb said: “Curiosity—the driving human thirst for knowledge—is only one reason, of course, for undertaking space exploration on the scale and at the pace which our country has established. . . . “First, we seek for mankind the benefits inherent in the scientific and technological knowledge and dexterity that will emerge from this dynamic effort to conquer the most hostile environment that man has ever entered—and to use that knowledge and technical skill as an important new resource for human progress. “Second, we seek to maintain our position as leader of the Free World, through continued superiority in science and technology. “And, finally, we seek space power as a deterrent to any potential adversary who might attempt to exploit space as an avenue of aggression against us . . . .”
At annual nasa awards ceremony, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Group Achievement Awards: to four groups at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Assistant Directorate for Engineering and Development, Preflight Operations Division, Mercury Project Office, and Flight Operations Office; and to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Directorate for Tracking and Data Systems, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards to Robert E. Bourdeau and John C. Lindsay, both of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Outstanding Leadership Awards to Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director for Engineering and Development, msc; George B. Graves, Jr., Assistant Director for Information and Control Systems, msc; George M. Low, Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of Manned Space Flight; and John W. Townsend, Jr., Assistant Director for Space Science at GSFC.
Rep. James G. Fulton, senior Republican on the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in an interview: “There’s no doubt our overall space program is slipping despite the high words and fine praise coming from the White House ... If it continues to slip, we’ll be lucky to get a man on the moon before 198°.” _ ...
In an address to the Duke University Symposium on “Regional Implications of Space Research,” nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated: “I believe the regional approach is sound. It permits a number of universities to pool resources for research and to plan complementary programs directed to the needs of the region. Industry, too, has much to gain from regional cooperation . . . beginning, more and more, to look to the universities of their region for the most important resources of the age—ideas, scientific brainpower, and advanced technological skill and experience. “It is not a question today of whether a region can already qualify. . . . The question is whether the region is creatively doing what it can to equip its citizens to serve their area and their Nation in a period when our prosperity and our very existence as a free people depend on scientific and technological leadership. . .”
Results of Aviation Week poll of the members of the House of Representatives to secure “grass-roots” opinions on the U.S. space program were published. Representatives were asked to indicate how their constituents felt about key space aspects. The majority indicated that the U.S. space program is “proceeding at the right pace”; of the minority who disagreed with this, twice as many favored “speeding up the program.” Landing a man on the moon was considered “something the U.S. must do primarily to keep up with the Russians.” The majority also felt that nasa rather than the military should run the space program (“emphatic support for nasa on this question by a ratio of almost 5 to 1”). Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario noted on his questionnaire that it is regrettable tnat the space program is linked in the public mind to the cold war contest with Russia: “I am concerned by this because the space program does not therefore stand on its own and there is the resulting danger that it wlli not receive the continuous support it will need over the years ahead to do what must be done . . .”
Monetary awards under $1,000 were made to nasa employees for patentable inventions: nasa Ames Research Center—Vernon L. Rogallo; Joseph R. Smith, Jr.; John V. Foster; and Albert E. Clark, Jr.; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center—Harold J. Peake, Stephen Paull, and William A. Leavy; nasa Langley Research Center—William J. O’Sullivan, Jr.; George F. Pezdirtz; George F. Look; Frank M. Ballentine, Jr.; Virgil S. Ritchie; Howard F. Ogden; Eldon E. Kordes; Donald H. Trussed; Deene J. Weidman; George E. Griffith; Blake W. Corson, Jr.; and Emanuel Schnitzer; nasa Lewis Research Center—Paul F. Sikora; nasa Manned Spacecraft Center—Warren Gillespie, Jr.; nasa Marshall Space Flight Center—Donelson B. Horton.
In X-15 awards ceremony before distinguished guests and Headquarters personnel, at nasa Headquarters, tribute was paid to the team of governmental and industrial persons responsible for the contributions of the X-15 program to aeronautics and space flight. Associate Administrator Seamans reviewed the objectives and achievements of the X-15 program, nasa Outstanding Leadership Awards were presented to Paul F. Bikle (Director of the nasa Flight Research Center) and Hartley A. Soulli (Langley Research Center X-15 project manager) by Administrator Webb. After a short address on the pride of the nation concerning nasa’s achievements, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson (Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council and a key figure in the Congressional enactment of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958) awarded nasa Distinguished Service Medals to the X-15 pilots Forrest Petersen (Cdr., usn), Robert M. White (Major, usaf), and Joseph A. Walker (nasa).
In joint letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Robert S. Kerr and Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller said: “The world must of necessity admire the remarkable achievements of the Soviet Union in the field of space. A shadow is thrown over the entire space effort through their refusal to admit to failures. . . . “We feel it is important that if the U.S. Government possesses any information relative to unsuccessful attempts by the Soviet Union to launch a spacecraft to Venus, or other planetary probes, that this information should be made available to our committees and to the American people.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of Dr. Howard S. Turner to the Industrial Applications Advisory Committee. Dr. Turner was vice president for r&d of Jones & Laugh-lin Steel Corp. and formerly president and a director of Industrial Research Institute.
In opinion poll taken in Ohio Congressional District (23) by Congressman William E. Minshall on whether the U.S. should enter into a cooperative space program with Russia, 47% replied affirmative, 39.6% replied negative, and 13.3% made “no opinion” replies.
The National Center for Space Studies of France, headed by Pierre Auger, released a summary of its 1962 space program: launching of sounding rockets containing a rat and later a cat to 125 miles altitude; research observations of the sun and various planets; and telecommunications experiments. France would also cooperate in a joint satellite project with the U.S. and participate in the European Organization for Space Research.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in first annual Theodore von K arm an Lecture of the American Rocket Society: “The costs of the presently approved [space] program increase next year to about six billion dollars if current time schedules are maintained. It would not be possible to include the development of a [manned] space station now without still larger resources assigned to the space program. I personally believe that the next large manned space flight project [after Project Apollo manned lunar landing] will be this one rather than extensive exploitation of the moon or manned expeditions to the planets. This might change if the early lunar exploration returned surprises in the form of natural resources of use on earth. “I think it will now be appreciated that the present rather arbitrary subdivisions of our program will coalesce, for the manned space station wlli be useful for both manned and unmanned scientific exploration and could be the site of observation of weather or of communications relay stations . . . .”
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, interviewed in The National Observer, said: “Some people have drawn the conclusion that the Russians are ahead of the United States in the endeavor to land men on the moon and return them safely. This is based on a misconception that going to the moon is something like progress down a one-way street, passing successive street-corners. “That is far from being the case. The enterprise requires mobilization of a large task force with many tasks to be done and brought to fruition simultaneously. In some aspects, it makes small difference in what order the tasks are performed. The fact that the Russians have done one part of the work of going to the moon does not mean that they are ahead in the entire enterprise. ...” When asked about U.S. participation in international space programs, Dr. Dryden said: “The United States now has arrangements with more than 55 countries for space activity. . . . We hope to increase the number of countries with which we are co-operating. We have been engaged in negotiations with the Soviet Union toward that end. “Recently, Academician Anatoli Blagonravov and I concluded the first phase of the negotiations with a joint recommendation to our governments that they undertake co-operative efforts in meteorology, communications, and the investigation of the earth’s magnetic field. . . . ”
White House and State Dept, officials denied report by French newspaper Paris-Presse that U.S. and U.S.S.R. negotiators had signed cooperative agreement to send team of Russians and Americans to the moon in 1970 on first manned lunar flight. During December: Response to O.E. Forum survey of editors, writers, and publishers: 60% considered present expenditure for U.S. space program fully warranted; 26% probably fully warranted; 8% probably not; 5%, not warranted; and 1%, no response. Asked what should be level of expenditure (relative to gnp) in immediate future, 25% replied sharply higher; 30%, a little higher; 22%, remain at about present ratio; 6%, a little lower; 6%, sharply lower; 11%, no response. 33% said U.S. would probably exceed U.S.S.R. in space achievements by 1970, while 40% said U.S. would approximately equal U.S.S.R. by 1970. 45% said prime objective of U.S. in space was to exceed U.S.S.R. space achievements—but without duplication and inefficiencies of an all-out crash program. 35% said prime objective was to sustain a prudent and orderly program of scientific progress in space achievements, with little regard for who leads in the various aspects of space technology. 16% chose crash program to exceed the Russians in space. As to justification for U.S. space program, 59% said: “Because of its by-products, both actual and potential, our space program is an excellent dollar investment, over and above its value for military security and international prestige.” 29% chose this statement: “Our space program requires a high dollar expenditure which must be justified—preponderantly if not wholly—m terms of its value for military security and international prestige.” During December: nasa awarded contract to Ford Motor Co. Aero-nutronic Div. for development of camera system to be hard-landed on the moon. To relay photographs of lunar surface back to earth, camera would be used in future Ranger lunar spacecraft and would replace seismometers carried in bangers iii, iv, and v.
nasa awards of less than $1,000 for inventions were made to the following nasa employees: D. H. Buckley, R. L. Johnson, Earl W. Conrad, R. J. Weber, F. D. Kochendorfer, John C. Nettles, Glen E. McDonald, Gerald Morrell, L. A. Baldwin, V.	A. Sandborn, C. J. Blaze, C. G. Richter, and Marcus F. Heid-mann of Lewis Research Center; and David H. Schaefer of Goddard Space Flight Center.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, addressed National Advanced Technology Management Council in Seattle on the U.S. lunar program. “Although we are still in a very early phase of the greatest engineering project that man has ever undertaken, the Nation has made four crucial management decisions which clear the way for action. First, the goal has been identified. We are to land American explorers on the moon. Second, the timetable has been laid down. We are to carry out the mission and return the U.S. explorers safely to earth within this decade. Third, we have settled on the organization to meet the national goal on schedule. Finally, we have selected the method which we believe can accomplish the lunar expedition on the shortest possible time schedule, with the greatest assurance of success, and at the least expense. You do not need to be a specialist in management to realize that decisions such as these are central to the success of any job—what to do, when to do it, who is to be in charge, and how it is to be done. In the United States space program, these fundamental decisions have been made. And we have proceeded with the work to carry them out at the swiftest pace consonant with other processing needs of the country and with the resources available .... “The achievement which stands out [in the manned lunar landing program] . . ., in my opinion, has been the launching by the people of the United States of a truly national effort to demonstrate our determination and our capacity to sail on the new ocean of space and to master the technology of the space age in all its aspects—for the security of the Free World and the good of all mankind. “The lunar landing is no stunt. The most important accomplishment will be the development by this Nation of the ability to make the landing, and not the landing itself. Achievement of such ability is worth the great investment in brains and industrial capacity and technological advance that we are making. The lunar landing is a yardstick—a measure of this country’s technological leadership, a measure of the ability of this democracy to ‘manage,’ if you will, a great engineering and technological undertaking in the national interest.”
In speech at Cleveland, Miss., General Bernard A. Schriever said: “As long as the Soviets remain committed to their goal of world domination, their accomplishments in space can be a potential source of danger to free men everywhere. In their efforts to bring about the complete victory of their system, they have not hesitated to use any means. There is no reason to believe that space will be an exception. ... “National defense missions in space have certain unique requirements, but in many ways they are closely related to other aspects of the national space program. There has been and continues to be close cooperation between the Air Force and “The rate of progress in our space program will be determined by two factors. The first of these is research. Development of space technology urgently calls for new knowledge. . . . “Research alone is not enough. The knowledge we acquire must be applied in timely fashion. The key to this application is management. ...”
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and his family were welcomed by President Kennedy in brief visit at the White House. Also in Washington, Cdr. Schirra appeared before nasa Headquarters employees, later at the Pentagon receiving usn astronaut wings from Secretary of the Navy Fred Korth.
Ten-year program for the study of weather, climate, and the atmosphere was submitted to the President’s Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner. Report by Dr. Sverre Petterssen was based on six conferences among 189 meteorological specialists and called for tripled manpower and expenditures including much research in space programs.
nasa test pilot Joseph A. Walker, key speaker at 40th Anniversary and 1962 Annual Meeting of National Aeronautic Association in Washington, said: “I feel very strongly that the source of our strength in the air in commerce and in National Defense is gradually drying up. Looking at the attrition of small airports, the cost o! flight instruction, the attitude of local residents near airports, and the increasing restrictions upon use of airspace and facilities, I cannot help becoming alarmed. . . . The supply of individuals with skills capable of supplying the demand for pilots will inevitably decrease from old age and retirement. . . . “Two things are apparent. One, that the present outlook is gloomy. Two, that history and foresight give us grounds for expecting that there will be plenty of need for pilots in space as well as in the atmosphere. . . . The need for pilots will not be confined to the cockpit. Engineers with pilot training have a better understanding of the cockpit problems. We need the understanding of the cockpit problem in operations, in maintenance and repair, in management and in planning. Beyond doubt, pilot experience can be an effective tool and augment business administration as well as engineering and accounting. . . . “The space programs are depending upon qualified, experienced test pilots. It is my belief that they don’t happen, they are made, and they are made just about the time of the first solo.”
Langley Gold Medal of the Smithsonian Institution was awarded to Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa’s Deputy Administrator, at the annual meeting of the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. Cited for his “important applications of experimental science to the problems of flight and for his wise and courageous administration of much of America’s research and technical developments that now make possible the conquest of air and space,” Dr. Dryden was the tenth recipient of the 54-year-old award.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Northeast Commerce and Industry Exposition in Boston, said: “The achievement of . . . [U.S. pre-eminence in space] requires that we learn to travel in space as we have learned to travel on the sea or in the air. We must develop what might be termed space power—the capability to utilize space for every purpose which our national interest may require. And, to fulfill the directives established by the Congress, we must develop that competence in space for the benefit of our own people, and of all mankind .... “Although creative individual effort is as important today as it has ever been, and the imagination and initiative of the individual remain the primary source of scientific and technical progress, the development and perfection of the complex equipment, the systems and subsystems which are taking men into space are rarely, if ever, the work of single individuals. Today, teams of talented and imaginative technicians are joined in each major technological achievement . . . .”
Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, headed by Rep. Victor Anfuso, opened hearings on the role of women in the space program. Jane B. Hart and Jerrie Cobb, representing the 13 women who completed unofficial space qualification tests at the Lovelace Foundation, testified that women had a real contribution to make and were qualified as astronauts. Jacqueline Cochran, well-known flier, said that “there is no doubt in the world that women will go into space.”
In regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked for his “evaluation of our progress in space at this time” and whether the U.S. had changed its “timetable for landing a man on the moon?” He replied: “I have said from the beginning we’ve been behind. And we are running into the difficulties which come from starting late. We, however, are going to proceed. We’re making a maximum effort, as you know, and the expenditures in our space program are enormous. And, to the best of my ability, the time schedule, I hope, has not been changed by the recent setbacks.”
nasa Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, addressing General Session of U.S. Savings and Loan League in Washington, said: “. . . What we are buying in our national space program is the knowledge, the experience, the skills, the industrial facilities, and the experimental hardware that wlli make the United States first in every field of space exploration—scientific and practical uses, including military applications. And to accomplish this result we must make advances at the frontiers of knowledge in nearly every field of science and technology which wlli project new ideas into our whole industrial system. . . . “The success of the National Space Program hinges on the ability of the American people, through their government, their industry, and their privately endowed institutions, to implement many difficult tasks. Not one or two men wlli make the landing on the moon, but, figuratively, the entire Nation. “And our ultimate success also depends, in some measure, on our abllity to enlist the cooperation of other nations in this enormous undertaking. An important (but certainly not determining) consideration in our international programs is winning and cementing friendly relations with our allies in the Free World and among the uncommitted nations. This we do by demonstration of our peaceful objectives and our willingness to share what we learn from space exploration with the scientific community the world around. . . . “The investment in space progress is big and will grow, but the potential returns on the investment are even larger. And because it concerns us all, scientific progress is everyone’s responsibility. Every citizen should understand what the space program really is about and what it can do. . . .”
In message to the Second National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space at Seattle, President Kennedy noted that the U.S. was already “working hand in hand with scientific groups of fifty nations. “Ours is an open society and the benefits of our space program will continue to flow throughout the world. It is my hope that the Soviet Union will cooperate constructively in the proposals which we have made so that all peoples will gain in the improvement of weather observation, communications systems and the manifold output of the peaceful application of space technology.”
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa’s Deputy Administrator, speaking to the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology in Atlantic City, said: “. . . the air age brought us great supplies of aluminum and the basis for building lightweight structures, not only for airplanes but also for trains, buses, and ships. The nuclear age brought applications of isotopes in medicine and in inspection of materials. Nuclear developments brought remote manipulators and sealed pumps for hazardous liquids and gases. The space age has brought to maturity the concept of systems analysis and optimization of designs involving many branches of science and engineering. In addition the space age has given us high-temperature ceramics, ablating materials for heat protection, pressure-stabilized lightweight tanks, computers handling large amounts of data, and many other developments which are finding application throughout industry.” April 16: Senate passed the nasa supplemental appropriations blli, with amendments providing $71,000,000 for construction at amh but contingent on passage of authorization legislation. Blli would now go to Senate-House conference to iron out differences between the versions passed by the two Houses.
Agreement establishing U.S.-Italy cooperative space program, signed in May, was confirmed in Rome by Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Italian Foreign Minister Attilio Piccioni. The Memorandum of Understanding between nasa and the Italian Space Commission provided for three-phase program, expected to culminate in launching of a scientific satellite into equatorial orbit. Generally, nasa would provide the Scout rockets and personnel training; Italians would launch the vehicle with its Italian payload and would be responsible for data acquisition as well as for towable launch platform located in equatorial waters.
President Kennedy opened his news conference with the announcement that he had received Premier Khrushchev’s reply to his letter on cooperation in the peaceful uses of space and stated: “I’m gratified that this reply indicates that there are a number of areas of common interest.” He further announced that Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, had been designated to lead the technical discussions with Soviet representatives beginning in New York on March 27.
Reported that responsibility for all U.S. space bioscience programs, including animal flights, would be given to nasa as result of informal agreement between Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara and nasa Administrator James E. Webb.
In speech to the 1962 Boys Nation, nasa Administrator Webb spoke of the future of the space age: “There is an intimate connection between the space effort and the future of this nation.” Mr. Webb was made an honorary member of Boys Nation and was presented a plaque for his “interest in the youth of the nation.”
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was among five Government career men selected for 1962 Rockefeller Public Service Awards.
In a nasa press conference following the presentation of the Administration’s budget to Congress, Mr. James Webb, nasa Administrator, commented on the general attitude toward nasa’s doubled appropriation request: “I would say that the people I have talked to have felt that we ought to go forward with the effort at about the level the President has recommended. I have seen no indication as we have had advanced discussion with some of the leaders, like the Chairman of the House Committee, Congressman Miller, the Chairman of the Senate Committee, Senator Kerr, and with some of the Appropriations members; we have seen no disposition on their part to just simply throw up their hands and say, 'No, sir.’ Each one of them has said that what you have makes sense and we are going to look it over very carefully, of course, but nevertheless there has been no tendency to start out with a reaction that it was simply out of line with reality. . . . Under those circumstances my judgment is that there will be a good, strong, vigorous debate, just as there was when this agency was formed, and that when the issues are clearly out on the table, and the success of the very active flight program that we are now conducting makes itself felt, that there will be support for the program and that we will end up with about the recommendations of the President.”
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric, in Armed Forces luncheon address in San Francisco, stated that he was reluctant to identify dod contributions to the national space program as “The Military Space Program,” because “there is only one unified national program, not two or three or four. “We are mindful of the stated U.S. national objective of using space for peaceful purposes only, and we [dod] support this policy completely and wholeheartedly. ... We are well advised in buying technological insurance even while earnestly hoping that space wlli be used only for peaceflli purposes.” Since the U.S. must avoid technological surprise in the military space area and there is no guarantee that the U.S.S.R. will cooperate on the peaceflli use of space, Gilpatric announced that dod has decided to develop manned orbital rendezvous space systems for inspecting other satellites to determine intent and neutralizing if hostile, and then land at predetermined locations on earth. These would be separate, he said, from nasa’s Gemini and Apollo programs. In reviewing the evolution of the U.S. space program, Gilpatric pointed out that the “division of labor” between nasa and dod in space was based “partly in logic, partly in pragmatic assessment . . .”
nasa announced appointment of Walter L. Lingle, Jr., as Special Assistant to the Administrator and, temporarily, as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Formerly executive vice president of Proctor and Gamble, Mr. Lingle served three months as Deputy Administrator of aid just prior to nasa appointment.
In remarks referring to the editorial in the nasa issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology, Representative George P. Miller, Chairman of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that “the national space program continues to fire the imagination of the American people. The spectacular space achievements are but the top of the iceberg. Underneath is a rapidly growing base of solid scientific knowledge which will benefit the Nation in thousands of different ways. The agency spearheading the massive scientific effort is the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . . .”
In Cleveland ars meeting, Associate nasa Administrator Robert Seamans stated that decision on the lunar-orbit rendezvous (lor) would allow time to develop a larger Nova booster than previously contemplated.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force Systems Command, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that the revised usaf solid-propellant development program would cost considerably less than the $60 mlliion originally planned. He said that current program review ordered by Secretary of Defense and nasa Administrator had shown that solid-fuel program was larger than necessary to demonstrate the feasibility of the boosters. Once approved by the Secretary and the Administrator, the new master plan for solid-propellant boosters wollid limit the program to feasibility study, since neither dod nor nasa had specific mission requirements for their application.
In nasa press conference in New York City, Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of the Lewis Research Center, outlined factors in nasa’s nation-wide recruitment of 2,000 scientists, engineers, and technicians: (1) nasa had already interviewed 4,000 candidates in other cities and hoped to screen another 1,000 in New York; (2) salaries in industry tended to be higher than in Federal employment but nasa offered better postgraduate experience as well as opportunity to acquire national or international reputation; (3) nasa’s manpower drain on the annual pool of 40-45,000 engineering graduates was small; and (4) the new specialists trained in the space program during the next decade would be an effective argument for much of the cost of the entire space effort.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing National Rocket Club, asserted: “Developing the right kind of space program is a continuing job in the Department of Defense. . . . The difficulties encountered do not relate to problems of principle. The problems are questions of specifics. There are tough decisions of choice to be made. We have to weigh effects on other activities, make careful estimates as to time, determine rates and select the projects to be pursued. . . . The current rate of investment in space by the Department of Defense reflects our best judgment as to which projects are dictated by specific requirements and those which should be carried on for general development purposes. ... As projects become more precisely defined and funding and time estimates can be firmed, and as requirements become clearer and more specific, then efforts are focused on those most pressing and most promising. . . .”
Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke to the American Astronautical Society on the broad benefits derived from the space program. He said: “Space exploration is of such immense importance to man’s total knowledge that it wlli benefit and alter the course of his existence in ways no more foreseeable today than those which resulted from the invention of the wheel. . . . One of the major benefits being gleaned from this vast effort to conquer space is the stimulus which it is providing for scientific research in new and uncharted areas. . . .”
Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, nasa director of grants and research contracts, told press conference in Chicago that by 1970 one out of every four technically trained persons in U.S. will be engaged in some phase of the space program. Press conference preceded first national conference between nasa and representatives of 300 universities, colleges, and technical schools, Nov. 1-3.
President Kennedy was reported by New York Times to have requested Bureau of the Budget to look into possibility of obtaining extra funds for U.S. manned lunar flight program. An additional $300,000,000 to $400,000,000 was estimated requirement for fiscal year 1963. President’s request came after White House meeting with nasa Administrator James E. Webb and nasa Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Greater Hartford (Conn.) Chamber of Commerce, said that the “habit of oversimplifying has carried over into the evaluation and understanding of our objectives in space. . . . Many of our citizens believe our major, and in some cases, our only purpose in space, to be one of winning, in a contest with the Soviet Union, ‘a race to the moon.’ . . . [This concept] overlooks the significant and seldom appreciated fact that learning how to get to the moon, developing the technology which will be required to get there, and employing this technology for many purposes in space, is more important than the lunar landing itself. . . . “Characterization of our effort solely as a ‘space race to the moon’ also leads to the mistaken notion that the nation first to conduct a lunar exploration will have assured itself of ultimate and enduring superiority in space. The fact is overlooked that landing men on the moon, although a great and challenging goal, is only one of many goals in space. . . . “With the resources which are being applied, and knowledge of how those resources are being utilized to mobilize our nation’s scientific, technical and industrial strength, I am confident that we will achieve a space posture satisfactory to the United States given a continuation of our present efforts and support for those planned for future years. On the basis of what we know now of the scope of the Soviet Union’s efforts, and of what is required to do the job, this country has a better than even chance to conduct the first manned exploration of the moon. For these reasons, I have said I believe we will be there first. “But in saying this I do not want to fall into the same trap which has snared too many of us—that of again inviting a characterization of this broad and vital national effort as a spectacular ‘race to the moon.’” He pointed out that President Kennedy did not set the national goal of “landing the first man on the moon.” Rather, the President “stated our determination to attain ‘a position of pre-206 eminence in space’ and to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation .... “That is our objective—to develop superior competence in space which will be available for any national purpose which may be required, whether it be the peaceful utilization of space for the benefit of mankind, or to keep the peace and forestall its exploitation by any nation for aggressive purposes . . . .”
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, speaking at NASA-University Conference in Chicago, said nasa needed help from universities in four main areas: space sciences, manned space flight, applications of earth satellites to communications and meteorology, and advanced research and technology. “Our educational institutions bear a major responsibility for the success of our national effort to explore space. Our universities and colleges are called upon to produce a body of scientists and engineers of unexcelhd competence. Some of these graduates wlli enter governmental service with nasa and other agencies participating in the space program; some wlli join private research organizations and industrial corporations. “But some must remain at the universities where they continue to advance knowledge and produce new talent. This last function should receive high priority. The government laboratory, industry, and research foundation all are users of creative and talented men without reproducing this vital national resource. The university alone is the producer of new engineers and scientists.”
nasa Inventions and Contributions Board made awards of less than $1,000 to the following nasa employees: Wade E. Lanford, Langley Research Center; Billy C. Hughes, John R. Raskin, Robert J. Schwinghamer, Wilhelm Angele, and Hans G. Martineck, Marshall Space Flight Center.
nasa published an integrated series of three Quality Publications setting forth nasa’s intensified quality assurance program now required in nasa space programs from r&d concept through space operations. These publications required nasa prime and subcontractors on space system work to establish and maintain a quality program that in many elements was beyond traditional quality control. They also provided guidelines for nasa management to evaluate contractor quality performance both as a factor of current contract performance and as a consideration in award of future contracts.
Launching of telstar marked tenth straight successful flight of the 3-stage Delta rocket. The history of Delta goes back to the Thor-Able and the earlier Vanguard, from which it acquired its upper stages. Originally designed as an interim booster when nasa ordered twelve Deltas from Douglas Aircraft in April 1959, it achieved what nasa Administrator Webb called “the greatest level of reliability of any of our launch vehicles . . . .” The following satellites were orbited by Delta boosters: echo i, tiros ii, iii, iv, and v; explorers x and xii; oso i; ariel i; and
U.K. and Canada supported U.S. request that U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space concentrate on international cooperation on space programs rather than on legal matters that contained elements of “a highly political and controversial nature.”
In address at Tulane University, Dr. James R. Killian, President of mit, stated that the Soviet Union had placed “their first rate people” in their space program and thus weakened their high-energy physics program. “We must be very careful in space exploration that we do not tend to draw strength from other technological areas. We need balance,” he said.
In address to the Institute of Radio Engineers in New York, NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden stated: “The costs of satellites and space probes are so great that every possible step must be taken to assure success. In our scientific experiments we insist that the bench prototype developed by the physicist be redesigned by engineers to meet the environmental requirements, that the engineered prototype be tested on vibrators, in vacuum and temperature chambers and other ground equipment simulating the space environment beyond the required conditions, and that, if possible, the equipment be tested on the less expensive sounding rockets prior to use on the more expensive satellites. . . . “To state the matter another way, we desire assured and demonstrated performances and reliability. The cost of the necessary engineering and tests is small compared to the cost of a single failure. We do not wish to be the first to use the newest and most advanced device nor the last to give up the obsolete. A moderately conservative engineering approach with adequate analysis and test is indicated as the best design philosophy.”
Reported that the Air Force Logistics Command (aflc) civilian retraining program begun in October 1957 has proved to be highly successfm. According to aflc program director Eric W. Jordan, 80,000	civilian employees, whose skills have become obsolete in today’s rapidly changing technology, wlli have been retrained and placed in new jobs by the end of 1962.
Ambassador Charles Bohlen officiated at the opening of a nasa exhibit at the Palais de la D&ouverte, Paris, France. The exhibit would stay in Paris until January 15, included models of past, current, and future nasa spacecraft; panels explaining the goals and results of the U.S. space program; a working telstar demonstration; and a Spacemobile lecture and demonstration. The exhibit was enthusiastically received by French scientific and government personages attending the inauguration.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was among the five Federal employees presented with the distinguished Rockefeller Public Service Award for 1962 by President Kennedy.
In testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space programs were not necessary for scientific space exploration. “For the same investment of effort we learn much more without the man. ... A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made out alright.” In testifying on behalf of the National Science Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the U.S. should not rush into a cooperative space program with Russia; failures would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such a program. The U.S., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.” Testimony was released on May 14.
President Kennedy sent telegram to aerospace unions and industries stating that a strike would “substantially delay our vital missile and space programs and would be contrary to the national interest.” The International Association of Machinists, one union involved in threatened strike of 150,000 workers in major aerospace companies, immediately accepted the President’s request to postpone strike for 60 days.
President Kennedy congratlliated labor and management at U.S. missile sites for achieving a new low in work stoppages. According to the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, only 1 man-day per 1,100 man-days worked was lost during the year ending this date, while 1 man-day per 96 man-days worked was lost during the 1956-1961 period. The President expressed confidence that the commission would continue to receive cooperation of labor and management “in making sure that our missile and space programs go forward ... as economically as possible.”
nasa officials said five experiments aboard explorer xv were working well but that two others had been adversely affected by satellite’s excessive spin rate. The two experiments were designed to determine decay rate of artificially created radiation.
Dr. Arthur E. Raymond was appointed a special consultant to the nasa Administrator. He would be concerned with organization and management of research and development programs, especially those involving advanced research and over-all systems planning. Dr. Raymond retired in 1960 as senior vice president of engineering for Douglas Aircraft Co., having spent 35 years with the company. He served as a member of naca from 19461956.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced that the project management of the liquid hydrogen-fueled Centaur launch vehicle and the hydrogen-fueled M-l rocket engine would be transferred from Marshall Space Flight Center to the Lewis Research Center. Studies were being initiated to adapt Centaur as a stage to other boosters. Mr. Webb said: “The transfer wlli allow the Marshall Center to concentrate its efforts on the Saturn vehicles for the manned lunar landing program. ... It wlli permit the Lewis Research Center to use its experience in liquid hydrogen to further the work already done on one of the most promising high-energy rocket fuels and its application to Centaur and the M-l.”
Testimony by nasa Administrator Webb before House Appropriations subcommittee was released in which he declared that the U.S. has given far more than it has received in exchanges of space flight findings with the Soviet Union. By publicly releasing information gained from space flights, the U.S. is “ . . . cooperating with them, but not getting very much in the way of return cooperation,” he said. Webb defended U.S. policy of making space research results generally available: “We are, in this open way, exposing the problems just ahead of us to the largest number of able minds all around the world. This is really the way mankind has made its forward advance. No one can tell from which mind comes the solution to a problem. “I think the progress which can come from this can never be matched by Russia and the nations which do these things in secret.”
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric, addressing representatives of Midwest industries and universities in South Bend, Ind., said: “The United States believes that it is highly desirable for its own security and for the security of the world that the arms race should not be extended into outer space, and we are seeking in every feasible way to achieve this purpose. Today there is no doubt that either the United States or the Soviet Union could place thermonuclear weapons in orbit. . . . “We have no program to place any weapons of mass destruction into orbit. An arms race in space will not contribute to our security. ...” He added that U.S. military space program has two objectives: “First, as part of our overall Defense effort, we have continuing programs to ensure that the United States will be able to cope with any military challenge in outer space. Our programs in this area are under constant review, and this review indicates that our present rate of effort is entirely adequate. “Second, as a part of our national space program, we in the Defense Department, along with nasa, are actively exploring the potentialities of outer space as a useful part of our expanding universe. We are developing through activities in space and observations from space our ability to improve our capabilities in fields such as communications, navigation, meteorology, mapping and geodesy. Many branches of industry are contributing to this endeavor by improving propulsion, electronic, photographic, communications and other components of systems for space research and utilization. These programs have great significance not only for our military forces but for the economic and scientific advance of the United States and of the whole world. The progress that they represent, like all scientific advances, is neu+ral in its political and moral content. . . .”
In testimony on proposed Federal salary reform before the House Post Office and Civil Service Committee, nasa Administrator James E. Webb stressed the requirements of the national space program for adequately paid scientific and technical personnel in government. He pointed out that one third of nasa’s personnel were professional scientists and engineers, one third skllied craftsmen and research mechanics and their supervisors, one eighth were engineering and scientific technicians, and one sixth were clerical and secretarial. The remainder were professional-level specialists in management, legal counsel, librarians, editors, etc. Mr. Webb said that in considering pay raise legislation (H.R. 10480) the Federal Government must be able to compete favorably in the nation-wide labor market and that present salaries must be raised to have “reasonable comparity” outside of Government.
John Rubel, dod Deputy Director of Research and Engineering, told the Aerospace Luncheon Club in Washington that dod was supporting two programs in space—one “directed at clear, identifiable military needs and requirements” and the other, less well defined, designed to provide “building blocks” as “insurance against an uncertain future.” Replying to charges that military space activities should be expanded, he noted that dod’s military space program exceeded $1.5 billion this year and probably would be greater next year; dod expenditures on space developments were “remarkably high in relation to viable concepts for military applications in space.” He concluded that the military space program was adequate and well balanced, although “we probably err on the side of allowing too generous a margin of safety for the effects of these uncertainties.”
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa’s Director of Space Sciences, speaking to a sectional meeting of the American Society for Engineering Education at Texas Technological College, Lubbock, Texas, said: “. . . accomplishing the space mission absolutely requires the strong and vigorous participation of our colleges and universities, which in turn requires that nasa bear its fair share of the support required to make it possible for the universities and colleges to participate. The universities must bear their share of responsibility to the space program and allocate an appropriate fraction of their material, as well as human, resources to the effort. In such a partnership, nasa stands ready to invest an appreciable fraction of its resources.”
nasa Administrator Webb introduced Robert R. Gilruth and Astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn to nasa Headquarters’ personnel assembled in fob No. 6, Washington.
In interview with Data magazine, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, said that Houston Chamber of Commerce had predicted that the “arrival of the Manned Spacecraft Center mil influence the economic growth of the area to a degree similar to that associated with the opening of the ship channel here almost 50 years ago. Community leaders are enthusiastic concerning the diversion of Houston’s growth from an almost total reliance on the petrochemical industry. Of course, you must also remember that Houston, in terms of population increase, is one of the most dynamic cities of America. The Manned Spacecraft Center represents only a segment of its growth. . . . “Undoubtedly, there has been some immediate impact on the economy since msc’s arrival in the Houston area. More than 80 aerospace companies have opened local offices here. ...”
nasa announced selection of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to build lunar excursion module (lem) of the three-man Apollo spacecraft. In announcing the selection, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We are affirming our tentative decision of last July . . . using lunar orbit rendezvous as the prime mission mode to accomplish initial manned lunar flight. . . . Studies [of alternate approaches], now completed, along with a great deal of related analyses . . . during the intervening months, make us confident that our present course is the proper one.” D. Brainerd Holmes, Deputy Associate Administrator of nasa and Director of Manned Space Flight added that more than 1,000,000 man-hours of some 700 scientists, engineers, and researchers had been devoted to studies of the Apollo mission. “. . . The results of these studies added up to the conclusion that lunar orbit rendezvous is the preferable mode to undertake.” Apollo lunar spacecraft will be composed of command module, service module, and lunar excursion module.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, announced jointly with Soviet representative Anatoly Blagan-ravov in Geneva that a U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement had been reached to coordinate launchings of weather satellites to provide information for the “world weather watch” of the World Meteorological Organization (wmo) . Also announced was agreement on a joint effort to map the earth’s magnetic field; talks were continuing on joint cooperation in the field of communications satellites. Announcement was made after two weeks of talks on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation in Geneva, which grew out of the exchange of letters between President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev in March.
