Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President of Cal Tech, addressing Western Electronic Show and Convention banquet in San Francisco, noted that “many people talk about the space program as a scientific program. . . . [Actually] the engineers of the world ought to nave credit.” Dr. DuBridge said scientific bases of space program were laid from 60 to 300 years ago, but enormous advances in engineering and rocketry in last 50 years had made space accomplishments possible. “The scientists [of today] are working in their laboratories on things that may lay the groundwork for application 50 years from now.” (Davies, NYT, 8/23/63, 38)
Congressman George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke out during committee questioning of Dr. Albert J. Kelley, nasa Director of Electronics and Control, about location of proposed nasa Electronics Center in Boston area. Miller made his comments after Congressman Thomas N. Downing (D.-Va.) asked Dr. Kelley why nasa had not chosen Langley Field, Va., as site for new center: “Frankly, we’re making this thing right now a question of where are we going to put it because it’s going to be a plum. We’d all like this in our states. But do you want to make a W.P.A. project out of this or are we interested in the space program?” (AP,NYT,4/5/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegates would meet in March in Rome to work out “detailed arrangements to carry out proposals for co-operation in space.” Meeting would immediately precede meeting of cospar, also in Rome, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964, Transcript; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/17/63)
usaf was studying a novel method of protecting spacecraft from meteoroid hits, according to Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Demler (usaf) , Commander of the AF Research and Technology Div. usaf’s Flight Dynamics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, was studying the concept of surrounding the spacecraft with a 40-in.-thick layer of metallic dust held in place by an electrostatic field. A meteoroid hitting the vibrating dust layer would be shattered or vaporized. {M&R, 11/25/63,29) During November: Military role in the U.S. space program is “generally misrepresented and largely misunderstood,” Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Commander of AF Space Systems Div., told the World Affairs Council meeting in Los Angeles. The national policy of using space for peaceful purposes “serves to put the military into space, not restrict space to purely non-military activities. What-every shape and direction our ventures into space ultimately take, military considerations cannot be separated from the political, economic, psychological, technological and sociological implications of space development.” {M&R, 11/25/63,30)
The first live transmission of TV signals across the Pacific Ocean was accomplished via relay i communications satellite. The U.S. ground station in the Mohave desert transmitted the pictures, which were relayed by the satellite to Japan’s new Space Communications Laboratory north of Tokyo. Viewers in Japan saw and heard taped messages from Japanese Ambassador Ryuji Takeuchi and nasa Administrator Jame6 E. Webb, as well as scenic and cultural sequences. A message of greeting that President Kennedy had taped for the occasion was deleted when word came in of his assassination a few hours before the broadcast was to take place, abo- and nbc-tv shared in producing the program. ( nasa Release 63-256; NTT, 11/24/63,14)
Senator Clinton Anderson (D.-N.M.) replying on the floor of the Senate to Senate Republican Policy Committee’s criticism of Project Apollo (May 10), cited buildup of TJ.S. scientific and technological base: “. . . insofar as our national security is concerned, the development of this basic structure for space power, and the scientific knowledge and technical skill required to enable men safely to explore the moon is probably of greater consequence than the lunar landing itself .... “The decision to try to land a man on the moon by 1970 does not constitute a crash program. The decision-making process does not allow for vacuums; failure to decide on a schedule for attempting to reach the moon is equivalent to setting no deadline at all. Work is done best—even by the technical community—which is not exempt from the laws of human nature—when a specific goal is set. An objective of landing on the moon in the 1960’s was chosen as the one that would permit us to work for a lunar landing in a rapid, yet efficient manner. This permits us to work at a challenging pace; yet, does not absorb a greater percentage of the Nation’s resources than our country can afford. This is only 1 percent of the gross national product at current rate. “Once having been made—in 1961—the decision is subject to review and modification every year at budget time and can be modified within limits .... nasa is not immune from congressional appropriations review .... “Administrator Webb has announced that nasa, in this decade, will accomplish all the programs now planned, including lunar landing for under $35 billion. This is less than two-thirds of the budget requested by the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1964 alone—a small price for the experience, technology, industrial base, and facilities which may be required for national security .... “Mr. President, there is ample room in the current debate on the space program for divergent views and criticism and for constructive suggestions. But are we to believe that if we cancel the Project Apollo, the savings will be so translated into new hospitals, modem classrooms, and better diets for the ill nourished ? . . . . “We are not faced with an ‘either-or’ proposition. We can afford to have an effective, logical, and successful space program and we can afford these other efforts to improve well-being here on earth. Mr. President, we cannot afford not to go to the moon .... “Any slowdown in our Nation’s space programs would certainly afford great, comfort to our enemies and spread dismay among our friends overseas. To slacken the space effort after having accepted publicly on a national basis the Soviet challenge would open us to accusations of lack of firmness and resolution regarding national goals .... “In 1958, President Eisenhower declared:
President of mit, Julius A. Stratton, announced plans for new Center for Space Research on mit campus, nasa would provide $3 million of the total $4 million cost. (Boston Sun. Advertiser, 1/6/63) ■January 6: Review of Space Research, report of eight-week Space Science Summer Study sponsored by National Academy of Sciences in support of nasa, was transmitted to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Consensus of the more than 100 U.S. scientists from Government, universities, and industry: “Of all the discoveries that have come from or can now be anticipated from man’s efforts in space sciences, none more easily captures the imagination nor is more likely to focus interest and acclaim than the empirical proof that there is in this universe a biota other than our own. “On solid scientific grounds, on the basis of popular appeal, and in the interests of our prestige as a peace-loving nation capable of great scientific enterprise . . . finding and exploring extraterrestrial life should be acclaimed as the top-priority scientific goal of our space program .... “What is at stake is an opportunity to gain a new level of discussion of the meaning and nature of life.” Even without “definitive evidence” of extraterrestrial life, report said there was no basis for ruling out possibility of life on Mars, Venus, or the moon; it strongly endorsed nasa policy of sterilizing interplanetary spacecraft to prevent contamination of possible extraterrestrial life. The report also recommended that trained scientist-observers be assigned important roles in future U.S. space missions. “By his presence, man will contribute critical capacities for scientific judgment, discrimination, and analysis (especially of a total situation) which can never be accomplished by ms instruments, however complex and sophisticated they become. “Hence manned exploration of space is science in space, for man will go with the instruments that he has designed to supplement his capacities—to observe what is there, and to measure and describe the phenomena in terms that his scientific colleagues will clearly understand. A scientifically trained and oriented man will be essential for this purpose.” Report asked nasa to take immediate steps to train scientists for space investigations so that: a “scientist-astronaut” would be member of each Project Apollo (lunar mission) crew; meteorologists could co-pilot future manned orbiting space observatories, beginning with two-man Gemini flights in 1964; biologists would be available for first manned flights to Mars; astronomers would be prepared for advent of space observatories and for maintenance and modification of these facilities. Urging “maximum possible participation of scientists in all space missions,” report outlined tour specific levels of training: scientist-astronauts (men combining experience and resourcefulness of trained scientist and trained astronaut); scientist-passengers (experienced, mature scientists with adequate training in critical and emergency spacecraft operations); ground scientists (leading scientists in pertinent fields collaborating with spacecraft personnel in accomplishment of scientific mission) ; astronaut observers (astronauts with varying degrees of special training in making scientific observations), (nas, Review of Space Sciences; nas Releases)
Astronaut John H. Glenn said in speech before annual luncheon meeting of Associated Press: “As a result of the space program, tremendous and vast new areas of information appear on the horizon and are increasing daily. Consequently, this space program will undoubtedly serve as a catalyst toward an expansion of information that will dwarf anything we have known heretofore .... “What we need is a national repository for information, organized not along traditional library-type lines, but designed to utilize all the techniques at our disposal for sorting, cataloguing, analyzing, storing and making readily accessible, new information as it becomes available .... “In short, I propose that we lose no time in establishing a National Information Center. Control of such an institution could be by government, private interests, or a combination of appropriate interests . . . .” (Text)
Lt. Col. John Powers (usaf) , msc Public Affairs Officer, announced in Washington he had conferred with nasa Administrator James E. Webb and Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden about “the changing nature of the manned space flight program.” In accordance with this change, brought about by the end of Project Mercury, nasa would “realign our organization and our people, including myself.” (West, Houston Post, 7/26/63)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, inserted the Goddard Historical Prize Essay for 1962—“Early U.S. Satellite Proposals,” by R. Cargill Hall—into the Congressional Record. Chairman Miller pointed out that “in space affairs we cannot afford to be shortsighted or wrong” and asked that proposals of 1946-49 be considered in the light of the current discussion on the U.S. space program: “What if the United States had launched a satellite in 1952 or even 1954? Would history have been different? . . . Would not the image of the U.S. in the eyes of the rest of the world have been spared the historical blemish of Sputnik, the appearance that we were not the scientific and technological leader in the world ? ... If we would remain free and maintain peace on a small and troubled planet, America had better make sure that superior space science and technology are on our side.” Prize historical essay reviewed proposals by the U.S. Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics and the U.S. Air Force’s rand Corp. for for the launching of earth satellites, proposals turned down by Department of Defense officials as not having “scientific or military utility.” Goddard Historical Essay Competition is sponsored annually by the National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. {CR, 10/7/63, A6277-6284)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb and Council of New York City President Paul R. Screvane conferred in Washington on plans for nasa exhibit at 1964 World’s Fair, ^possibly to he a proposed 361-ft. inflatable Saturn V rocket replica to house 10,000 sq. ft. of exhibits. ( nasa Release 63-58)
nasa announced it would negotiate with Lear-Siegler, Inc., of Anaheim, Calif., for an extension of the company’s present $3,753,059 contract for design, manufacture, and installation of equipment for testing subsystems of the Saturn V launch vehicle at msfc. The additional work would include design, manufacture, and installation of instrumentation for a dual liquid-hydrogen test position and an acoustical-model test position at msfc. (nasa Release 63-222) World Conference on Space Communications opened in Geneva with delegates from 70 countries present. U.N. Secretary General U Thant was to have addressed the delegates via Telstar communications satellite, but a technical problem prevented the broadcast. Principal purpose of the conference was to reallocate radio frequencies to provide growth room for future satellite communications needs. (NYT, 10/8/63, 16) Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, received Harry E. Salzberg Memorial Medal for his “distinguished contribution to the field of transportation” and became the 1963 Salzberg Lecturer at Syracuse Univ. (Ltr. of Invitation, 4/18/63) Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., would decide during the week whether he would seek the Senate seat now occupied by Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio), according to George Clifford of the Washington Daily News after an interview with C. Leo DeOrsey, adviser to the astronauts. (Clifford, Wash. Daily News, 10/7/63) nana reported Lufthansa sources in Germany claim that U.S.S.R. is farther along on supersonic transport development than either Britain-France or the U.S. Being designed and built by the famous Ilyushin and Tupolev teams, the Russian entry is reported to be in the same speed class as the British-French Concorde— mach 2.2 (1,500 mph)—and carry about the same passenger load of 100, and to land at quite low speeds, probably through the use of variable-sweep wings. First version of the supersonic transport would be a freight carrier, not only because it can be introduced with a lower safety factor than a passenger version but because the increased friction between Soviet Russia and Communist China dictates a fast priority freight system to eastern Russia, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63) Atlas D icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., but exploded shortly after launch, (upi, NYT, 10/8/63, 28) Lewis awarded study contracts totaling $576,000 to General Dynamics/Astronautics and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation to investigate the possibilities of using “flox”—a mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen—as the oxidizer in the Atlas space launch vehicle. Preliminary studies indicate the combination could result in an 88 per cent increase in payloads for 100-mile high orbits, (lrc Release 63-78, Lewis Chronology, 9) Early October: faa Deputy Administrator Gordon M. Bain said that nasa’s studies of a supersonic commercial air transport (scat) were not in accord with faa thinking—that they derived too much from the B-70 work of some years ago and that they recommended the technical desirability of a mach 3 aircraft, while faa leaned toward a mach 2.5 aircraft as the one economically feasible for airline operation. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,38)
D. Brainerd Holmes, former nasa Director of Manned Space Flight and now a senior vice president of Raytheon Co., said in a TV interview on abc that the manned space flight program needed a single manager with great freedom of action. The only way to run a large program, he said, “is to put the project manager in such complete charge . . . that he makes policy with very little approval above.” (NYT, 10/7/63? 23)
In an article in Missile and Rockets, nasa Administrator James E. Webb emphasized the importance of the engineer in the space program: “During this period of intensive research and development, it becomes doubly important for industry, the press, and nasa to tell the workshop and test site story as well as the launch site story. The role of the space engineer must be brought out as clearly as the achievements of space scientists and the astronauts . . . . ”	(M&R, 11/25/63)
House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices began hearings on nasa appropriations for FY 1964. nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in opening statement before the executive meeting: “I urge that your Committee approve the total amount of appropriations authorized. I should like to point out that even if the full amount requested by the President were authorized and appropriated, we face in these funds and in the plants of the contractors a similar situation to that with our own Centers where they requested 2,000 more people than we were able to approve under the budget restriction. In our manned space program we will be short between one hundred and two hundred million dollars out of the three billion dollars requested by the President. We are prepared to operate with a tight belt, we are prepared to operate without contingencies. However, I do want to point out to the Committee that we are still going to have a serious problem if we encounter any major difficulties in the form of a catastrophe on the launching pad or with a test station. “I should also like to say to the Committee that after the Authorization Bill has been enacted and after the Appropriations Bill has been passed, we are going to prepare an over-all operating plan. We plan to show it to both the House and Senate Space Committees and we will be happy to show it to the Appropriations Committees. With this re-examination and the basis for committing the funds actually appropriated, we will be in a position where we will know what our situation is and whether we will have to ask for a supplemental appropriation . . . .” (Testimony, nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/128)
In letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, ^ New York Congressional delegation urged nasa to select site in New York state for its proposed electronics research center, nasa had received more than 30 bids from areas in at least 19 states for location of the center. (AP, NTT, 12/30/63; M&R, 12/23/63, 9)
Testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced nasa had decided not to conduct another Project Mercury flight: “We will proceed at once to a very careful, thoughtful but vigorous reorientation and realignment of the nasa organization, to move on with Gemini and with Apollo . . . .” (Transcript)
afsc/ssd awarded $4,396,000 increment to existing contract to Aerojet General Corp. for work on Titan III liquid rocket engines for space programs, (dod Release 1599-63)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in address at Patrick afb :	. . about our future in space, let me establish two bench marks. The first is that the Air Force needs everything it can get from nasa. nasa needs us, too, as the record of how nasa puts things into space indicates, but if there weren’t a nasa, the same facility and capability would have to be created some other way.	... “There is reassuring precedent for the principle of having an outside-of-defense civilian agency provide the type of support we need. The case at point is the Atomic Energy Commission. Our own nuclear weapon flexibility as well as the Polaris-carrying submarine is sufficient testimony. “The clear lesson for us in the space field is that we must put requirements on nasa to meet whatever part of our needs can be met in this way. We must utilize every possible resource to build the necessary military capability and I can assure you that nasa is ready to respond. Jim Webb, the nasa Administrator, harbors no illusions about nasa’s responsibilities in support of national defense requirements. “The second bench mark is that there is no such thing as peaceful space or military space. There is just space. The new and massive space program in a civilian agency was launched nearly five years ago, with—for reasons which seemed not unreasonable at the time—a great hullabaloo about peaceful objectives .... “We have a lot to learn. The recent agreement with nasa for joint participation in the Gemini program is one way. That agreement represents an answer from both dod and nasa to critics wbo said there was no place in space for military man. Our own activity directed toward manned space vehicles will increase, and with nasa’s back-up, we’ll attain the needed capability earlier than we would otherwise. “A term you hear around Washington to denote the areas of cooperation between government agencies is ‘interface.’ Here at Patrick is one of the primary ‘nasa—Air Force interfaces.’ Such terms usually leave me pretty cold but this one does have some descriptive value. “There will be plenty of problems between the Air Force and nasa, but not by any means all at the ‘interface’ points such as the Cape. We wouldn’t either one be true to trust or tradition if there weren’t. Any machine as big as the national space effort is bound to have some kind of friction. But just remember, a clutch is a friction interface. Its purpose is to join two shafts for the transmission of power. “The power we can get will provide protection for the free world in space. This was my third point—to make sure that no aggressor can exploit space, either for expansionism on earth or interference in space with the peaceful pursuits of the free world. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, addressed Space, Science, and Urban Life Conference in Oakland, California: “The budget of $3.7 billion for the current fiscal year and the requested $5.7 billion for the next fiscal year are sizable sums of money, approaching one per cent of the gross national product in magnitude. But, perhaps even more important than the absolute magnitude of these sums, is the leverage they exert or can be made to exert on other more general activities and associated resources. Although the effect of the space program on the total national scene may be quite modest, in certain localized regions it can be quite large. For example, ... it appears at the present time that in Fiscal Year 1963 about 47 per cent of all nasa prime contracts will go to California firms . . . .” (Text)
In press conference, President Johnson discussed preparation of FY 1965 budget:	• “I am working from a budget of $98.8 billion this year. It appears that we will expend about that amount, and maybe a little under or a little over, but substantially $99 billion will be the expenditures this year. That was the amount of Mr. Ken-nedy’sbudget. There are built-in increases of $1,790 million that are mandatory —military pay increase for 9 months, military retired pay, civilian pay, National Aeronautics and Space contracts, the Agency for International Development, Post Office rise, Federal Aviation Agency, urban renewal, and public assistance grants.. .. “In the Roosevelt war years we spent as high as 46 percent of our gross national product for administrative budgets. During the transition period under Mr. Truman we spent 29 percent. In 1954, under Mr. Eisenhower, we spent 18.6 percent. We are hoping that we can come under that figure in our budget next year—in other words, that our budget expenditure as a percentage of our gross national product will be less for the fiscal year 1965 than it has been for any of these periods I mentioned . . . .” To the question, “Mr. President, have you reached a hard decision on changing the space program, including eliminating the Rover project?” the President replied: “No.” (Transcript, CR, 12/19/63,24005-007)
On first anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft friendship 7 was presented to Smithsonian Institution by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. Astronaut Glenn presented to the Smithsonian the flight suit, boots? and gloves he had worn and the tiny American flag he had earned during his three-orbit space flight. Making the presentation, Dr. Dryden remarked: “It is appropriate that John Glenn’s friendship 7 spacecraft should join the Wright Brothers’ first airplane in this hall, dedicated to man’s pioneering efforts in flight. “These two machines . . . stand as constant reminders that mankind aspires to the stars .... “As in the early days of aeronautics we can only dimly foresee the future of space exploration, what we Shall find, and what benefits will come to us. We know only that we must move forward in knowledge and practical accomplishment as we strive to discover the nature of our universe .... “We are surrounded here by the cherished treasures of the Nation. Today, we add still another to bring to mind the promise of the future that men of imagination and courage will always find new frontiers to conquer . . . .” (WasJi. Post, 2/21/63, Bl; Text)
Study memorandum identifying U.S. “stamp lag” inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Frank E. Moss (D.-Utah). In the memo Frank Ballard, principal engineer of Sperry Utah Co., noted Communist bloc has issued at least 18 postage stamps identifying Soviet space successes, whereas U.S. has issued only two stamps associated with its space program, and these in limited editions. “. . . In the face of the existing world struggle, it is imperative, even urgent, that we utilize all available media of communication to advertise the forces of democracy. The U.S. ‘stamp lag’ is self-evident. We must engage in a vigorous program calculated for optimum utilization of the vast potentialities of the U.S. postage stamp. As a start, I should like to suggest a chronological documentation of the entire space program beginning with the suborbital flight through individual Mercury orbital flights. Gemini and Apollo . . . .” (Study Memorandum, CR, 9/25/63,17044-A5)
In introduction to U.N. Annual Report, Secretary General U Thant “. . . the development of cooperation in outer space exploration and use continued in an encouraging manner, especially in the scientific and technical field. “The Scientific and Technological Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its second session held in Geneva in May 1963, agreed upon a series of pew and revised recommendations concerning the exchange of information, encouragement of international programs, education and training, potentially harmful effects of special experiments and the organization of international sounding rocket facilities. The meeting of the subcommittee provided once more the occasion for the scientists of the two leading space powers to continue their private talks on cooperative space programs. “The World Meteorological Organization, the International Telecommunication Union and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization continued to participate actively in the field of peaceful exploration and use of outer space. “No agreement was reached on legal problems relating to outer space, but a valuable exchange of views took place in the Committee and its legal subcommittee . . . .” (Text, CR, 8/27/63, 15099-103) During August: The Atlantic Monthly published an article “Why Land on the Moon?” by Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director, Goddard Institute for Space Studies, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, Director, Office of Space Sciences, nasa. “These are the specific values of space exploration: the benefits of basic research, economically valuable applications of satellites, contributions to industrial technology, a general stimulus to education and to the younger generation, and the strengthening of our international position by our acceptance of leadership in a historic human enterprise. The current discussion of these values of the space program has served the United States well in directing its attention to questions of national purpose. But, however we may try to break the program down into its elements and to attempt a detailed balancing of debits and credits, the fact remains that the space effort is greater than the sum of its parts. It is a great adventure and a great enterprise, not only for the United States but for all humanity. We have the power and resources to play a leading role in this effort, and it is inconceivable that we should stand aside. “Scientific administrators ask . . . can we afford the cost of the space program in technical manpower? Their concern is heightened by the fact that federal activities in defense, space, and atomic energy together consume nearly half of the science and engineering talent available in the United States. But is the space agency the major consumer of trained manpower within this federal complex of technical agencies? In actuality, nasa will be using six percent of the national manpower pool in science and engineering through its contracts with private industry, plus an additional one percent in government laboratories. If the space program has substantial value, this is not an overwhelming drain.” (Text)
Sen. Ernest Gruening (D.-Alaska) criticized nasa on the Senate floor for its indifference to training and use of women astronauts in the manned space program. Also he inserted in the Congressional Record a recent article in Life by Clare Boothe Luce, in which she said: “The astronaut of today is the world’s most prestigious idol. Once launched into space he holds in his hands something far more costly and precious than the millions of dollars’ worth of equipment in his capsule; he holds the prestige and the honor of his country .... But the astronaut is also something else: he is the symbol of the way of life of his nation. “In entrusting a 26-year-old girl with a cosmonaut mission, the Soviet Union has given its women unmistakable proof that it believes them to possess these same virtues. The flight of Valentina Tereshkova is, consequently, symbolic of the emancipation of the Communist woman. It symbolizes to Russian women that they actively share (not passively bask, like American women) in the glory of conquering space.” (CR, 6/27/63,11228-30) Jwne 27: usaf launched Minuteman icbm from amr in 4,000-mi. flight down Atlantic Missile Range in successful test, (dod Release 929-63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb sent a report to the Congress on the construction of facilities for the University of California: “. . . the University’s geophysics building is being expanded by the addition of wings for geology and chemistry laboratories. Accordingly, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration plans to provide funds for the construction of a 62,000 gross square foot addition to that building complex in the amount of $2,000,000. The addition will be known as the space science building.” (Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/84)
explorer xiv energetic particles satellite transmitted 38 sec. of complete data, and officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center were hopeful the satellite might eventually resume normal operations, explorer xiv developed transmission difficulty Jan. 10, after 100 days of nearly continuous transmission. Project Manager Paul G. Marcotte of Goddard reported explorer xiv received less than 10 per cent degradation from space radiation since its launch Oct. 2; project officials did not believe radiation damage to be cause of satellite’s transmission malfunction. (nasa explorer xiv Prog. Rpt. No. 4; nasa Release 63-6)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in speech before American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in New York City that launching of lunik iv was an initial step “in a very well organized man-on-the-moon program.” He warned that U.S.S.R. would “employ its growing space competence for military purposes if it finds such action is effective. We must be ready to handle such a threat.” Dr. Welsh disputed former President Eisenhower’s recent charge that “enormous sums of money” were being wasted in the National space program. “Mr. Eisenhower is consistent. He was wrong about the space program two, three, four years ago, and he is wrong now.” (NYT, 4/4/63,19)
nasa and dod announced joint agreement to coordinate studies and actions concerning a manned orbital research and development station. The Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (aacb) would be the means by which the joint appraisals would be carried out. If the eventual findings were that such a program was required, the nasa Administrator and the Secretaiy of Defense would submit a joint recommendation to the President, including a statement as to which agency should have project responsibility. If the President agreed to proceed with the program, a joint nasa-dod board would be set up to establish objectives and approve specific experiments, (nasa Release 63-231; dod Release 1380-63)
Astroscience Center, facility devoted to current and long-range space programs, opened in Chicago by Armour Research Foundation of Illinois Institute of Technology. Headed by Dr. Leonard Reiffel, Director of Physics Research at the Foundation, new center would coordinate research projects for nasa and enlarge space research activities of the Foundation. (NYT [West. Ed?J, 3/21/63)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology, said at Univ. of Minnesota Engineers’ Day Convocation that “all too often” the scientist “gets the credit for the work done by the engineer.” In the space program, “the boundary line between science and engineering is often so fine as to be indistinguishable . . . .” (Text)
In hearings on H.R. 7381, bill to modernize dual-compensation and dual-employment laws, conducted by House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service, nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified:	.... “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is strongly of the opinion that the proposed legislation should be enacted (1) to permit the Government to capitalize on certain skills, competence, and experience in the areas of aerospace science and technology possessed by a sizable group of military personnel who have completed their service careers, and (2) to correct certain inequities in the present statutes pertaining to the Government employment of these personnel. “Many of the abilities and skills and much of the knowledge valuable to nasa are possessed by certain military personnel who have been closely associated with missile and military space programs and aeronautics. Collectively, this body of men, educated and skilled in aerospace science and technology, represents a reservoir of knowledge and experience which constitutes a national asset of inestimable value. Unless this limited group of specialists can be attracted to remain in the Government, this asset will not be available directly to the Government’s space program. As of August 5, 1963, 227 active duty military officers are detailed to nasa by the Department of Defense . . . .” (Testimony)
Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced a five-year space program that included development of Japanese boosters and launching of three satellites. It would be funded at $59,138,888 and employ some 300 Japanese engineers. Programs included a 60-km. weather observation rocket; a 150-km. two-stage weather observation rocket; 400-km. three-stage rockets; 1,200-km. two-stage rockets; navigation satellites, to be ready for launching by NASA in 1967. (M&R, 11/18/63,13)
Letter from Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, to nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden reporting on his recent visit to U.S.S.R. was inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.). Sir Bernard quoted M. V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, as saying U.S.S.R. had rejected, at least for present, any plans for a manned lunar landing, because of insurmountable problems of radiation in space. According to Sir Bernard, Keldysh said “that the manned project might be revived if progress in the next few years gave hope of a solution of their Sroblems, and that he believed the appropriate procedure would e to formulate the task on an international basis. He stated that the Academy believed that the time was now appropriate for scientists to formulate the task on an international basis (a) the reasons why it is desirable to engage in the manned lunar enterprise and (b) to draw up a list of scientific tasks which a man on the moon could deal with which could not be solved by instruments alone. The Academy regarded this initial step as the first and most vital in any plan for proceeding on an international basis . . . .” nasa Administrator James E. Webb’s reply to this letter also was inserted, in which he said:	“. . . With regard to space research and exploration, as you know, our present relationships with the Soviet Union have developed directly from the correspondence between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev on specific possibilities of cooperation in this field. Dr. Dryden’s discussions with Academician Blagonravov over the past year or so have followed within this framework. There is already a current agreement between the Soviet Academy of Sciences and nasa which represents the first fruit of these early efforts. “Accordingly, if the Soviet Academy is indeed interested in the matters you describe in your letter, we will look forward to the possibility of further explorations by Dr. Dryden and Academician Blagonravov as to their views and desires . . . .” (Letters, CR, 8/9/63, 13903)
Fourth annual Conference on Peaceful Uses of Space would be held in Boston in May 1964, nasa Administrator Webb announced. (Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
Addressing Washington, D.C., meeting of American Red Cross, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Project Apollo offers us our greatest opportunity to overcome the lead in manned space exploration now held by the Soviet Union. It gives us assurance that if an American is not first on the Moon, he certainly will not be far behind. And most important of all, it demonstrates to all the world that we in the United States have the capability and the determination to carry on those things which we have declared seriously that we intend to do.” (Text)
In Presidential news conference, the question was asked whether the President construed Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 as taking Soviet Union out of the moon race. The President replied: “I didn’t read that into his statement. I thought his statement was rather cautiously worded .... “I think it is remarkable that some people who were so unwilling to accept our test ban treaty, where there was a very adequate area of verification of whatever the Soviet Union was doing, were perfectly ready to accept Mr. Khrushchev’s very guarded and cautious remark that he was taking himself out of the space race, and use that as an excuse for us to abandon our efforts. “The fact of the matter is that the Soviets have made an intensive effort in space, and there is every indication that they are continuing and that they have the potential to continue. I would read Mr. Khrushchev’s remarks very carefully. I think that he said before anyone went to the moon there should be adequate preparation. We agree with that. “In my opinion, the space program we have is essential to the security of the United States, because, as I have said many times before, it is not a question of going to the moon. It is a question of having the competence to master this environment. I would not make any bets on Soviet intentions.” (Trans-9cript? Wash. Post, 11/1/63)
Stephen J. Grillo, Director of nasa Headquarters’ Administrative Services since 1960, died.
Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Cdr. of afssd, reported to ias that AF Systems Command considered three fundamental projects as “space programs of prime military necessity: rendezvous and inspection, space station development, and communications satellites.” (Av. IF*., 1/28/63,26f) 741-623 O—64-3 Chemist Harold C. Urey said that only about three per cent (about $15 billion) of this country’s gnp was spent on education, and that amount “should be doubled.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/24/63, A4)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was showing interest in acquiring usaf Titan III boosters to launch future heavy payloads such as observatory satellites, according to Aviation Week. Webb was said to have discussed with dod’s Dr. Harold Brown the possibility of adding Titan III to the list of standard launch vehicles in the national space program. (Av. Wk., 11/18/63, 25)
At nasa FY 1964 Budget Briefing, nasa Administrator James E. Webb acknowledged reported combustion instability in F-l engine: “It isn’t iust going to turn out to be a problem; it is a problem, and it has been a problem with every engine as I understand it that has ever been developed. We will solve the problem.” (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/23/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb submitted to Sen. Richard B. Russell, Chairman of Committee on Armed Services, nasa’s recommendations on S. 960, bill to establish joint committee to investigate defense and space contracts, and S. 961, bill to amend U.S. Code on procurement to require nasa to establish central file on contract communications. Regarding S. 960, Mr. Webb said “it is not apparent to this agency that more effective machinery is needed for the investigation of the nasa procurement program by the Congress than exists today . . . .” Regarding S. 961, Mr. Webb said “it is felt that current practices provide ample opportunity for the committees of the Congress to review and investigate the handling of any particular procurement action of nasa without resorting to the assembling of a mass of miscellaneous communications in a central file.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/217; Letter, 12/26/63)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Maine) read letter from Senator Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) in session, of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, the letter quoting three scientists who estimated that, at present pace, 60 per cent of all physical scientists would be working as nasa employees. Senator Bennett called on Republican members of Committee to see what steps were necessary to “prevent this concentration of scientific brains /"1„„--------A „A Al___________ ha uuvciiiniciit at uic ca^choc - -TA + A /lAV»r»A1*of.1ATtO L V Cl. tc Wli/OlUClVllO i n rl (NYT, 4/25/63) In aiaa speech at Dallas on “Space Policy and Space Management,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc. reviewed the national objectives in space: “First of all, there is an over-all policy objective, which the President has expressed as the determination of this country ‘to become the world’s leading space-faring nation.’ It is worth mentioning that this is a broad umbrella. . . . Suffice to say that the space program is not a one-project design nor a short-run episode. It is a growing, expanding, multi-project program, which I predict will become an increasingly significant part of our way of life. As important as it is, the moon project is not the whole space program; it is just one portion and one phase of an over-all program which has breadth through variety and depth far into the future. “A few features of this broad space policy are: “1. Its objectives are peaceful . . . the distinction as to what is peaceful and what is not peaceful is a matter of intent and is not determined by what agency of the government engages in them .... “2. Our policy asserts that space travel and space exploration are subject to international law and that such activity should be consistent with the provisions of the United Nations charter. . . . “3. It is our policy to seek increased international cooperation in, and mutually advantageous agreements for, the orderly and open conduct of space and space related activities .... “4. It is also our policy that the concept and performance of our space responsibilities shall be maintained and strengthened as a national program rather than a series of separate and unrelated projects. . . . “5. There are inherent risks in space exploration, particularly in manned flight, and they must be recognized .... “6. While we must continue to improve on state-of-the-art competences, it is essential that we strive just as hard to make so-called quantum jumps in technology and performance .... “7. It is a significant element of policy that progress be the joint product of government and private enterprise. . . . “In conclusion, the national space program is an essential and dynamic feature of our economy. It benefits the many rather than the few. It strengthens the nation, both at home and abroad. It looks forward rather than backward. It highlights the contributions of the most able technologists and the most able managers and gives them an unprecedented peacetime opportunity to repay more fully the special bonus they have received by living in this great country. “We can afford the space program. We must afford it. We can be satisfied with nothing less than first place—to the moon, to the planets, and throughout the solar system.” (Text)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator said, in accepting Gold Medal of the International Benjamin Franklin Society, New York: “. . . Space science and technology require research and development at the frontiers of almost every branch of science and technology. Any industrial nation which refuses to devote substantial effort to space exploration is incurring the hazard of future technological obsolescence of its industries, the hazard of potential loss of leadership, and the hazard of military surprise by potential enemies . . . .” (Text)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified before Communications Subcommittee of Senate Commerce Committee that experiences of both telstar i and relax i communications satellites were being “used continuously to review projects such as Syncom .... in an attempt to achieve the 24-hour, synchronous orbit, as well as all of our other satellite projects. “I should like to add, finally, that the experience of Telstar and Relay to date have merely reinforced the opinion which I gave before this committee last year; that considerable research and development have yet to be performed before economic operational systems can be established . . . .” (Testimony)
--	t7'"-	-*-'7 to research and development, with the attendant flow of new processes, new inventions, new products, and new ideas which stimulate many sectors of the economy. So far, during the past six years we have spent less than $10 billion on all aspects of space development and exploration. This has averaged less than 20 cents per capita per week. Contrary to the careless thinking of some critics, this money has been spent for materials, jobs, facilities, etc., right here on earth rather than on the moon or some distant planet. In other words, its stimulating effect has resulted in a greater demand for consumers’ goods and greater savings and investments. “It is unrealistic to conclude that, if this money were not going into space work, it would necessarily flow into other essentials such as slum clearance, education, and cancer research. The facts are that we have been spending more for those essentials since there has been a space program; the space program contributes to such progress; and it is not likely that the Congress would vote more money for such other projects if there were no demand for space funds. This is not an either/or proposition . . . .” 741-623 0—64---17 He attributed to the space program major credit for such benefits as: “comprehensive knowledge and understanding” of earth-sun relationships, interplanetary space environment, origins of solar system and life itself; improved communications, weather forecasting, and navigation; improvements in metals, alloys, and ceramics, and “substantial progress in the whole field of electronics . . . .” In “peaceful application of space competence to national security” he listed: “1. Support of our terrestrial armed forces ... in communications, meteorology, navigation, and mapping; “2. Increase in our alertness against pending dangers and our knowledge of potentially hostile territories through early warning and observation capabilities; and “3. Competence to examine and neutralize, if necessary, hostile and threatening spacecraft. “. . . Of even greater importance is the potential impact the space program can have on world peace through substituting competition in space exploration for competition in building nuclear striking power. If sanity prevails, the path to the stars can be the path to peace.” (Text)
President Kennedy announced that he had appointed Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Chairman of the Chemistry Department at Princeton Univ., to succeed Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner as the President’s science adviser and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology. Dr. Hornig has previously been a member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee. The President also announced that Robert H. Charles, a special assistant to the nasa Administrator, would succeed Joseph S. Imirie as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Materiel. (Wash. Post, 11/8/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the New York section of the aiaa in New York, pointed out that the U.S. maimed space program involves technical requirements “about 20 times the complexity of the Minuteman program.” For this reason, among others, he said leaders of the space program had recognized from the beginning that leadership could be achieved “only through a sustained, steadily accelerating effort.” He quoted Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, speaking on Apr. 26, 1958, when he said that without this big, long-term national commitment “I’d just as soon we didn’t start”; Dr. Wemher von Braun in 1958 telling the House Select Committee studying the Space Act that the biggest problem was “how we can eliminate this lethal and wasteful not-and-cold blowing that has plagued all our missile projects in the past. I think this lack of steady determination and unwavering support over the years has hurt us more than anything”; and Dr. T. Keith Glenn an, nasa’s first Administrator, speaking at the first nasa budget hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “If our space programs are to be run on an off-again, on-again basis, zigging and zagging with the turn of every new year, then we’d better spend our monev buying telescopes to watch the Russian pioneers in space/’ (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the Chamber of Commerce, Billings, Mont., noted that President Jefferson’s Louisiana Purchase in 1803, which brought much of the state of Montana within the boundaries of the U.S., was criticized at the time as a “prodigal waste of The public monies.’ ” Similarly the space program had been criticized. But Mr. Webb predicted that “the decisions for a dynamic national space program made by the Congress, by President Eisenhower, and by President Kennedy during the past five years will earn a place in history that, in significance will go far beyond Jefferson’s Louisiana Purchase and many of the other major decisions which have characterized turning points in our national history.” (Text)
Charles W. Frick resigned as Apollo Project Manager at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center to accept a position with industry. msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth appointed Robert O. Piland as Acting Project Manager, (msc Release 63-72)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director nasa Goddard Institute of Space Studies, speaking at the American Society of Newspaper Editors, attempted to explain the “scientific effort” in the context of the entire space program: “I think, personally, that there is also a powerful general stimulus wbich comes from the need for developing new ideas and technologies to operate in and master a new environment. One must go back to the explorations of the late 15th Century to find a parallel to what we are about to witness in the next 30 to 50 years. Those explorations 450 years ago and their results awakened interest in the world and an intellectual ferment which were the necessary foundations for the development of a scientific revolution. “The ideas of a scientific revolution could not have flowered in a static society with fixed ideas of what could and could not be done. It took the explorations of the 15th and early 16th centuries to shake established notions enough to permit the birth of modem scientific thought. In a subtle and deep sense, this is one of the reasons for the interest of the scientist in the exploration elements of the space program .... “I think that the history of the last 100 years demonstrates that we need not expect a very long wait before space research will feed back into everyday affairs and play a role in them. “In the 19th century, the lag was rather long. The Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell published a treatise on electromagnetism in 1864, but not until 1901 did Marconi transmit the first wireless signal across the Atlantic. “More recently, in 1932, Chadwick discovered the neutron in England. Fermi set the first atomic pile critical at Stagg Field in Chicago in 1942, only 10 years from the basic discovery to a very formidable application. “Still more recently, Bardeen and Brattain and Shockley at the Bell Labs discovered the transistor in 1948 and only six years later the first transistorized power amplifier appeared on the market .... “. . . the exploration of the moon has a very special role to play, precisely for the reason that would make one think the moon is uninteresting scientifically—specifically because the moon is a relatively lifeless body. It has no atmosphere, no oceans, nothing to wear away the record of the history of the solar system, and of whatever has occurred to the surface of the moon since its birth. “On the earth, record of even tremendous surface events disappear within 10 to 50 million years, a very short time compared to the age of the planet, and mountains form and are turned over. With the action of weather, everything changes and disappears as the millions of years go by. That is probably also true on Mars and Venus which resemble the earth in this respect. But the moon has no oceans, no atmosphere, no mountain-building activity that we can discern. For this reason, the moon is a kind of Rosetta Stone of the solar system from which we can read the past. That is why it is so interesting to the scientist. He has the opportunity to find there the record of the early history of the solar system. “To the student of the origin of the earth, the moon is even more interesting scientifically than Mars or Venus. “. . . if the moon and the planets were formed out of gas and dust in the condensation that surrounded the primitive sun, then we can expect such condensation to accompany the birth of every star. There are one hundred billion stars in our galaxy alone. Nearly every one of them we expect to have a planetary system around it. Some small fraction of those planets will be at the right distances from their suns, from their stars, and of the right size to have conditions favorable to the development of physical life as we know it. “If that is the case, it follows that life must be a relatively commonplace thing, physical life in the universe . . . “. . . there is one small instrument on the Tiros which has not achieved as much attention as it deserves. The size of a quarter, it is a black disc which detects the infrared energy radiated from the top of the atmosphere. That is the energy which is reflected back into space from the earth. We can accurately estimate the energy coming to the earth from the sun and we can take the difference between the two and calculate the amount of energy remaining in the atmosphere. “This energy deposited in the atmosphere constitutes the driving force that generates weather activity. With the aid of satellites, for the first time we can measure the energy difference and hope to break through from the day-to-day forecasting, which depends on immediately preceding events, to the week-long or two-week forecasts.” (Text)
Gordon M. Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport, suggested at meeting of Society of American Travel Writers in New York that he believed the U.S. supersonic transport aircraft could be economically used on routes as short as “perhaps 1,200 miles.” Maximum range of the U.S. sst would be around 4,000 mi. (Clark, NYT, 12/21/63)
In aeronautics press briefing, nasa Administrator James E. Webb replied to reporter’s question on cost of supersonic transport development: “We can do a great deal for $1 billion. I think we could probably build a flying prototype for less than that.” In President Kennedy’s proposed plan for supersonic transport development, $750 million would be spent by Government (faa, dod, and nasa) and remaining $250 million by industry. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 7/26/63)
Discussing the National Space Program before Iowa City Daily Press Association in Des Moines, nasa Associate Director of Plans and Program Evaluation Addison M. Rothrock said: “The prime objective of . . . [the manned space flight] program is to land men on the moon before the end of the decade. The scope covered by the program is much broader than this. It is in fact the research, development and operation of a series of research manned spacecraft that will determine for us man’s ability to operate in space. By focusing on the moon-landing we have set a goal that insures we develop all basic phases of the operation of manned spacecraft. I cannot emphasize this too strongly. “By the time our three astronauts leave for the moon-landing we as a nation will have accumulated 2000 flight hours in earth orbit of manned craft. To indicate to you the significance of this number—we have as of now less than five flight hours of manned aircraft at speeds in excess of Mach 2.5. ... In these 2000 hours we will have orbited the earth some 1300 times. Men will have gone to and from craft in orbit. We will have rendezvoused and inspected craft and transferred men and material between craft. We will have maneuvered the craft both in regards to the attitude of the craft as has been done with Mercury and the Orbiting Solar Observatory and in regards to changes in the flight path as has been done with Mariner II and Syncoms. These are the things that must be done and will be done in the development, operation, and functioning of manned craft in space. . . .” (Text)
Appointment of Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II as consultant to Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. President of the Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research, Dr. Lovelace would be consultant on medical aspects of current manned space programs. (nasa Release 63-274)
Congressman Charles A. Halleck (R.-Ind.) publicly released letter from former President Eisenhower urging that “the new spending programs in the pending budget ... be drastically reduced .... “The space program, in my opinion, is downright spongy. This is an area where we particularly need to demonstrate some common sense. Specifically, I have never believed that a spectacular dash to the moon, vastly deepening our debt, is worth the added tax burden it will eventually impose upon our citizens. This result should be achieved as a natural outgrowth of demonstrably valuable space operations. But having made this into a crash program, we are unavoidably wasting enormous sums. I suggest that our enthusiasm here be tempered in the interest of fiscal soundness . . . .” {CR, 4/2/63, 5172)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, speaking before the Atomic Industrial Forum Conference in New York, said that nuclear energy was essential to the space program and offered larger potential in space applications than in terrestrial ones. “One of the major defects in space thinking today is that it is too ‘short-run’. There is a tendency to think only from budget to budget rather than from decade to decade. It has taken great effort—not altogether successful—to get people to think as long-run as a manned flight to the Tnr»on In terms nf what, sna.ee travel and snare exnloration #	~	'	T *	^	# ' '	''"	‘	1.	1. mean to this country, the lunar objective is really a short-run target. Yet, some people think of it as the final space goal which is so far in the future that it can be further delayed without serious effects. If we are to think clearly about space, it is important that we recognize the lunar program for what it is, i.e., only one of the initial steps in a very young program. I believe that those who understand and support nuclear energy in space have a responsibility to educate others in the long-run, broad-based view of space. ... I am suggesting that, if we can get people to realize now that space travel and space exploration are permanent features of the economy, the idea of nuclear energy will automatically be considered a major element in the program.” (Text)
usn launched a Polaris A-3 missile off U.S.S. Observation Island missile support ship, had to destroy the missile 52 sec. after launch when it went off course. (M&R, 12/9/63, 10) . November : nasa launched the first successful Atlas-Centaur space booster from amr. The booster performed perfectly and the Centaur second stage ignited its liquid-hydrogen engines in space and went into orbit as the heaviest object (10,500 lbs.) yet orbited by the U.S. Orbital data were later announced to be : apogee, 1,050 mi.; perigee, 340 mi.; period, 108 min.; and inclination, 30°. Although another six flights remained before the Centaur could be considered operational, this first successful flight of the high-energy liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen booster was a major landmark in a development program dogged with delays and disappointments. The previous launch attempt, on May 8, 1962, ended 55 sec. after launch in fiery explosion when the weather shield ripped off the Centaur second stage. In a press conference after the launch, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Edgar M. Cortright spoke of the launching as “the world’s first successful flight of a hydrogen-oxygen rocket.” Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center and the man who personally oversaw the reworking of Centaur during the past year, added that the flight was “the first test of our ability to successfully ignite hydrogen on time in space.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/28/63; Benedict, Wash. Post, 11/28/63; Witkin, NYT, 11/28/63; nasa Releases 63-254-261)
Washington Evening Star proposed appointment of “a devil’s advocate” for U.S. space program. He would be “a member of Government, well qualified in science and engineering and well advised on tbe doings of lawyers and publicists . . . charged with building the strongest possible case against every space proposal— before it becomes sanctified as a line item in the Federal budget .... “This functionary .. . might well save the country a good deal of money and enhance the progress of the space program at the same time . . . .” (Editorial, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/27/63, A12)
Canadian government authorized four additional satellites for ionospheric research in joint U.S.-Canadian space program. {M&R, 3/11/63, 9) During March: Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the soldier and statesman for whom nasa Marshall Space Flight Center was named, donated to the center the Executive Order naming nasa's Huntsville, Ala., facility and the fountain pen used by President Dwight D. Eisenhower for signing it. (Chattanooga Times, 3/10/63)
Industry proposals to define advanced nuclear space propulsion systems for 1970’s were submitted to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The mission-oriented studies would analyze post-Nerva developmental engine systems for maximum operational use and flexibility in U.S. space program. {Av. Wk., 3/18/63, 53)
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
January 22: nasa Administrator James E. Webb and dod Secretary Robert S. McNamara announced nasa-dod agreement establishing Gemini Program Planning Board, with Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. (Associate Administrator for nasa) and Dr. Brockway McMillan (Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d) as cochairmen. Planning Board would delineate nasa and dod scientific and technological requirements and monitor the Gemini program to ensure that the requirements are met. Agreement supplemented nasa-usaf Gemini management agreement in effect since spring 1962; nasa would continue to be responsible for Project Gemini management, dod would participate in development, pilot training, pre-flight check-out, launch operations, and flight operations “to assist nasa and to meet the dod objectives.” dod also would assist in funding Gemini, (nasa Release 63-12; nasa-dod Agreement; dod Release 8A-63)
In column strongly supporting the U.S. space program, Roscoe Drummond stated that the United States “should not make the mistake of allowing Nikita Khrushchev to determine the size of the U.S. space program. This is a pitfall to be avoided at all costs .... “Naturally we must leave it to the concensus of the scientists and the technicians to decide whether the manned flight to the moon is the best way and the urgent next step to insure preeminence in outer space. The controlling and compelling objective is not a manned lunar landing on the moon for its own sake, but the achievement of mastery of the element of outer space for all that it will mean to the kind of earth we will inhabit for a long time to come.” (Wash. Post, 10/30/63)
Results of marines ii flight towards and past Venus were detailed in nasa press conference. Analysis of microwave and infrared radiometer scans revealed Venus is covered by cold, dense clouds in upper atmosphere; preliminaiy estimate of Venutian surface temperature was around 800° F. Temperatures are essentially same on dark and sunlighted sides of Venus, with a cold spot in southern hemisphere. Any carbon dioxide in atmosphere above cloud layer was too small to be detected by mariner ii’s instruments. High-density electron ionosphere was not detected. Radar observation on Venus from Goldstone Tracking Station established Venus’ rotation rate as 230, plus or minus 40-50 days, retrograde, with 225 days as non-rotating status for Venus. This observation together with other ground (measurements and data from mariner n’s magnetometer indicated Venus has very low, if any, magnetic field. Analysis indicated solar plasma continuously flows out from the sun, velocity of observed solar winds varying from 200 to 500 miles per second (approximate) and having temperature of about 1,000,000° F. Density is normally about 10 to 20 protons and electrons per cubic inch. Because solar plasma “carries along with it lines of magnetic force which originate in the [sun’s] corona, and the frequent variations in plasma velocity results in the deformation of these field lines, ... it is difficult to deduce from the point-by-point measurement of magnetic field what the general undisturbed configuration of the solar field would be .... It is hoped that further data may reveal the presence of magnetic waves m space ana ciam^ me interactions oetween tne magnetic field and the plasma. ...” mariner ii data on ionized particles in space revealed a flux of about 100 million particles per sq. centimeter per sec. in the range from few hundred to a thousand electron volts. In range 0.5 to 10 mev for protons, “very few exist at times, but at other times their flux may be a number of times that of cosmic rays. In the range of energies 10 to 800 mev for protons, there is nearly complete absence of particles normally [with great number possible during solar flare]. Above 800 mev, galactic cosmic rays enter interplanetary space and these decrease in numbers quite rapidly as the energy decreases. ...” Data obtained from two-way doppler tracking of the probe during its flight would enable scientists to calculate the mass of Venus with probable error of 0.005 per cent (compared to probable error of 0.05 per cent calculated by astronomers); to determine precise locations of tracking stations on earth—specifically, to calculate exact location of Goldstone Tracking Station to within 20 yards, calculated to within 100 yards before mariner n mission; to determine value of Astronomical Unit, established by radar observations as 92,956,220 mi.—50,000 mi. longer than that by classical astronomical observations; and to determine precisely the mass of the moon, now known to certainty of 0.1 per cent. Dr. Eberhard Rechtin, Director of jpl’s Deep Space Instrumentation Facility, reported mariner ii’s flight “resulted in accumulation of some 65 million bits of information with an accuracy of at least one per cent and yet with the use of only three watts of radio frequency power.” (nasa Releases 63-36-1, -2, -3, -4, -5; nasa Press Conf. Transcript)
U.S.S.R.’s most recent cosmonauts, Jr. Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova and L/Col. Valery Bykovsky, held press conference in Moscow. Both insisted that tandem flight had gone off according to schedule, both as to duration and maneuvers. Lt. Tereshkova, the first woman into space, added another fact to her official biography—that she had had pilot training prior to entering the space program. (N.Y. Herald Trib., 6/26/63)
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, said in address to Charlotte (N.C.) Chamber of Commerce: “The most important of the major reasons for undertaking a broad national program of space research and development—the one which promises the greatest rewards for mankind—is the least understood and the most difficult to explain. It is the certainty that the basic scientific knowledge gained, and the technological applications which will flow from it, will offer the greatest return on our space investment over many years ahead .... “The road to pre-eminence in space may be a long one. It certainly will not end on the moon, regardless of which nation lands the first explorers there .... “Much of what we need for pre-eminence in space will be acquired on the way to the moon. That is why we have chosen the lunar exploration as an immediate national goal of prime importance. “When will we clearly achieve the pre-eminence we seek ? This is not an easy question. The answer depends not only on_the sustained effort and investment we make, but on what the .Russians do. Their system lends itself to concentration of resources on specific tasks, but their system like any other is faced with conflicting demands for priority. At the present time we simply cannot know what level of investment they expect to make on a long-range space program. We do know we must not be trapped into a narrow one-purpose program such as one limited to a lunar landing. . . . “Unless the Russians unveil a new rocket on the order of Advanced Saturn in the next few years, our chances for being first to explore the moon remain good . . . .” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in address before the Los AnSiles Council on World Affairs, pointed out the unique role of alifomia in the national space program: “During Fiscal Year 1962 and the first six months of FY 1963, 47 per cent of nasa’s prime contracts over $25,000 were awarded to firms in California. If the second ranking state is excluded in each of these years, California industries received more nasa prime contract dollars than all of the other 48 states combined. manned space glider to the “Unless the nation decides to forego the opportunity it now has to insure a pre-eminent position in space, I foresee no possibility, certainly not in the near future, that the volume of space activity conducted in California will decline ... It does seem likely that as our national investment in space research and development increases, California will find it more difficult to maintain its present percentage of the total . . . .” nasa’s procurement, Mr. Webb said: “In short, we are making a deliberate effort to use the self-policing forces of the market place, to avoid building government competition with industry, and also to maintain sufficient managerial and technical capability in our own organization to make certain that our contractors are giving us the reliability we must have and the taxpayers a dollar’s-worth of work for every dollar we spend.’’ In reviewing the international aspects of the nasa program, the nasa Administrator cited the provisions of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, and said: “Some citizens, who regard military necessities as the prime justification for our space effort, find it difficult to accept the open, unclassified character of our civilian space program. Some regard basic scientific results as a national treasure, which should be kept under lock and key, and ask ‘Why do we give away our secrets to the Russians?’ “The answer is that our program involves both science and technology. There are no real secrets of nature, and it would be self-defeating to try to classify the science and principles of nature. On the other hand, technological advances and inventions are the product of men and effort, and can properly be classified and kept from potential enemies where the national interest so requires. “Accordingly, our national space program moves forward with the basic scientific research conducted by the civilian agency, available to the whole scientific community, but technological development conducted by both nasa and the Department of Defense which is shared by both agencies, and classified when defense and military interests are involved. In this manner we have protected our national security while making the maximum contribution to the advancement of science . . . .” (Text) March 27: In a letter to Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner discussed the problems of scientific manpower. “The manyfold demands for technical manpower draw on the same pool of talent—for defense and space, for innovation of civilian products able to compete in a world market, for meeting such domestic problems as mass transportation and environmental pollution associated with a rapidly urbanized society, for medical advancement, and for the effective management of our resources in such a way that we can help upgrade the way of life of citizens throughout the world without downgrading our own. Superposed on these requirements is the need for science, mathematics and engineering teachers to meet the rapidly growing college enrollment. A sharp competition for manpower has resulted, particularly for the superior individual having advanced training. In that competition, not all sectors of demand have succeeded in meeting their needs, and the future outlook is not encouraging. “For the first time, we are confronted with a plurality of goals that may well outstrip our technical manpower resources. “Faced with the same manpower problem as the Soviet Union, how, in a democratic society where each citizen must have a free choice of his or her occupation, do we meet this challenge? “The urgent need for more individuals having advanced training is clear .... To keep pace with our national needs, it is the judgment of the Presidents Science Advisory Committee that we should and could increase the number of Ph.D.'s each year in engineering, mathematics, and physical sciences (emp) to reach 7,500 in 1970, the number of master’s or equivalent to 30,000. This annual production of 37,500 advanced degrees by 1970 should be compared with 15,000 in 1960, 11,000 in 1950. “A substantial fraction of these new graduates, incidentally, must be plowed back into the universities for teaching, and soon .... With regard to students, the major barrier to continuation of full-time graduate study is financial .... Another barrier is inadequate graduate facilities .... In addition, there is very convincing evidence that some geographical areas produce a much greater proportion of doctorates than others .... Relatively few students are prepared to study more than several hundred miles from their homes. It would thus appear that we have a special problem in terms of meeting an unequal geographical distribution of centers of educational excellence. “The present barriers to graduate education—limitations in student support, number of faculty, and educational facilities— must be overcome. It is to that end that the President has proposed that the Federal Government take the initiative and provide the leadership needed to meet these national needs. “To meet goals for graduate education in the three fields of potential shortage—engineering, mathematics, and physical sciences—it is of critical importance that we increase the number of graduate students enrolling in the fall of 1964 from the 22,000 which may be expected on the basis of projected trends to some 30,000 .... Support would be provided within existing legislation, through nsf, aec, and nasa fellowships, and through new nsf science development and training grant programs .... In virtually all of these cases, assistance to students would be accompanied by a grant directly to the college or university to help meet the true cost of education, and thus would assist the university to maintain an internal balance between fields .... The President also proposes Federal support for new physical facilities .... “The proposed program is designed to achieve a substantial and unprecedented acceleration in the rate of production in advanced degrees in these three fields.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86, 6/10/63)
Harvard Business Revieic conducted poll of corporation executives on the space program, found that seven out of ten believe U.S.S.R. is ahead in race to send a man to the moon, six out of ten that the U.S.S.R. will beat the U.S. to the moon by a year and a half; only four out of ten would speed up the space program. (Harvard Business Review, Sept.-Oct. 1963)
Gordon M. Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, told representatives of 11 foreign airlines that U.S. could build a safe, commercially profitable supersonic transport airliner. He stressed that “we don’t think we are lagging far behind” Britisli-French development of Concorde. (NYT, 8/22/63)	_	_
nasa announced that Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director (Systems) , Office of Manned Space Flight in nasa Hq., had been named Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, at msc. He would be responsible for the development of the Apollo command and service modules and for the lunar excursion module (lem). George Low, Deputy Director (Programs) in the Office of Manned Space Flight, would assume the added responsibility for the Systems organization, (nasa Release 63-226; msc Release 63-163)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in address at Annual Dinner Meeting of Pittsburgh Post, Society of American Military Engineers: “Space science and technology require research and development at the frontiers of almost every branch of science and technology. Any industrial nation which refuses to devote substantial effort to space exploration is incurring the hazard of future technological obsolescence of its industries, the hazard of potential loss of leadership, and the hazard of military surprise by potential enemies .... “While the new technological developments offer the earliest contributions to economic development, m the long run the scientific knowledge obtained in the great unknown environment of the celestial bodies and interplanetary space may bring much greater returns. For, judging from past experience, advances in scientific knowledge are the foundation of advances in technology, which are a key factor in economic development .... “We live, in the language of the old cliche, at a great moment in history. Man has begun to lift himself above the restrictions of his planet into a new and strange environment and to expand his intellectual horizons. This is no visionary activity but one essential to the strength and security of our nation and to the future of man in the universe.” (Text)
nasa said it was investigating “possible improprieties” in reports that cars leased to nasa by a contractor, Management Services, Inc., at Cape Canaveral were being sold after two or three years use for as little as $50. Some of them had been sold to nasa employees, the reports said. {NYT, 10/17/63)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes, addressing Tenth Annual Conference for Engineers and Architects, Ohio State Univ., said: “The nation has a pool of about 1,400,000 scientists and engineers, which is expected to grow to 1,900,000 by 1970. At present, between 250,000 and 300,000 of these are employed in the aerospace industry, nasa employs more than 9,200 of these on its own staff and, through contract, accounts for the employment of about 32,800 others. Thus the space program occupies something over 3% of the national pool of scientists and engineers. We expect that this proportion will rise gradually, to a little more than 6% in 1968. “There is no evidence that this growth of the manpower requirements for space is interfering with consumer research and development. Nevertheless, as a consumer of scientific and technical manpower, we feel a responsibility to do our part to maintain and increase the supply. “Because of this responsibility, nasa is . . . providing about 35 million dollars to universities for research projects, and 10 million dollars have been granted for university facilities. Under the graduate training grant program, 88 universities have funds for 796 fellowships. It is expected that this number will increase . . . .” (Text)
L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit space flight as “a great step forward in the United States’ space program.” (AP, NYT, 5/18/63, 9)
nasa announced the details of a major reorganization of nasa Hq., to become effective Nov. 1,1963. Designed to consolidate authority and responsibility for major program management and for direction of field centers and to realign headquarters management of agency-wide supporting services, the reorganization provided the following: Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Dr. George Mueller) directing the manned space flight program and the related centers, msfc, Msua-nd loc; Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology (Dr. Raymond Bis-plinghoff), directing the advanced research and technology profram and the related centers, arc, frc, Lane, and lrc ; and the ssociate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications (Dr. Homer Newell), directing the scientific explorations of space and {>eaceful applications program and the related centers, gsfc, Wal-ops Station, ploo, and administering the contract for jpl. These program managers would report to the Associate Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Dr. Seamans acquired a deputy, Walter L. Lingle. Also reporting to Dr. Seamans would be four staff functions: Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs (Earl D. Hilbum); Deputy Associate Administrator for Administration (John D. Young); Deputy Associate Administrator for Programming (D. D. Wyatt); and Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense Affairs (Adm. Walter F. Boone (usn, Ret.)). Several agency-wide support functions would report directly to the Administrator: Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs (^Julian Scheer) ; Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning (Dr. George Simpson); Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs (Richard Callaghan); Assistant Administrator for International Programs (Arnold Frutkin); Executive Director of the Policy Planning Board (Paul Dembling); General Counsel (John A. Johnson). In addition to his assistant administrator duties, Dr. Simpson would also become Associate Deputy Administrator, coordinating the staffs reporting to the Administrator and Deputy Administrator. (nasa Release 63-225)
nasa announced rca Service Co. had been selected to negotiate contract for operation and maintenance of satellite data-acquisition stations—two near Rosman, N.C., and two near Fairbanks, Alaska. One station at each location would be operational by Sept. 1963; other two stations were expected to be operational m 1964. Facilities would be first high-capacity data-acquisition stations, supporting Oao, Pogo, Ego, and Nimbus satellites, (nasa Release 63-138). ■June 19: nasa Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden received international aspects of the U.S. space program at a luncheon meeting of the National Capitol Section of the aiaa. Dr. Dryden was awarded the First Annual von Karman Memorial Citation and a letter from Vice President Johnson was read which said, in part: “A few more Hugh Diydens—appropriately placed about the globe—and we would have a world of peace, honor, and progress.” Preceding Dr. Dryden’s address Mr. Robert F. Packard of the State Department reviewed U.S. policy with regard to space. (Letter; Citation; Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, asked for his reaction to Premier Khrushchev’s statement that U.S.S.R. was not competing to land a man on the moon, said it was “useful to have an authoritative statement” on Soviet plans but that “we will have to think a long time before modifying our program. “We will not want to change the status of our program until we determine precisely what the statement means and what is in our national interest.” (NYT, 10/27/63,12)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, wrote a letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb asking for an explanation of the statements made at the summary conference on Project Mercury that there had been poor workmanship on the Mercury spacecraft, according to William Hines, in the Washington Evening Star. He was also reported to have inquired about a remark attributed to Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc, that industrial shortcomings included outright falsification, citing an instance where a component used “ ‘black iron where there Should have been stainless steel.’ ” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/63) October 4: Atlas F icbm was launched by usaf from Vandenberg afb, but blew up during liftoff, (upi, PfYT, 10/8/63, 28)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation, pointed out the long history of naca-nasa contribution to aircraft development and its continuing research contribution to the supersonic transport. Denying that such a transport would be economically unfeasible, Mr. Webb said that further improvements were attainable during the aircraft’s development: “Reduce fuel reserves by 17%; Increase airplane lift-to-drag ratio by 7% ; Reduce engine specific fuel consumption during cruise by 3%; Reduce engine weight by 15% ; Reduce airframe structure weight by 5%. If all of these gains can be achieved simultaneously the payload can be increased 34% for a given weight aircraft designed to fly 4,000 statute miles.” (Text)
At luncheon meeting with nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Soviet Academician Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov reported to have suggested that it might be desirable to discuss possibility of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar expedition. (Bartlett, Wash. Eve Star, 9/17/63; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/18/63; Finney, NYT, 9/18/63,11)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, addressing Cleveland-Akron sections of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) and American Society of Mechanical Engineers (asme), stated “a few of the social and moral responsibilities of scientists working in this field [of space science and technology]: “(1) To search for knowledge of the facts and to conduct our work with devotion to intellectual honesty and objectivity. “(2) To carry out our part of the national program of space exploration in such a manner as to obtain maximum benefit to the welfare of tlie nation and all mankind. “(3) As citizens to lend our influence to the establishment of societies of free men in a peaceful world providing not only material benefits but also incentives for mental and spiritual growth and accomplishment. “(4) To realize in our job and daily contacts the highest moral aspirations and ideals of which we are capable.” (Text)
President Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral, his third tour of the test site within two years. Flying in from Palm Beach, where he was spending the weekend, the President spent three hours watching the launching of a Polaris missile from the submerged nuclear submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson, riding in a helicopter over the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) where nasa is constructing facilities for Saturn V launches, visiting the Saturn I rocket on its launch site. Speaking of the Saturn I flight scheduled for earlv December, the President said that if successful it would give tlie U.S. “the largest booster in the world and show significant progress in space. “I think that would be an important milestone for us.” The President was briefed on Projects Gemini and Apollo and the related booster programs by a group of nasa officials including nasa Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and msfc Director Dr. Wem-her von Braun. At one point in the illustrated lecture, the President lagged behind his party to examine models of the various boosters in the space program. He picked up a model of the 72-ft. Atlas D which had boosted the Project Mercury astronauts into orbit and compared it with a model of the 281-ft. Saturn V intended to propel Project Apollo astronauts to a manned lunar landing. “This is fantastic,” the President said. (NYT, 11/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 11/17/63,2)
President Kennedy sent FY 1964 Budget Request to Congress, recommending nasa appropriation of $5,712 billion. Of this sum, $3.19 billion was for manned space flight, with Project Apollo receiving largest single increase in nasa budget—from $435 million in FY 1963 to $1.2 billion in FY 1964. nasa Administrator James E. Webb characterized the budget request as “austere”—it would neither speed up nor slow down the National effort to land an American on the moon in this decade. Total FY 1964 space budget, was estimated at $7,614 billion— nasa, $5,664 billion; dod $1,668 billion; aec, $254.3 million; Weather Bureau, $26.2 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.3 million, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964; Wash. Post, 1/18/63, A12; M&R, 1/21/63,13)
Dr. Nello Pace, physiology prof, at Univ. of Calif., sworn in as consultant on life science programs to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release)
Appointment of Dr. Augustus B. Kinzel to nasa Industrial Applications Advisory Committee was announced by nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr. Kinzel was vice president for research at Union Carbide Corp. since 1955. (nasa Release 63-31)
nato announced U.S. Prof. Courtland D. Perkins had been elected chairman of nato’s Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research (agard). (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/22/63, A15) “. . . The very reasons which impelled the powers to reach a test ban treaty—a combination of common sense and a recognition that costs were going up by geometric progression—should now bring them to combine a space program.” (London Times) “. . . The horizons opened by the President . . . were vast.” (Paris Aurore) “. . ..Benefits from such a joint effort militate in favor of this second major step to develop the improved international relationship already stemming from the agreement on the limited nuclear test-ban treaty.” (NYT) “. . . Will excite world-wide attention . . . eminently sensible suggestion . . . national advantages to be derived by the first nation to the moon are great, in a political and propaganda context, but they are lesser than the advantages that all mankind will derive from the extension of human knowledge that is going to be involved in the effort to reach the moon . . . .” (Wash. Post) “. . . Stirred the imagination of the world . . . tend to open up the closed society of the U.S.S.R.” (Wash. Star) “. . . Kennedy envisages an incredibly bold scientific advance [and] accepts as possible a degree of collaboration between two opposing systems . . . which would have seemed incredible only a few months ago.” (London Daily Express, NYT, September 22,1963)
In address to the annual meeting of the nea’s elementary school principals at Oklahoma City, nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated that every segment of society needs to reexamine its activities in the light of changes brought about by science and technology. “In the field of education it is evident that a first and obvious demand of this age is an increasing supply of scientific and technical manpower, including scientists, mathematicians, and engineers with advanced degrees .... “A second obvious demand on education is the development of a citizenry with a higher level of scientific literacy, not merely to motivate more young people1 toward careers in science, but to assure our nation of a body politic better qualified to understand and cope with the problems of government and society during a period of great and rapid change. “And, finally, achievement of our goals in space will demand the highest scholastic efforts and intellectual accomplishments in virtually every field of study. “Space is, indeed, a new and challenging frontier, but it is a frontier of the intellect—one which challenges brain, not brawn, with creative intelligence our greatest weapon . . . .” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb told National Transportation Institute meeting in Chicago “. . . our national defense—perhaps even our national survival—demands that we act to insure that no hostile force will be permitted to use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us.” (Chicago Trib., 1/31/63)
Total manpower working at nasa’s Michoud Operations, of which only 244 were nasa employees: 8,463. Contractor employees were: Boeing, 4,136; Chrysler, 3,207; Mason-Rust, 769; Rocketdyne, 13; and Telecomputing Services, 94. (Marshall Star, 10/23/63, 4)
At the State Department luncheon honoring Astronaut Gordon Cooper, Vice President Johnson remarked: “In 1942, President Roosevelt called together our wartime leaders for the final decision on continuing or abandoning the Manhattan project which produced the atomic bomb. One of the most eminent leaders present heard presentation from all sides. Then, he solemnly gave President Roosevelt his verdict: ‘The bomb will never go off—I speak, of course, Mr. President, as an expert on explosives.’ “In that first, uncertain spring of the space age 5 years ago, some conscientious experts took the same attitude toward Project Mercury. History has proved them grossly wrong. . . . “Hitler once predicted the Nazis would wring England’s neck like a chicken. After the Battle of Britain, Winston Churchill said to Commons, ‘Some chicken. Some neck.’ We have heard some say recently that the civilian space program is only ‘leafraking.’ Considering Major Cooper—considering the vast technological cooperation which made his mission a success—I would say today, ‘Some leaf. Some rake.’” (Text, CR, 5/23/63, A3299)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition, outlined nasa personnel requirements for FY 1964. Dr. Seamans said some 73,000 scientists and engineers would be required to carry out the U.S. space program, and 11,300 of these would be employed by nasa. (upi, NYT [West. Ed.], 3/20/63)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. announced it was withdrawing its $3.2 million contract offer to 16 U.S. astronauts for their personal stories. “It is with deep regret that we are withdrawing our bid. We knew there would be a vast number of subtle and complex problems to resolve before we could arrive at a viable contract. “Following our most recent conversations with [nasa] officials, we have reached the conclusion, most reluctantly, that further negotiations would be futile.” (upi, NYT, 7/9/63, 1)
nasa announced it had selected a fact-finding committee to study various geographic locations for the proposed nasa Electronics Research Center. Once the committee completed its study, the nasa Administrator would make the final decision and report his findings to Congress in conformance with P.L. 88-113. (nasa Release 63-233)
Conclusions on where the armed forces “are going” in the rest of this decade were outlined recently by Gen. William F. McKee, usaf Vice Chief of Staff. “. . . we must watch our own and the Soviet’s space programs carefully. This is probably the area of greatest demand on our vision as a nation. For it is here that one of us, probably, will find the key to the strategic superiority of the 1970’s. Secretary McNamara says, ‘I think there is no clear requirement for military purposes for manned operations in space as we look at the future today.’ However, Mr. McNamara said more: ‘. . . But, should one develop it could come so suddenly in a field in which the leadtime for the developmental technology is so long that I believe we must anticipate that possibility today . . .’. “I, too, think we must anticipate that today. While this is a national effort, it is also an absolute obligation of those of us responsible for our national security.” {Air Force Information Policy Letter, June 1963)
Bidders’ conference for Voyager design-study contracts held at nasa Headquarters. Unmanned Venus and Mars probe, Voyager “is predicated on the fact that this country is serious in exploring planets in detail for a manned flight to the planets,” nasa Deputy Director of Space Sciences Edgar Cortright was reported to have said. (Space Bus. Daily, 3/13/63,309)
U.S.S.R. was designing a supersonic transport aircraft from the start, not modifying a bomber design as they had done with the TU-104 and were rumored to be doing again, according to faa Deputy Administrator Gordon Bain. (NYT, 11/4/63,1)
Results of Harvard Business School poll of U.S. industrialists on how they viewed America’s space program, published in Harvard Business Review, indicated that industrialists expect a considerable payoff from space in terms of tangible benefits to our planet and think that the space program is “a great energizing force on our society.” (Greenough, Boston Morning Globe, 9/2/63)
Gordon Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, issued statement rejecting Oct. 1 proposal by Continental Airlines President Robert F. Six that U.S. join with U.K. and France in supersonic transport development. Regarding U.S. participation in U.K.-French Concorde development, Bam said that “at the present stage in the development grogram of the Concorde, there is little, if anythingj that United tates manufacturers could contribute, except possibly money,” and monetary contribution would aggravate U.S. balance-of-payments problem. Regarding U.K.-French-U.S. joint development of mach 3 airliner, Bain said: “At no time have the British-French indicated any interest in such a project. (Wash. Post. 10/4/63) During October: Centaur AC-2 vehicle completed its last two major tests prior to launch. At Lewis Research Center the new stage separation system underwent successful test. At General Dynamics/Astronautics Sycamore Canyon test site in Calif., -two RL-10 engines underwent full duration, full power test (380 sec. at 30,000 lbs. thrust). (Av. Wk., 10/14/63, 32)
Editorial in Missiles and Rockets took issue with widespread assertions that the space program was a serious drain on the Nation’s scientific and technical manpower. Asserting that no other part of the economy was known to have a serious shortage of scientists or engineers and that even if the space program were stopped tomorrow the crosstraining of scientists and engineers into some other part of the economy would be long and difficult if not impossible, the editorial concluded that the big problem of the future would be a shortage of skilled manpower against a background of a rising threat of unemployment. The Nation would need an estimated 34.5 million new jobs by 1970. “New jobs develop from new technologies. And one of the fastest and most promising routes to development of new technologies lies in the missile/space industry. “With such a demand for new jobs ahead and with a concurrent need for skilled workers, the answer seems obvious—yet has received little attention. Training of surplus manpower to fit the requirements for skilled workers is the only sensible route— not a cutback in what will soon be the nation’s largest industry. But we have yet to see any large-scale government program for training of unemployables. “Nor is it solely a government problem. It must be shared by the nation’s industrial management and labor unions.” (M&R, 11/18/63, 46)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said at Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner, Oklahoma City: “Space . . . has gained the lion’s share of publicity—and justifiably so. “When we talk of space and space research, there are those who raise the question that our efforts cost too much. Certainly American leadership in space is not cheap. We are now spending 20 cents per week per capita on our national space program. “Other Americans ask if our space efforts are worthwhile. “I can answer in terms we can all understand. While the space age is not yet 5 years old, more than 5,000 companies and research organizations have been or are now involved in our space effort. We have produced more than 3,200 space-related products, many of which are already being put to use. “But, many prominent Republicans are questioning the value of the program. A former Republican President has referred to our moon project as a ‘stunt.’ “I can answer that simply: I do not believe that this generation of Americans is willing to resign itself to going to bed each night by the light of a Communist moon . . . .” (Text, CR, 5/23/63, A3243-44)
In a letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Rep. Clarence D. Long (D.-Md.) criticized nasa for failure to fulfill Public Law 88-113 whereby “ ‘a detailed study of the geographic location of, the need for, and the nature of, the proposed center’ ” should be made. Long was referring to the selection of a site for and the building of a $50-million electronics research center. He implied that the nasa “factfinding committee” set up to conduct this study had not given sufficient consideration to all suitable locations—the Baltimore area in particular—and, thereby, had failed to serve the national interest. (OR, 1/22/64, 934)
nasa Director of Electronics and Control Dr. Albert J. Kelley made public two- studies conducted by nasa on need for electronics research center and letters from nasa Administrator James E. Webb to Rep. George P. Miller and Sen. Clinton P. Anderson. Letters and studies pointed out that electronics difficulties comprised greatest single cause of failures in spacecraft and rockets during past five years, nasa had no highly developed skill in design of electronic components, and new center was expected to fill that need. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 7/14/63)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, msc, spoke before the National Rocket Club in Washington. He explained the philosophy behind the recent changes in the Apollo flight-test program, when Saturn I launch vehicles were replaced by Saturn IB’s and the first manned flight thereby delayed for some nine months. Dr. Shea pointed out that the space age had advanced to the point that the space environment is understood well enough so that components can be designed, built, and ground-tested with confidence that they can perform well in space. The flight test program has become “the relatively small portion of the development iceberg which is clearly visible to the public.” This had led to a desire to flight-test the entire spacecraft configuration from the outset, rather than the previous method of adding additional systems flight by flight, when “every spacecraft is a somewhat different design containing the potential of new problems. “The discipline of a single configuration—configuration control, if you will—not only increases the carry over from test to test so necessary for establishing design confidence, but also provides repeated opportunities for early spacecraft tests of substantial scope.” (Text)
Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) read into the Congressional Record an editorial from Life Magazine on priorities in the U.S. space program: “The United States needs a reasoned and balanced space program that is more than a series of jumpy reflexes to things Khrushchev may or may not be doing. The first priority is not the moon. It is the conquest of inner space (up to 500 miles high), the true military high ground from which our world can be photographed, weather surveyed, perhaps atom policed. Beyond that lie vast challenges in the quest for knowledge of space, where the moon is only one way station. The challenges must be met, the United States must be a space-faring nation; but at a rate and in an order set by our own capacity and deliberation.” (CR, 11/12/63, A7016)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson reviewed his first 26 months in office on abc television interview. Referring to his participation in major national decisions, he referred to pushing ahead with the large rocket booster program and the accelerated space program decisions in which he participated as Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. (Wash. Post, 3/27/63; Wash. Eve. Star, -3/27/63)
Dr. Arthur R. Kantrowitz, Vice President of avco Corp., interviewed in U.S. News & World Report, said the moon was “set up as the priority target in our space program” because, at the time of the decision, “it was the most obvious goal .... But I think that, while it does provide us with a center for vigorous activity, it precluded other imaginative things that we might be doing, because it absorbs so much of our funds .... “I am one of those who favor, as our next objective, the permanent manned station in a low orbit around the earth .... It would give us a chance to learn to live and to work in space. It would give us a chance to achieve a larger vision of the potentialities of space .... A laboratory like this would enlarge man’s horizons in an important way. . . .” Dr. Kantrowitz said there was “certainly a possibility of going to the moon via a manned orbital station,” and that this might be the Soviet method. Asked if U.S. should be working on this approach in addition to lor, he said: “If we had two approaches, I would be willing to bet that it would accelerate our moon program, because there is a chance that either of these approaches will run into serious difficulties. Having two baskets for our eggs would seem to me to be a much more reasonable thing. Note that before the expensive later phases are reached by either approach a choice may be necessitated for economic reasons. “Furthermore, we might find after we’re deeper into the space program that there are more exciting things to be done than landing a man on the moon.” (U.S. News, 4/15/63,64-66)
nasa Administrator Webb wrote letters to the respective chairmen of the House and Senate space committees indicating that a mid-city location in Boston on land now owned by the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority might provide an alternate location for the proposed nasa Electronics Research Center. He pointed out that if authorization for the Center and its location m the Boston area were approved? nasa was going to not only carefully consider the original possibility of obtaining 1,000 acres of land as near as possible to Harvard and mit, but also the alternate location, utilizing air-rights with multi-story structures on a smaller area. (Texts, nasa Release 62-63)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Titan III program director, quoted as saying usaf planned to fly at least 10 X-20 (Dyna Soar) spacecraft, the first two to be unmanned and remaining eight carrying astronauts. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/14/63, 238)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator testifying on nasa’s international programs before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that the “first substantial fruits of these programs were realized in 1962 and further significant programs were laid down for future years. During 1962, “—the first two international satellites, Ariel and Alouette, were successfully placed in orbit, “—launchings of sounding rockets bearing scientific payloads were carried out in cooperation with eight countries, “—37 countries engaged in special projects in support of our weather and communications satellite programs, “—foreign participation continued to grow in the operation of our global tracking and data acquisition network overseas, “—and, a new nasa international fellowship program was successfully established in our own universities.” Discussing studies of follow-on projects to manned lunar landing, Dr. Dryden listed as “obvious candidates . . . establishment of a station on the moon permitting prolonged occupancy, a manned laboratory orbiting the earth as a satellite, and manned reconnaissance of the planets .... “It seems to us that an orbiting laboratory is a necessary preliminary to manned planetary expeditions .... “Obviously the capsules presently in the program do not have sufficient space available for experimentation and have only a limited lifetime in orbit. Something larger, of longer duration in orbit, and with resupply capability is required. Many exploratory design studies nave been made of the technological feasibility of assembling a large space laboratory in space from multiple launches with one or another of the available launch vehicles. We believe however that technical feasibility alone does not justify a project of this magnitude and cost. We are attempting to grasp the problem from the other end, that is to ask what one can and would do in a space laboratory in specific fields of science and technology with a view to establishing a realistic and useful concept. We hope that such studies will provide the information necessary to justify and support a decision to be made in time for the fiscal year 1965 budget. The program must be designed to fulfill national needs . . . .” (Testimony)	'
Stratoscope II 36-in. telescope, separated from tandem balloons by radio signal, landed 10 mi. north of Pulaski, Tenn.; balloons landed 14 mi. west of Pulaski. Project Manager Dr. Martin Schwarzchild, arriving at landing site, said he was “delighted” with condition of the instruments and termed the flight a success. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/3/63)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, was elected to third four-year term as Home Secretary of National Academy of Sciences, (nas Release)
nasa Deputy Director Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed accomplishments of nasa’s international program and some future trends of U.S. space program in presentation to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He described U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement for cooperation in weather satellite program and mutual experiments with Echo II passive-reflector satellite, and said: “The agreement itself provides for the usual sixty-day period during which each nation may change its mind on details and suggest changes. This gives an opportunity for review by various agencies within both governments, and changes can then be made without embarrassment. For that reason, the text of the agreement will not be released until two months from March 20 . . . .” Dr. Dryden said Soviet maneuvers in Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space were ‘‘a small cloud on the horizon” threatening “that this effort toward scientific cooperation may be terminated.” He suggested that some scientists in Soviet Academy were non-Communist Party members and were eager for international contacts and cooperation; they apparently were allowed to discuss scientific and technical matters not involving politics. But possibility existed that “political elements” might “shut off” moves toward international cooperation—evidenced by Soviet “tendency to hint that scientific cooperation may not be so easy unless there is agreement on legal matters.” (Testimony; NYT, 4/28/63,41)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, nasa Associate Administrator, told Washington Representatives Chapter of National Security Industrial Association: “The goals of this [accelerated national space] program and of our nation in space are to achieve a position of pre-eminence in every aspect of space science and technology for the benefit of all mankind .... Four main reasons underlie the tremendous effort we must make to achieve the goals stated by the President. Our position as leader of the Free World requires it. Our national security requires it. The fact that we are a practical people, dedicated to the improvement of life on earth for ourselves and our world neighbors, requires it. And man’s age-old urge to explore and our national traditions of pioneering require it . . . .” Dr. Seamans also discussed the Pioneer space probe program: “. . . We are initiating a competition for a new probe, pioneer, to develop a better understanding of solar flares. These probes will be used, commencing in 1964 (the International Year of the Quiet Sun), to measure the characteristics of the interplanetary medium such as magnetic field, solar plasma, solar and galactic cosmic radiation, and micrometeorites. The probe will provide information of intrinsic scientific value in addition to measurements in direct support of the manned lunar landing....” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Montana State University, Missoula, Mont., listed six reasons for making Project Apollo the major manned space flight effort of the 1960’s: “1) The goal of lunar exploration is feasible from an engineering standpoint .... “2) By planning ahead, and adopting a realistic schedule, we rwrn. J 11> a ww .... n A. T v. n A j J	J	An J on f!«n*IA1«At tvviriu mo w aoiciauicao in iiiueuioiirii anu	mianuii^. “3) We have set ourselves a clear goal which the entire world can understand, and one in which we nave a good chance of being first .... “4) We have set a goal which will focus our efforts, and at the same time enable us to build up a broad base of space power .... “5) In Project Apollo we protect ourselves against the great psychological advantage the Soviet Union would have if it alone could occupy and use the moon . . . . “6) Project Apollo gives us our first good chance of overcoming the lead in manned space exploration which the Soviets now hold.” (Text)
nasa announced appointment of James T. Dennison and Dr. Thomas P. Murphy as special assistants to nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, Dr. George L. Simpson. Dennison, formerly Director of Research and Engineering at Dennison Manufacturing Co., was assigned overall responsibilities in technology utilization. Dr. Murphy, formerly staff assistant to nasa Administrator, was assigned responsibilities in policy planning, socio-economic studies, and research projects. (nasa Release 63-159)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Iowa Bankers Association 77th Annual Convention in Des Moines, said: “Let me list the principal reasons why our investment in manned space flight is sound: “1. The current level of effort is vital if we are hot to settle for second position in space .... “2. Almost all our advances in space technology will add directly or indirectly to our ability to deter aggression .... “3. The scientific capital we shall acquire in the lunar program will long serve the nation .... “4. The facilities we are building and the technology we are acquiring are tangible assets that will extend benefits to our children and grandchildren .... “5. The dollars that are putting us into space are being spent right here on earth .... “6. We are clearly demonstrating to the world the ability and determination of our democratic society to organize whatever large-scale scientific and industrial effort is required to meet critical national and international needs in time of peace as well as war .... “7. To meet the stringent demands of the space environment . . . engineers are developing new materials . . . certain to pay off dividends, many of which we cannot foresee, some of which may be of revolutionary nature .... “8. We are rapidly building up a large pool of highly trained and creative scientists, engineers, and technicians .... “9. We are currently devoting about one per cent of the country’s income to the civilian space effort. If the inducement to hard work and inspiration of participating directly or indirectly in space exploration spurs our people to increase production of goods and services by only one per cent, the space program will pay for itself. “10. Our swift progress has now brought us to the point where our space power can be employed in peace-making as well as peace-keeping.” (Text)
Senator Clifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) said in press conference he would urge Congressional investigation to determine whether U.S. was channeling too many resources into space programs to the detriment of other Federal programs. Senator Case said he would recommend to Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, that the committee conduct “a pretty thorough review of the whole space program.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/17/63)
In commencement address at Univ. of Pittsburgh, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “In the world you enter today, man is no longer rooted to terra firma, to his native land, or even to his city block, either in the literal sense or in his understanding of the powerful forces of the universe, of which he is such a minuscule part. Increasingly man comprehends that the new understanding and knowledge that are being unleashed by science and technology will alter his existence in more ways and more rapidly than he can possibly foresee .... “Forty years elapsed between the Wright brothers and the first supersonic flight. Only 10 years were required to reach 4,000 miles per hour in the X-15. Applying this knowledge, we now see a shrunken and bipolarized world, within which we can travel anywhere in a few hours, but cannot solve without force and violence man’s relation to man. And all of this was achieved using the atmosphere up to twice the height of mountains. “By the end of this decade, man will have stood on the moon and looked outward to the vast universe and beyond, and learned in the process vastly more about the earth itself . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/12/63, A3792)
nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said in address before Society of Aerospace Material and Process Engineers in Philadelphia: “There is no area of technology more important to our space effort than materials and their processing. Virtually every device that is employed in space is limited in either performance or efficiency by its constituent materials. The space program is literally paced by our ability to use and process materials . . . .” (Text)
Even our opponents realize that we have the leading role in space,’ Khrushchev said recently. ‘They haven’t overtaken us yet, and we are not going to let them. Our people are covering themselves with glory. We shall give the capitalist world no peace, since it has to go.’ “We have a balanced, fast paced space program geared to our national needs and resources. I can assure you that the Soviets are also working hard on a well conceived program, even though they throw a veil of secrecy over their failures and try to confuse us about their objectives.” (Text)
At nasa Hq., D. Brainerd Holmes, former Director of nasa Manned Space Flight, was presented nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership by nasa Administrator James E. Webb. (nasa Release 63-199)
nasa would support pilot program to develop adult education course on the space program in Pawtucket, R.I., E. E. Collin of nasa Education Services said in New York Herald Tribune. nasa $2,500 contract with Rhode Island State Dept, of Public Instruction would finance 10 two-hr. presentations covering overall space exploration program, each given by expert in the subject area. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Tnb., 7/30/63; Collin, nasa afee)
L/Gen. Thomas P. G. Gerrity (usaf), dc/s for Systems and Logistics, told American Ordnance Association in Washington that “the worst blot on the Air Force-Industry image is inaccurate estimating of costs and schedules. In these areas we simply have to do abetter job at the outset of each program and we have to conduct accurate and timely reviews to be sure that program growth and cost overruns are anticipated and separately identified . . . .” (A-N-AF Journal <& Register, 5/18/63, 38)
Appointment of Robert H. Charles as Special Assistant to nasa Administrator was announced. Consultant to Administrator since September 1962, Mr. Charles would work closely with nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs in development and negotiation of NASA-industry contractual relationships. (nasa Release 63-134)
In testimony before the House Armed Services Committee, General Curtis E. LeMay testified: “The Soviets could be proceeding actively to develop space systems for military application. We believe that the Soviets wfill produce and deploy those military space systems Which they find feasible and advantageous in comparison with other types of weapons and military equipment . . . “U.S. military achievements in space will be expensive. Our objectives will be difficult to accomplish and the risks . . . large.” “However, as in all previous military progress, risks will diminish with experience and can be minimized in early stages by thoroughly planned decision points. “We must not risk the danger of waiting for the enemy to demonstrate a capability before we undertake the development of our own. The visible threat to our National security requires a vigorous military space program.” (Text; A-N-AF Journal and Register, 3/2/63,16)
faa Administrator Najeeb Halaby announced appointment of Gordon M. Bain as Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development. Formerly Assistant Administrator for Appraisal, Bain would head faa organization charged with overall responsibility for Government-industry development of supersonic transport aircraft. ( faa Release 63-69)
Lt. Gen. Leslie R. Groves (usa, Ret.), speaking at panel meeting (“Satellite Sanity—Lunar Lunacy”) of National Association of Manufacturers’ 68th Congress, criticized Project Apollo as a wasted effort, value of which would be only prestige. He charged the lunar landing program was too expensive and, if continued, would bankrupt the nation. nasa Administrator James E. Webb, attending the meeting, was invited by presiding officer Paul Bachman to the platform to answer General Groves. Mr. Webb defended values and costs of the national space program. In his remarks, Mr. Webb pointed out that the national debt ($300 billion) is only half of the annual gnp ($600 billion), so he didn’t think the country was bankrupt. He defended the use of manned instead of instrumented spacecraft and remarked, “I for one don’t think there is any doubt that man and his brain is superior to a machine.” Supporting Mr. Webb’s defense were panel members Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of Goddard Institute of Space Studies, and Walter L. Lingle, Jr., nasa Deputy Associate Administrator. (Halley, NYT, 12/7/63)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. press conference in Rome, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, chief U.S. negotiator, and Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, announced signing of an accord for a joint weather satellite program and called for broader American-Russian cooperation in space activities. Agreements were reached under space cooperation accord signed by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. last June, and after ten days of closed-door negotiations by teams of specialists. Agreement would become effective after a 60-day waiting period pending possible changes by either Government. Under the joint weather satellite program, each nation would launch a satellite on a different orbit to collect meteorological data, while a 24-hr. cable and radio communications network would be established for exchange of information and cloud-cover pictures, such data to be made public throughout the world. Launching of Echo II later in 1963 would provide basis for communications experiments which could lead to a global communications network, including the exchange of radio and TV programs. Both nasa Deputy Administrator Dryden and Blagonravov expressed hope that the accord just negotiated would lead to broader agreements. Blagonravov was quoted as saying that “the first step is always the hardest.” Dryden was quoted regarding the Warsaw meetings later this year on probes of Mars and Venus as saying: “I hope there will be future coordination to avoid duplication.” (Text; AP, Wash. Post, 3/21/63,1)
In commencement address at Univ. of Delaware, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “. . . For the first time in the history of mankind the opportunity to leave the earth and explore the solar system is at hand. Only two nations, the United States and the Soviet Union, have the resources with which to exploit this opportunity. Were we, as the symbol of democratic government, to surrender this opportunity to the leading advocate of the Communist ideology, we could no longer stand large in our own image, or in the image that other nations have of us and of the free society we represent. “Like it or not, therefore, the hard facts of international life leave no doubt tbat we are in a contest with the Soviet Union. Like it or not, it is a fact of international life that space achievement is and will be a symbol of national character and national strength . . . .” (Text)
In address at Univ. of Wichita, Kans., nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Today, it is accepted that growing industries tend to concentrate in regions where research fanilities are best. No part of the country can afford to neglect investments in advanced scientific and engineering education and in first class research facilities. “Modem industry, too, has much to gain from regional cooperation in support of the universities and associated research efforts. Industrial leaders are beginning, more and more, to look to the universities of their region for the most important resource of the age—ideas, scientific brainpower, and advanced technological skill, experience, and judgment. “It is not a question today of whether a region can already qualify—can now offer the human and natural resources required— for a particular industrial plant or government facility. “The question is whether the region is creatively doing what it can to equip its citizens to serve their area and their nation in a period when our prosperity and our very existence as a free people depend on scientific and technological leadership . . . .” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in address before Milwaukee Press Club Gridiron Dinner: “From the results of the past five years of effort, it is apparent that, if we are to achieve mastery of space, we must add substantially to our scientific knowledge and to our utilization of technology. The nasa program is moving forward on both of these fronts. Essentially, our efforts in the Gemini and Apollo programs, leading to exploration of the moon, will provide us with an understanding of the limiting factors in space utilization, and the skills which will be needed to meet such future requirements in the space environment as our nation decides to undertake .... “All of these skills are needed not only in the pursuit of peaceful rewards for mankind from space exploration, but for the development of any space missions wbich may become necessary to our national defense, to insure that space will not be used as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us. As these skills increase, a growing close relationship between the nation’s best experts in the underlying technologies is utilized to make the best decisions on new operat ional systems, whether civilian or military. “It is also recognized that our space program must be broad enoughj including considerable basic research, to give us a flexible base suitable for a continuity of effort in a direction or directions perhaps still unknown. Our broad and varied space effort permits us to lead from our great national strengths—the remarkable flexibility of our economic, social and political systems, the great variety of our talents, and the vast resources of our university-industry-government complex. “Accordingly, we have not allowed ourselves to be trapped in a narrow competition, but have developed a national space program which embraces a wide range of activities . . . .” (Text) April 17: Soviet declaration of 11 basicprinciples of space activity presented to Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. U.S. sources said proposals were virtually unchanged from those offered last year. {NTT, 4/18/63, 22) Discovery of planet (“Barnard’s Star B”) in constellation Ophiu-chus was reported to astronomers at Tucson, Ariz., by Dr. Peter van de Kamp, Director of Swarthmore College’s Sproul Observatory, Swarthmore, Pa. Six light years from earth, planet is one-and-a-half times mass of planet Jupiter or nearly 500 times mass of earth. Dr. van de Kamp’s measurements of amount of wobble it produced in motion of its sun, Barnard, determined object to be a planet. Barnard’s Star B was third planet discovered outside our solar system but the most nearly planet-sized one of all. (Wash. Daily News, 4/18/63; NTT, 4/19/63, 4) usaf announced selection of three contractors to begin development work on large solid-fuel rocket motors: Aerojet General Corp., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and Lockheed Propulsion Co. Thiokol and Aerojet would conduct parallel programs leading to demonstration static firing of half-length 260-m. motor of about 3 million-lb. thrust; depending upon results of this work, usaf would select one of the companies to proceed with development aimed at demonstration of 6-million-lb. thrust motor. In addition, Thiokol would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-in.-diam-eter motor of 3-million-lb. thrust, using two segments in solid-fuel motor; Thiokol would work toward demonstration static fipirwv 1	r\ Tia-TOilUstTt.lk flimcf in oinrrlo llilllg VA Il/U'AAA.“VAAlilllOtCl lAAV/VVl VA VliV AiAAAllVAA IV, Ulll	AAA UAAAj^AV/ segment, steerable through use of movable nozzles; Lockheed would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-in.-diame-ter motor of one-million-lb. thrust, in single segment, steerable through use of deflectors, usaf was managing the solid-propellant rocket motor development under nasa-dod agreement, (dod Release 493-63) Draft report on two bills (S. 132 and S. 152) “to create the National Weather Council and to provide coordination and central direction for an accelerated program of weather research, basic and applied,” sent to Bureau <3 the Budget for consideration and advice prior to submission to the Congress. Proposed council “would coordinate and centrally direct meteorological and weather research and experimental programs” of represented agencies and would consist of: Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau (Council Chairman), Director of nsf, Administrator of nasa, Secretaries of Agriculture, Interior, Army, Navy, and Air Force or their respective designees. S. 132 would also include Administrator of faa. ( nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/55 and 56; Itr, nasa administrator to Hon. Warren G. Magnuson, 4/17/63)
nasa syncom i communications satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle from amr, entering a highly elliptical orbit. About five hours later, apogee-kick motor was fired for about 20 seconds in maneuver designed to place the satellite into near-synchronous, 24-hour orbit 22,300-mi. above the earth. At about the time the apogee-kick motor completed burning, ground stations lost contact with the satellite and could not confirm a synchronous orbit, nasa officials assumed that “the satellite’s spin axis was misaligned at the time of the apogee motor firing. Because of this they have been unable to determine whether the satellite is damaged.” Attempts to make contact with stncom were continued. stncom i was to have hovered at a nearly fixed longitude over the Atlantic Ocean and traced every 24 hours a figure-8 pattern approximately 30° north and 30° south of the equator; this path would be close enough to true synchronous orbit—Stationary hovering at speed equal to that of earth’s rotation—to determine if synchronous orbital communications satellites were feasible. Experiments with 6tncom were to have included telephone and teletype communications transmitted between New Jersey and Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. Syncom was nasa project, supported by dod ground stations and communications experiments, (nasa Statement, 2/14/63; AP, Wash. Post, 2/14/63, Al; nasa Syncom Release, 1/29/63)
Legislative Manager of U.S. Chamber of Commerce Theron J. Rice said in public letter that CofC recommended nasa’s FY 1964 budget request be cut by $1.2 billion “and that a total of $4,512,000,000 be appropriated for nasa programs for Fiscal 1964. We believe this amount will adequately provide for a continuation of our national space program and will enable the space agency to meet the established goal of a manned lunar landing by the end of this decade. The amount we recommend will give the space agency an approximate 25% increase in appropriations over Fiscal 1963, which is the maximum growth rate we believe can be sustained and supported within the economic as well as scientific and technical capabilities of the nation . . . .” (Text, Av. Wk., 8/26/63, 21)
Stratoscope II tandem balloon system was launched from National Scientific Balloon Flight Station near Palestine, Tex., carrying 36-in. telescope to 15-mi. altitude to focus on planet Mars. Stratoscope II Project Manager, Dr. Martin Schwarzchild. called it “a beautiful launch.” First attempt to detect life-related substances on Mars from above earth’s atmosphere, project was conducted jointly by Princeton Univ. and Univ. of Calif, with Vitro Laboratories in charge of flight operations; it was sponsored by nasa, nsf, and onr. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/2/63)
Senator Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) introduced jointly sponsored resolution in the Senate to authorize presentation of an Air Force medal of recognition to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (ret.). General Foulois learned to fly from Wilbur Wright in 1909 and was Chief of the Army Air Corps when he retired in December 1935. In 1907, he wrote a thesis on “Tactical and Strategic Value of Aerodynamic Flying Machines,” using Jules Verne, the Bible, and Army Field Service Regulations as sources, one of the pioneering concepts of the military application of aeronautics. General Foulois served on the naca (1929-30, 1932-35), and is currently President of the Air Force Historical Foundation. (CR, 2/28/63, 2975) During February: nasa Goddard Space Flight Center plans for second-generation Oso satellite—known as Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory, or Helios—were outlined at Philadelphia technical meeting by Goddard’s A090 Project Manager A. J. Cervenka. (Av. Wk., 3/4/63,48)
msc announced a reorganization designed to strengthen Apollo and Gemini management structure and to assimilate Project Mercury personnel into these programs. Under Dr. Robert R. Gilruth as Director and James C. Elms as Deputy Director would be four assistant directors, managers of major programs, and manager of msc Florida Operations. The four assistant directors: Assistant Director for Engineering and Development (Maxime A. Faget), Assistant Director for Flight Operations (Christopher C. Kraft, Jr.), Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations (Donald K. Slayton), and Assistant Director for Administration (Wesley L. Hjomevik). Major program managers: Apollo Spacecraft Program Office (Dr. Joseph F. Shea) and Gemini Program Manager (Charles W. Mathews), (msc Release)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), in Missiles and Rockets interview, advocated selling space boosters to foreign countries. Noting Scout and Thor boosters already were available to European countries, he said Atlas also should be made available, under these conditions: “One, that they pay for the vehicle—I don’t think we should give it away. “Two, we would need to launch it for them. . . . Third, whatever secrecies surround the launch vehicle and/or other devices, all of this would be handled by U.S. personnel .... “In my opinion, other nations are not as interested in advancing scientific exploration as they are in embarking on programs to advance their own economic position. And in this instance I say it’s fine for us to cooperate by selling to them a booster or whatever other paraphernalia they need. “As these countries become more involved in space programs, it may be they will be desirous of buying Saturns or Centaurs. We don’t necessarily need to stop at Atlas. I think the whole high-thrust field of boosters is a tremendous market with great potential. “. . . we should do this through an agency of the U.S. government, probably through the Defense Department or nasa. Whatever profit might be involved does not go to nasa, does not go to dod—it goes to private industry, to those who make the Atlas or the Saturn or Centaur. This money gets back into the economy. It provides jobs. It stimulates the U.S.’s gross national product, causing our overall economy to grow and expand . . . .”	(M&R.
U.S. Army announced successful test-firing of Nike-Zeus antimissile missile at White Sands Missile Range. Colonel I. O. Drewry, Nike-Zeus Project Manager, said test objectives were met. (dod Release 239-62)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of Julian Scheer as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Scheer had been serving as consultant to nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs George L. Simpson, Jr., since November 21, 1962. (nasa Release 63-21)
At the White House, President Kennedy was presented with oneeighth scale model of mariner ii Venus probe by nasa Administrator James E. Webb, jpl Director William H. Pickering, and other officials. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/19/63; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/18/63)
faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby and his Deputy Administrator Gordon Bain testified on plans for supersonic transport before Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation. They said the U.S. would cancel its development of the supersonic transport if events proved the U.S. could not produce an aircraft competitive in price with the British-French version. But they argued that estimates previously presented to the Subcommittee on costs of the aircraft were too high. Aviation spokesman had estimated cost of the U.S. aircraft at from $30 million to $40 million per aircraft, compared with the $10 to $12 million estimated for the heavily subsidized European aircraft, faa said U.S. aircraft should not cost more than $20 million. (AP, NYT, 10/30/63, 26)
Republican study group of House Appropriations Committee said projects costing $10-$15 billion should be cut from FY 1964 budget appropriations request of $107.9 billion. Although they did not specify where the cuts should be made, Rep. Frank T. Bow (Ohio) suggested in press conference that cuts could be made in the space program and in foreign aid. {Wash. Post, 3/5/63: Wall Street Journal, 3/5/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before Senate Select Committee on Small Business, Subcommittee on Retailing, Distribution, and Marketing Practices' hearings on the role of effects of technology on the nation’s economy. Webb said that nasa’s “pull on the nation’s pool of scientific and technical manpower has been substantially less than many alarmists have stated.” Reiterating that nasa is a “management agency,” he pointed out that 93% of nasa’s space research money goes to private industry, “thus encouraging the growth of research and development under private industry.” (Space Bus. Daily, 12/19/63, 425)
The House Republican task force on space and aeronautics issued a 15-page report on the Administration’s space program. Main criticism was that the military space program was being neglected. “Too little progress has been made toward the development of a strategic space capability. In fact, the tendency of the present Administration is in the opposite direction—away from any military capability in space whatsoever other than conventional unmanned missiles.” Meanwhile, the report charged, the civilian space program “has grown so big so fast that waste and inefficiency have been all too inevitable.” Although nasa was taking some steps to tighten controls, it “could and should do more.” In international space agreements, the report charged that the U.S. had given more than it received in the agreements reached with the Soviet Union. Furthermore it contended that the Administration was usurping the powers of Congress by entering into a series of space agreements without submitting them to the Senate for its advice and consent. Finally, the report expressed concern over rising costs of Federal r&d and its competition with industry. “Competition between Government and industry in research and development appears to be increasing rather than decreasing, with industry operating at a natural and unnecessary disadvantage. This apparent imbalance should be corrected.” (NTT, 11/22/63, 21) The old question of whether sun spots affect human behavior received new empirical evidence. Drs. Howard Friedman, Robert 0. Becker, and Charles H. Bachman of the State Univ. of New York and Syracuse Univ., reported on a study they had made in which the daily admission rate in seven New York psychiatric hospitals was compared with the daily variation in the earth’s magnetic field over a period of four years. The comparison revealed that “the greater the intensity of the earth’s magnetic field due to ‘sun spots’ and other natural interference coming out of the cosmos, the higher the rate of psychiatric hospital admissions.” The effect was explained by the fact that all creatures with central nervous systems operate on self-generated, direct-current electricity. The same is true of radio transmitters and receivers. In both cases the electric impulses must travel through the earth’s magnetic field. This magnetic field is normally smooth flowing. Only when it is disturbed does radio transmission suffer. The doctors reasoned that the same thing might occur in the human nervous system. The doctors concluded: “Speculatively, the results are in keeping with the conception of the behavior of an organism being significantly influenced, through the direct-current control system, by external force fields Attention is thus invited to a hitherto neglected dimension in the complexity of psychopathology specifically, and perhaps generally in all human behavior.” (upi, Wash. Post, 11/22/63)
In ceremony celebrating establishment of new Australian tracking stations near Carnarvon and Canberra, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented scale model of 85-ft.-diameter tracking antenna to Australian Ambassador Sir Howard Beale. Carnarvon station was being established for Project Gemini and would also monitor Ogo and Oao unmanned satellites. Canberra station would be a portion of Deep Snace Network which tracks space probes to moon and planets, (nasa Release 63-195)
In final meeting of the Space, Science, and Urban Life Conference at Dunsmuir House, Oakland, Calif., nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “ ... we must all concern ourselves with the progress and the promise of scientific research and technological development in this country, and the effects of this activity upon society. My own work on projects concerned with civic and urban problems, has left an indelible impression of their complexity and urgency .... “Today we are dealing not only with profound changes in the social and economic structure of the country and the world; we are dealing, as well, with an even more profound change in man’s own conception of the boundaries and limitations of his habitable environment and his understanding of the forces of the universe . . . Man is no longer rooted to terra firma, either in the literal sense, or in his understanding of the powerful forces of the universe of which he is a minuscule part. Increasingly, he comprehends that the new understanding and knowledge which are being unleashed by science and technology will alter his existence in more ways, and more rapidly, than he can possibly foresee .... “Man has gained mobility, Ms horizons have broadened not only in the geographical sense, but because he no longer feels bound by a family farm, or a traditional village industry .... A civilization which can move with serious purpose to gear itself for travel to the moon and the planets will not be content with old and outmoded socio-economic concepts .... “Every thread in the fabric of our economic, social ana political institutions is being tested as we move into space. Our economic and political relations with other nations are being reevaluated. Old concepts of defense and military tactics are being challenged and revised. Jealously guarded traditions in our educational institutions are being tested, altered, and even discarded. Our economic institutions—the corporate structure itself—are undergoing reexamination as society seeks to adjust itself to the inevitability of change.” Mr. Webb stated that two thoughts were of critical importance: (1) “The need to create favorable conditions compatible with the American private enterprise system through which the knowledge which we gain and the skills which we develop in our huge program of federally sponsored research and development . . . are identified and made available for use in the industrial stream to contribute to economic growth and our nation’s power to survive in a world where second best is more severely penalized than ever before”; (2) “The necessity for developing viable relationships between science, education, industry, and government . . . .” (Text)
nasa’s Mississippi Test Operations (mto) had a work force of nearly 900 as of this date, of which nearly 700 were contractor employees, 81 were Army Corps of Engineers personnel, and 34 were nasa employees. Active contracts at mto now stood at some $28 million, with another $10 million out on bids. (Marshall Star, 11/13/63, 1)
California’s Governor Pat Brown said in Washington that nasa Administrator James E. Webb was planning a “deliberate” effort to spread contracts throughout the nation which would result in reduction of contracts to California industries. Gov. Brown later told L.A. Times that Mr. Webb reassured him that nasa contracts would continue to be awarded competitively. Mr. Webb confirmed nasa policy “to spread the problems which we must solve in space work over the greatest number of able minds throughout the country, . . .” but that purpose of policy was not to penalize California but to “obtain the best solutions for the program .... Contracts will be let by competition alone, not on the basis of politics or geography.” (L.A. Times, 2/16/63)
nasa Fifth Anniversary Banquet held in Washington, D.C., sponsored by Aerospace Industries Association, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and Aviation/Space Writers Association. Dr. James Doolittle, last Chairman of the naca, served as Master of Ceremonies. After speaking of the tangible achievements of nasa, Dr. Doolittle said: “Just as well known, to this audience at least, are the less tangible achievements of nasa’s last five years. I think, however, that they bear reemphasizing. “I refer first of all to the rapidly growing competence and effectiveness of the Govemment-industry-university space team—an American space team that simply did not exist five years ago. Today, the team is a valuable source of national strength, prestige, and security.” Other factors mentioned were “openness of the nasa program,” “inspiration which the astronauts of our space program have given to our youth,” and that difficult achievement, “a balanced nmoTnm.” (OR. 10/9/63 A 63271 —	~~ r o	-	, Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, called on the banquet guests to assist in getting a $5-billion-plus budget passed by Congress. He added... . let’s remember that there would be no basis for the modest space research agreements the United States has with the Soviet Union if this country had not demonstrated to the Russians the great strength of our space program. We bargain—and must continue to bargain—from a position of strength and those who criticize space spending should not overlook this fundamental point.” (CR, 10/9/63, A6333) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, made five main points about the space program: “the space successes of this country have been truly remarkable”; “This is a national program”; “This is also an international program”; “This is a growing and permanent program”; and “This is no time for complacency about our space competence.” (Text) nasa Administrator James E. Webb took time in his remarks to comment on the impression that nasa was dissatisfied with industry in the space program. He suggested that it was faulty reporting to pick one page of criticism out of a 443-page report that essentially spoke of industry’s “ ‘great job.’ ” (Wash. Post, 10/6/63)
nasa Administrator, James E. Webb, addressed North Carolina Press Association in Chapel Hill: “Our goal is to be first in every aspect of space research, development, and exploration. To achieve it we must develop the same sort of capability in the space environment that we have achieved on land, on and under the sea, and in the air, and ‘be in a position second to none.’
Eight professors of physics and geology at mit, Harvard, and Princeton signed statement urging public to support U.S. nuclear disarmament position: “Our future depends on controlling the spread of weapons of mass destruction. The U.S. proposal includes both detection stations and on-site inspections. These together can identify almost all nuclear explosions. Only some small underground tests might go unidentified. “We believe that nothing canbe learned from these small underground tests which can upset the balance of power.	‘ “In the long run, a ‘no-test, ban’ policy would result in a great loss of national security. By contrast the U.S. proposal realistically offers us a practical first step forward.” (AP, Wash. Post. 2/13/63, A19) February IS: Herbert D. Rochen’s appointment as nasa Deputy to Program Manager of joint aec-dod-nasa Snap-50 Program Office was announced by nasa. In this capacity Rochen would provide liaison between nasa programs and Snap-50/Spur (nuclear electric power plant) program. Rochen was formerly assigned to nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, Nuclear Systems Directorate, where he was nasa program manager for Snap-8 project. ( nasa Release 63-28)
nasa Deputy Director Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, at U.S. National Committee of International Scientific Radio Union meeting in Washington, referred to recent criticism of Project Apollo by scientists who had charged that scientific returns from manned lunar landing program aid not justify $20 billion cost: “They’ve been setting up a straw man and knocking it down. . . . No one in nasa had ever said the program was decided upon solely on the basis of scientific return. . . .” He described the manned lunar program as “a technological program, though it does have some science content,” and said it, like overall U.S. space program, was designed to give this country “mastery and pre-eminence” in space. Knowledge gained through Project Apollo, in rocket techniques as well as biosciences, would help prepare U.S. “for whatever we are called upon to do for both civil and military uses” of space. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/30/63)
Sen. Barry Goldwater, speaking before Air Force Historical Foundation at Maxwell afb, criticized U.S. space policies: “By choice of official policy, so far, we. are choosing to relegate the military function of space to a secondary position. We have delayed and debated to the point where it must be said that the United States today has no fully defined and effective military space program at all. “. . . We have, in fact, policy declarations stating that we will not orbit weapons of .mass destruction in space unless forced to do so by the hostile action of others. In short we say that we will not utilize the military potential of space until such time as it may be too late. . . . “Just what is this race in space ? By our actions we are clearly saying that it’s a race for the Moon. We are moonstruck. And, to be sure, the Moon is most romantic .... But, while our eyes are fixed upon it, we could lose the Earth or be buried in it . . . .” (Text)
In Saturday Evening Post, Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D.-Nev.) “A perilous notion grips Washington—that through some sort of gentleman’s agreement with Russia we can quarantine space, can keep it from becoming a theater of war. Wishfully the nation gears its space program to peaceful purposes, blind to the fact that the Russians have no such inhibitions. While we dream, the Russians bend every effort to develop military space systems. Quite openly they are striving for a decisive advantage in ilifli notrlu nonolrato^ romnn
Columnist William S. White, writing in the Washington Evening Star, charged that Premier Nikita Khrushchev was being supported in his efforts to slow down the U.S. space program by “one of the strangest coalitions we have ever known” in Congress, made up of conservatives who want to save money and liberals who want to spend the money on welfare. “The conservatives . . . ought to ponder what they are about here. For apart from the almost indescribable strategic and scientific significance of this program, there is the bottom fact that it is already nearly indispensible to the American economy and may later become indispensible in the absolute sense. “Automation, when fully launched, will create huge pools of unemployables. Politically, these must and will be cared for, under any forseeable regime, Republican or Democratic. Is it not better to spend the money for space than to speed the day when all this money and more will have to be thrown about for the most gigantic—and also permanent—leaf-raking schemes in the world’s history ? “The space program is the precise opposite of economic crack-potism. It is sensible conservatism’s greatest future weapon against just such crackpotism.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/1/63)
nasa testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Appropriations on Aug. 19,1963, indicated that at that time nasa officials saw little prospect for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration, William Hines, of the Washington Evening Star, quoted from testimony released today. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator and chief U.S. space negotiator, said: “In my discussions with Blagonravov, the question of cooperation in manned space flights was mentioned in the early part, but was pretty well dropped as something that was not practical . . .” because among other reasons, of “the very high degree of classification the Russians attached to their space program. . . .” Summing up, Dr. Dryden said: “I do not foresee in the near future any prospects that the Russians, any more than ourselves, will see a clear way to co-operate in a manned lunar landing.” nasa Administrator James E. Webb agreed: “Up to now, there has been no evidence whatever that we will gain anything significant from it.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63)
Dr. Nancy G. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics, nasa Office of Space Sciences, at Marymount College, Tarrytown-on-the-Hudson, New York, stated that: “There [is] a great deal of discussion of whether the United States should have women astronauts, and I am frequently asked for my own opinion on this subject. Frankly, it makes little difference to me. I believe that there will be women astronauts some time just as there are women airplane pilots, but there are so many other ways that women can contribute importantly to the space program that the fact there are no women astronauts as yet should not worry us . . . .” nasa had over 146 women who were classified as professional Aerospace Technologists, 77 of whom were professional mathematicians whose responsibility was the programing and operation of nasa’s highly complex computers and similar equipment, Dr. Roman said. “Moreover, I should emphasize that as badly as we need scientists and engineers, we also need educated women as well as men in other fields and no one, man or woman, should go into science simply because of its glamour . . . The space program, the country and the world need young people who have been trained to think logically and clearly regardless of the area in which they have specialized.” (Text)
Peaceful purposes,’ the Administration admits, means ‘keeping the peace’ as well as engaging in scientific exploration and m commercial activities in space. President Kennedy has said we must insure that no other nation gains a position in space that would threaten our security. And we are orbiting numerous unmanned space vehicles which could have significant militaiy purposes. But the disturbing fact is that we continue to put overwhelming emphasis on nonmilitary space programs and limit military efforts to a small list of defensive possibilities . . . .” (Sat. Eve. Post, 6/15/63,10,12)
Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California chemist, said at press conference in conjunction with National Academy of Sciences meeting in Washington that “more effort should be made to get more first-class scientists into the space program. If nasa really is going to use only one per cent of the nation’s scientists—how many among those will be first-class?” Comparing nasa with aec, Dr. Urey said: “The atomic energy program had a very positive base. Many top scientists worked m the program. But the space program is just the opposite, nasa grew too fast.” (Huntsville Times, 4/25/63)
Background briefing in Pentagon on dod budget proposals for FY 1964 indicated a total request in new obligational authority of $53.7 billion. Of this, some $5.5 billion was earmarked for r*d for the three services: Army’s main emphasis would be on the modernized Nike-Zeus antimissile system and on antiguerrilla weapons; Navy’s on antisubmarine warfare; Air Force’s on missile and space systems development. The $1.66 billion for rdt&e and Astronautics represented the dod portion of the national space program, (dod Background Briefing on the FY 1964 Defense Budget, 1/16/63)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Northwestern Univ. (Letter)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, compared U.S. and U.S.S.R. space achievements in General'Electric Forum: “1. U.S. has put about 4 times as many payloads into earth orbit (approximately 130). “2. U.S.S.R. has put substantially more weight into earth orbit with its smaller number of payloads. “3. U.S. space applications in weather, communications, and navigation have been impressive. U.S.S.R. has potential in these fields but not accomplishments. “4. Both nations have obtained remarkable amounts of scientific data, with no measurable advantage to either country. “5. U.S.S.R. has operational more powerful rockets than U.S., while the U.S. is developing more powerful ones than any known to be in U.S.S.R. “6. U.S.S.R. is ahead in manned space flight. “7. Since the race began, ratio of successes to failures has been comparable. In 1962, U.S. had one payload launching failure for each five successes.” {GE Forum, 7-9/63,23) During September: nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Diyden said in General Electric Forum interview: “. . . There is no question that setting definite technical tasks before people does motivate them. For instance, war efforts generally provide goals and accelerate progress—jet propulsion, electronics, miniaturization, and other technological advances. Along the same line, one of the major byproducts of space research has been a revitalization of education, getting people interested in scientific knowledge again—and particularly important, getting young people interested in science and technology.” {GE Forum, 7-9/63,20)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, speaking in Cleveland, Ohio, before the eighth annual Inter-Church World Peace Seminar, said that possible U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on space exploration would bog down in the Soviet’s extreme security measures. Their security measures toward their space program were as stringent as that of the U.S. in regard to nuclear weapons, Dr. Dryden said. (Text in CR, 10/8/63, A6325)
In regular press conference, President Kennedy responded to a question about the pace of the U.S. space program relative to the Soviet Union’s: “The U.S. is making, as you know, a major effort in space and will continue to do so. We are expending an enormous sum of money to make sure that the Soviet Union does not dominate space. We will continue to do it. And we will continue to take whatever steps are necessary to prevent any action against the United States. “The fact of the matter is the Soviet today with a nuclear weapon can reach the United States with a missile. So I wouh have to know in more precise detail than you [the questioner have described the exact nature of our threat before I suggestet what our counteraction would be.” (Transcript in Wash. Post, 3/22/63, A16)
House passed H.R. 8747, the Independent Offices Appropriations for FY 1964, which included the $5.1 billion for nasa recommended by the Appropriations Committee. Among the amendments accepted was one which would require Senate approval of any agreement that would use nasa funds in support of joint lunar exploration with Communist countries. Among amendments rejected were ones which would have (1) reduced nasa r&d funds by another $700 million and set limitations of $597,400,000 on Project Apollo and $124,400,000 on lunar and planetary exploration; (2) deleted the facility construction funds for the proposed nasa electronics center ($3,990,000); and (3) reduced the amount for development of a supersonic transport aircraft from $60 million to $500,000. An involved debate preceded passage of the bill, most of it concerned with the nasa program. Rep. Clarence Cannon (D-Mo.), Chairman of the Appropriations Committee, was one of those opposing passage of the nasa funding. He argued that “the appropriation reported out by the committee has been provided largely because of commitments. It is impossible to escape the conviction that the project [manned lunar landing] must eventually be abandoned.” Rep. Albert Thomas (D.-Tex.) led the support of the nasa program, arguing that the nasa budget had already been cut $1.1 billion from that ($6.2 billion) originally presented by nasa to the Bureau of the Budget. Another in support of the nasa appropriation was Rep. George W. Andrews (D-Ala.), who read into the record a letter from Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of msfc. Dr. von Braun argued that a program as big and complex and with such long lead times as the space program must have sustained, consistent support year after year. He stated that of the various major expenditures—rockets, capsules, facilities, etc.— only the Lunar Excursion Module was being designed principally for the manned lunar landing. “All other elements of these programs create what we as a nation most urgently need independent of our lunar landing effort: A national manned spacefaring capability, to sail the new ocean, as the President said.” (67?, 10/10/63, 18260-18309)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that Goldstone Tracking Station nau uiaue nrst rauar contact o an. zL wnn pianet itiars in a Az-hour per day experiment which would end early in March. 25-billion watt signal made 125-million mi. round trip Jan. 21 (the return signal being only one-billionth of one-trillionth of a watt) and indicated Mars has both rough and smooth surfaces, (jpi. Release; Wash. Are. Star, 2/22/63, A2; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A10) February 21: Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified to the House Armed Services Committee: “In recognition of the increased impact of space programs on our national resources and their direct effect on our future national security, Air Force space activities are closely coordinated with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. One example is the recent agreement between the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on the Gemini program. The intent is to insure that the scientific and operational experiments undertaken as a part of the Gemini program will be directed towards satisfying both military and nasa requirements and objectives .... “Our forward space development program integrates the rad work of many years into a cohesive space program. Funding for all facets of the program is not included m the FY 1964 budget, but the program will provide for Air Force space activities for the near future. “The Air Force has developed a solid foundation of space on which military capabilities can be built. These efforts have brought us to a point where significant military space possibilities are (dearly apparent. Utilizing the technological base so far established, the Air Force must translate these technical capabilities into actual defense systems. The time required to move from a development state to operational systems is measured in years. Yet, it is the ready military capability, not the technological base, that accomplishes deterrence. Accordingly, the Air Force proposes to begin some of these conversions at once. “The forward program aims at two basic objectives: “first, to enhance the general military posture of the United States by building a defense capability in space. Space is not only a new area of vulnerability to attack, but also affords important means of supporting the terrestrial forces of the U.S. in relation to a military threat posed by a hostile power. “second, to provide a capability within the space region for the purpose of denying to a hostile power the uninhibited military exploitation of space, and to provide a system of protection for U.S. scientific activities in space . . . .” (Text; A-N-AF J oumal and Regi ster, 3/2/63,17,37)
Addressing National Rocket Club in Washington, Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “To me, the most important indirect benefit we are gaining [from the space program] is probably the least tangible, the least measurable, and yet the most far reaching in effect insofar as our future national growth is concerned. I am referring to the impact our space program is having upon our educational programs and institutions. The fact that NASA places demands upon and draws from almost every academic discipline has produced a stimulus in universities and colleges that is unprecedented in peacetime .... “What is important to understand is that scientific research and development is for the first time in our peacetime history being organized within one agency to accomplish a national goal. The achievements of our immediate space objectives are, of course, of paramount importance. But, I have little patience with the critics who cry out that our tax money is being thrown away in the exploration of space, or that going to the moon will result in the neglect of our problems here on earth. “It should be obvious to those critics, if they take the time for a short historical review, that many years of experience have shown that the indirect payoff in human terms for technical innovation is many times more valuable than the original investment . . . .” (Text)
Reorganization of Apollo Spacecraft Project Office of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center was announced, with Robert O. Piland named as Deputy Project Manager for the Lunar Excursion Module and James L. Decker as Deputy Project Manager for the Command and Service Modules. Deputy directors would be responsible for cost, schedule, technical design, and production of the three-module Apollo spacecraft under overall direction of Apollo Project Manager Charles W. Frick. Other organizational changes included establishment of a Spacecraft Systems Office for the Command and Service Modules, with Caldwell C. Johnson as Manager, and a similar office for the lem with Owen E. Maynard as Acting Manager, (msc Release 63-27)
Testifying at Space Posture Hearings, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau, Special Assistant for Space, dod ddr&e, said: “It is . . . important to understand that, within the Department of Defense itself, a ‘space program’ does not exist as a separate entity. Space and space-related projects are integrated, on a functional basis, throughout our program structure. The basic objective in any functional area is to develop and exploit those capabilities which will provide the maximum military effectiveness for the foreseeable future.” {Space Posture Hearings. 2/28/63, 174)	'
nasa announced signing of Memorandum of Understanding with India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy, providing for cooperative U.S.-India space program. Joint scientific experiments to explore equatorial electrojet and upper-atmosphere winds from geomagnetic equator would be launched from Thumba, India, during 1963. For equatorial electrojet experiments nasa would provide nine Nike-Apache vehicles; ground launching, tracking, and telemetry equipment, ground instrumentation on loan basis; and training in U.S. for Indian personnel responsible for telemetry and launch operations. Univ. of New Hampshire would provide instrumented payloads through nasa. India would provide launching site and facilities; personnel for launch operations, telemetry, and data analysis; and supporting ground magnet ic and meteorological observations. For atmospheric-wind measurements, nasa would provide four Nike-Cajun vehicles, appropriate launching device on loan basis, and training at nasa centers for Indian personnel responsible for launch operations. India would supply four sodium-vapor-release payloads, photographic equipment, launch site and facilities, personnel, and supporting meteorological data, (nasa Release 63-5)
In Aviation Week and Space Technology editorial, Robert Hotz said: “The current debate has done much to explain to the public and Congress the real aims of the space program, which are the development of a broad capability in space technology that eventually can be applied to whatever national purpose or need that may arise in the future. Gradually, the point that the manned lunar landing Apollo program is simply the best possible focal point for this effort in its present phase is emerging from the verbal pyrotechnics of the current debate. It is becoming more readily apparent that Apollo is not just an ‘over-Niagara-Falls-in-a-barrel’ type of dare-devil stunt, but a well-conceived program of broad exploration across the whole spectrum of space technology as we know it today. “The solid technical success of the Mercury program, particularly in the six- and 22-orbit flights of Cdr. Schirra and Maj. Cooper, has done much to make this point clear. It should be obvious now that Mercury, Gemini and Apollo spacecraft are really the Nina, Pinta and Santa Marias of space exploration, and are simply paving the way for whatever useful purposes this nation eventually decides to utilize space. . . .” {Av. Wk., 6/3/63, , ^ • •
nasa announced three-year $400,000 grant to Univ. of Washington for research in new, advanced ceramics and the improvement of existing materials for use in the space program and for industrial applications, (nasa Release 63-180; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/12/63)
In press interview at nas, Dr. Martin Schwarzchild countered scientific critics of the U.S. space program, and said: “I am for it and I think it would be a mistake to arrest it. “The moon project is the stirring spearhead of a movement under the wing of which man will do real exciting things. . . . We must do an enormous effort of sparkling and grand and wonderful things and out of them one little pearl will come. . . . “Energy in one program will increase the push in all others. I hope art will blossom and pure science and philosophy. The first time you stop the present momentum you will not save money but you will stop the impetus for improving education in this country.” (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 4/25/63)
On anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Mercury Project Manager at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said: “Three U.S. Astronauts have accumulated 1,144.51 minutes in orbital space flights. The flights of Glenn, Carpenter and Schirra have confirmed that man can perform in a space environment and that he can enhance the mission success and flight safety by virtue of his flexibility and his capability to exercise judgment to solve operational problems. “The flights have also confirmed that the approach and philosophy followed in the design of the Mercury spacecraft was technically sound. Each of these flights has elevated our confidence level in the spacecraft systems and has demonstrated that, although not a simple task, the resources of the United States— that is, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, private industry and other elements—can be unified toward a common end with unparalleled cooperation to accomplish a national objective on a minimum time schedule. “All these benefits derived from the Mercury Project, are directly applicable to future manned space flight programs and ____: j____j *. j-x: ________1_;_i_ x_ i______xu _ t-: _ j a n~ pl UVIUO a &U11U. AUUIlU.U'blUll Ull WIUCU UA	1116 AJR5II11111 clilU ApVllO programs.” (msc Release 63-30)
Major reorganization of nasa Hq. became effective (see Oct. 9 for details), consolidating the four major program offices into three and delineating and elevating certain staff functions, (nasa Releases 63-225, 242)
nasa officials testified before the Subcommittee on nasa Legislative Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the summary report on Project Mercury that had accused industry of poor workmanship. Dr. George Mueller, Director of Manned Space Flight, and his Deputy, George Low, and Walter C. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, msc, agreed that the bulk of the 444-page report was “a recital of success,” with only one 10-page section listing deficiencies. The committee agreed with the witnesses and considered the matter closed. {Space Bus. Daily, 10/10/63, 60)
nasa Administrator. James E. Webb, testifying before the Select Committee on Government Research of the House of Representatives, said: “Something more than four billion dollars will be paid industry for work it will do under nasa contracts this year. About half of this will pay for the design of this advanced equipment and for its fabrication, using the latest methods and newest technologies in its production. . . . Just to make sure that the design is right, the fabrication is right, and the equipment sufficiently reliable, the other half of this four billion dollars will be paid to industry to test these machines and advanced systems of equipment once they have been fabricated. Thus American industry is moving into an entirely new period where the importance of very advanced design, manufacture, fabrication, and testing for utmost reliability will replace some of the practices of the past.” (Text)
nasa announced it and Soviet Academy of Sciences had approved Memorandum of Understanding providing for implementation of cooperative space agreement reached June 1962 in Geneva. Memorandum outlined procedures for U.S.-U.S.S.R. exchange of meterological data from weather satellites operated by each country, joint communications experiments using Echo II passive reflector satellite, and contributions of geomagnetic data from special respective satellites to WTorld Magnetic Survey in 1965. Memorandum of Understanding was drafted at meetings between U.S. negotiators, led by nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Soviet negotiators led by Academician Anatoli A. Blagonravov, Chairman of Commission of Exploration and Utilization of Outer Space of Soviet Academy of Sciences. (Memorandum of Understanding; nasa Release 63-i86)
Article by nasa scientists Dr. Homer E. Newell and Dr. Robert Jastrow in Atlantic Monthly inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Replying to scientists critical of pace set for landing men on the moon, the authors said: “This question requires a further exploration of the motives underlying the U.S. space effort. Is it primarily a scientific program, or is it motivated by a broader concern with the national interest ? Looking back to the overwhelming support given the new space program by the Congress in 1961, it seems clear that this support was not tendered for scientific reasons primarily, but came from a deep-seated conviction that the expanded program will make an important contribution to our future strength and security. We believe that this is the reason why the people have supported the enlarged space program. That brings us to the point on which we take issue with some of our scientific colleagues, who complain, ‘The scientific exploration of the moon has been accorded a secondary priority in the lunar program.’ This remark is based on the premise that science should have top priority in the space program. However, while science plays an important role in lunar exploration, it was never intended to be the primary Objective of that project. The impetus of the lunar project is derived from its place in the long-range U.S. program for the exploration of the solar system. The heart of that program is man in space, the extension of man’s control over his physical environment. The science and technology of space flight are ancillary developments which support the main thrust of manned exploration, while at the same time they bring valuable returns to our economy and our culture. The science which we do in space provides the equivalent of the gold and spices recovered from earlier voyages of exploration. It is the return to the taxpayer for his investment in his nation’s future. But the driving force of the program is not in scientific research alone, valuable though that may be in the long run. Thus, the pace of the program must be set, not by the measured patterns of scientific research, but by the need for a vigorous response to the national challenge . . . .” (Text, CR, 7/31/63, A4874-76)
nasa officials testifying before a subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee offered sharply revised estimates on the cost of a manned lunar landing. Under questioning from senators, nasa Administrator James E. Webb agreed that nasa would spend much of the $20 billion normally stated as the cost of manned lunar exploration even if there were no program to land a man on the moon. When asked how much the manned lunar landing would cost over and above other space exploration, Mr. Webb estimated less than $3 billion, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., estimated $2 billion; nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George Mueller estimated $1 billion. Mr. Webb and Dr. Seamans had included the cost of unmanned investigation of the lunar surface, while Dr. Mueller was counting only the cost of the Lunar Excursion Module (lem). (NYT, 10/1*9/63, 1)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson defended the space program as a major bulwark of U.S. posture. In a speech to the Massachusetts Associated Industries in Boston, the Vice President said: “If we want to maintain the credibility of our claim to the superiority of a free political system—and a free private enterprise system— we cannot seriously entertain the thought of precipitating now so massive a disillusionment as would follow a political default on our commitments in space exploration.” (AP, Wash. Post, 10/25/63)
U.S. and Japan exchanged notes summing up agreement to increase missile defenses in Japan. (Okie. Trib., 4/27/63) April 27; nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in interview at Princeton Univ. alumni meeting in Washington that first manned flight in Project Gemini would not be made for at least a year. He attributed the slippage to “some difficulty with the utilization of Titan II” and “some problems” with Gemini spacecraft. “No one can forecast now when we will fly Gemini.” On subject of Soviet space competition, Mr. Webb said: “With their existing rockets, they will probably be able to do a multimanned flight around the earth a year before we will do that.” (Hines, Wash. Sum.. Star, 4/28/63)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) refuted charges of waste and inefficiency in the space program, reminded members of a time three years before when similar statements were being made about the Mercury program. As evidence, he read into the record an article by James Baar in Missiles and Rockets of Aug. 15, 1960, entitled “Is Mercury Program Headed for Disaster F”: “nasa’s Mercury manned satellite program appears to be plummeting the United States toward a new humiliating disaster in the East-West space race. “This is the stark conclusion that looms in the minds of a growing number of eminent rocket scientists and engineers as the Mercury program continues to slip backward.” {OR, 10/21/63, A6547-48)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb issued statement to press: “The record shows that Congress has consistently taken the necessary action to support the space program, and I am confident that this Congress will continue this record. Although the report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics is a major milestone on the road to approval of the 1964 nasa Budget, it is still too early in the consideration of this budget by Congress to draw firm conclusions as to what the final result will be. The House subcommittees have given the nasa programs a most careful review, accumulating data from hearings which will total more than 4,000 pages of testimony. Their devotion and attention to details has been impressive, but in my opinion the overall result of their actions is an inadequate level of support for a program that is urgently needed, has achieved a high level of success, and is now giving this nation the promise of early preeminence in all phases of space exploration and use. In the areas reduced, nasa will present a strong case for restoration as the legislation proceeds to enactment. “After its many details were brought under close scrutiny, and the possibility of postponement of many of these examined, the Committee has endorsed the program and the way it is being carried out but decided to defer approval until subsequent budgets in a number of important areas. My view is that the necessary resources should be authorized this year, rather than have important segments postponed with the consequent introduction of uncertainty at many levels in the government-industry -university team now engaged in this urgent national effort. “At the reduced level of funding recommended, we will certainly have to slow up or postpone a number of programs and direct a reduction in the scheduled level of effort in the plants of our contractors where 90% of the work of the space program is done. Unless an adequate level of support is restored, momentum already attained with great effort and difficulty will be lost and the stretch-out required will add to the final cost of the work required to carry out the program.” (Statement)
U.S. and Brazil announced signing of memorandum of understanding for cooperation in satellite studies of the ionosphere. Signed by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and Aldo Vieira da Rosa, of Brazilian Commission for Space Activities, agreement provided for establishment of three radioreceiving stations straddling geomagnetic equator—at Belem, San Jose dos Campos, and Natal. Initial project would involve readout of telemetry data from S-66 ionospheric satellite, to be launched by nasa in 1963. Under agreement, Brazil would build, equip, and operate stations with nasa lending scientific equipment. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/3/63)
New York City honored Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper with tickertape parade. At city luncheon honoring Major Cooper, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and the entire Project Mercury team, Mayor Robert Wagner presented Major Cooper and Mr. Webb with city’s Medal of Honor and scroll acclaiming MA-9 space flight. Mayor Wagner said: “. . . It is remarkable how such a feat not only unites our own country in prideful pleasure, but also gives satisfaction to the rest of the world—to friend and foe alike. This is not man against man, but man against the elements, man against the forces of nature, man armed with the power of knowledge . . . .” {NYT, 5/23/63; CR, 5/29/63, A3487)
Memorandum titled “Space Race with U.S.S.R.” from Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, was made public. Dr. Welsh said U.S. space program was in the building stage this year and few space spectaculars could be expected in 1963; U.S.S.R. may attempt the following in 1963: manned orbital mission of eight days, manned orbital rendezvous mission, close-up photographs of planet Mars (with mars i probe), and several unmanned lunar soft-landing probes. Memorandum had been written before launching of Soviet probe lunik, iv, believed by many scientists to have been an unsuccessful attempt to soft-land on the moon. (Text; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations on space cooperation resumed in Geneva with nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Soviet space expert A. A. Blagonravov heading respective teams. Attempt would be made to reach agreement on cooperative use of satellites to study earth’s magnetic field. Discussion also would center on implementing agreement reached in principle last March concerning exchange of information furnished by meteorological satellites and coordinated experiments with communications satellites. (NYT, 5/17/63, 18; Manchester Guardian, Wash. Post, 5/17/63)
President Johnson’s active leadership in space program since early 1958 was reviewed in Missiles and Rockets by Hal Taylor, who predicted the new President would give the space program even greater support than did President Kennedy. Added support could mean growth of military space projects, Taylor said, possibly including assignment of manned space station development to usaf. But FY 1965 budget estimates would be virtually unchanged. Article in Aviation Week and Space Technology indicated President Johnson was likely to “play a more direct role than his predecessor in the nation’s military space and supersonic transport programs after the current transitional period, during which the emphasis is on showing the nation and the world that President Kennedy’s commitments will be fulfilled.” (M&R, 12/2/63,14-15; Av. Wk., 12/2/63,26-27)
Findings of Trendex survey of public attitude on space exploration, conducted by Hicks and Greist, Inc., advertising agency: “There seems to be a definite relationship between age and attitude toward the space program. Generally, there is an increasingly negative opinion about the program with increase in age . . . .” (Kaselow. N.Y. Herald Trib.. 8/15/63)
At nasa Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony, held at Smithsonian Institution, 23 individuals were singled out for outstanding contributions to the civilian space program. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated that U.S. space policy was clear: “With or without cooperation from any other country, we are going to the moon, and we are going to make that trip as soon as we can. . . . We would like to do this through international cooperation. Leaders of both parties have sought cooperation under two administrations. The moon represents our major space goal for this decade, and if cooperation is possible we are willing to share this goal as well as others.” nasa Administrator James E. Webb summarized the five years of space achievements and looked ahead: “From the first two United States satellites, Explorer I and Vanguard I, launched early in 1958, we learned that the earth was slightly pear-shaped rather than being the sphere it had been thought to be. We also learned that the earth was surrounded by a zone of radiation, called the Van Allen Belt after its discoverer Dr. James Van Allen. “In addition to these first satellites of scientific significance, we have orbited highly successful weather and communication satellites, probed the area of Venus, put men into orbit and brought them safely back to earth, and sent thousands of sounding rockets into space to study the earth’s environment. From these and other experiments installed in more than 100 satellites and deep space probes, we have succeeded in vastly expanding knowledge and understanding of our own planet earth and of the solar system of which it is a part .... “Looking ahead through the remainder of this decade, we have set our sights on a truly global weather satellite system, advanced communications and navigation satellites, space observatories for astronomical and solar studies, and a manned expedition to explore the moon . . . .” Awards were presented by Mr. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, and Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Eight cash awards totaling $12,200 were divided among 14 nasa employees for inventions and scientific and technical contributions: Robert L. Trimpi, ialrc, $3,000; Charles H. McLellan, lorc, $2,000; James H. Schrader, Lane, $1,500; Jesse M. Madey and Xopher W. Moyer, gsfc, $1,500 shared; James B. Newman, frc, $1,200; Hershel M. Nance, msfc, $1,000; Lee B. Malone, Charles E. David, and Harold R. Lowery, msfc, $1,000 shared; and Frank L. Clark, Charles B. Johnson, Wayne D. Erickson, and Roger I. Buchanan, iaRC, $1,000 shared. The nasa Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement went to Dr. Dean R. Chapman, arc, for his research on tektites; to Dr. Ernst D. Geissler, msfc, for contributions to Mercury-Redstone, Saturn, and Nova boosters; and to Dr. John C. Houbolt, formerly of LaRC, for work on lunar orbit rendezvous. The nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership was presented to Charles J. Donlan, nanc; and Dr. Walter TTaenssensann and Dr. William A. Mrazek, msfc. The new nasa Public Service Award, given to persons not employed by the Government, was presented to Jack N. James and Robert J. Parks, jfl, and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Cape Canaveral, (nasa Releases 63^-217,215; Wash. Post, 10/2/63; Webb, Text; Program, Honor Awards Ceremony) October 1: nasa Administrator James E. Webb appeared on Voice of America, “Press Conference usa.” Speaking pf President Kennedy’s proposal for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar program, Mr. Webb said: “. . . after the ratification of the test ban and one day after Mr. Gromyko proposed that we agree not to put into orbit multi-megaton weapons, the President followed with a suggestion that had five elements. Most people have centered on only one of them.” The five elements were (1) measures against war by accident or miscalculation; (2) measures against surprise attack; (3) measures to curb the nuclear arms race; (4) exchange of information and persons; (5) U.S. consent to Gromyko’s proposal to negotiate an agreement not to orbit large nuclear weapons. “And then he added as a sixth item, we should also explore, now mark you, he said explore, possibilities for cooperation in manned space flight and then set a clear indication that he was not thinking of a limited exploration, that rather he was thinking of a broad exploration . . ., that we could even go step by step to the planning of a joint expedition.” Speaking of the preparations for the President’s U.N. speech, Mr. Webb said: “. . . I myself personally attended a meeting in the White House called by Mr. Arthur Schlesinger, perhaps a month ago, to consider things that the President might want to discuss at the United Nations. And I did myself on the day before Mr. Gromyko’s speech have a long talk with the President, maybe 35 or 40 minutes, about the whole space program in which we discussed this. And I think I should say that he had his office phone me in St. Louis on Thursday afternoon after Mr. Gromyko made his speech to read me the language that he then decided he would use, because it seemed such a natural follow-on to Mr. Gromyko’s proposal.” (Text)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences began hearings on technical and scientific aspects of U.S. space program, preparatory to hearings on nasa proposed FY 1964 budget authorizations. Testifying were nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/59)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, quoted in press interview, expressed his hope that Congress would continue its record of consistently taking “the necessary action to support the space program . . . As the space program builds up toward pre-eminence for the United States, a position we are rapidly approaching, the space agency is endeavoring to obtain the maximum space value for each dollar it spends and has made an excellent record in this regard .... [But] the successful and expeditious carrying out of the programs recommended in the President’s budget will require the $5,712,000,000 which he recommended . . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/1/63)
Reported that nasa Administrator Webb and Defense Secretary McNamara were considering proposal that usaf perform military experiments during first 12 Gemini space flights, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. (Av. Wk., 6/24/63, 25)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in address before State Convention of New Jersey Society of Professional Engineers: “. . . activities in space itself, and in the complex of supporting work that goes forward here on earth, draw upon almost every branch of science and technology. In the process, the needs and interests of engineers and scientists are drawing closer together, and the lines of cleavage between the various disciplines are becoming less and less distinct .... “More than ever before, engineering has become the full and active partner of science in the exploration of this newest frontier . . . .” (Text)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations began in Rome on technical details of a three-year agreement signed at Geneva in June 1962, for exchange of data to be gained from separate satellite launchings. Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, headed U.S. scientific delegation, and Prof. Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences headed the Russian delegation. Joint space research program would include coordination on meteorology and communications studies, and charting of the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/63, A3)
Edward Z. Gray was appointed Director of Advanced Studies, Office of Manned Space Flight, nasa Kq., suceeedmgDr. WTilliam A. Lee, who was joining the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, msc. Mr. Gray had been with Boeing Aircraft Co. for 24 years, most recently as Development Program Manager of Advanced Space Systems, Aero-Space Div. (nasa Release 63-228)
At hearings on nasa proposed patent policy before Senate Subcommittee on Monopoly, Committee on Small Business, Senator Wayne Morse (D.-Ore.) charged nasa Administrator James E. Webb with tiying to give away “basic, substantive rights” of the public in Government financed research. Mr. Webb cited Section 305 of the Space Act of 1958 authorizing the nasa Administrator to waive Government patent rights, then outlined present nasa patent policy, and explained how proposed policy would extend patent waiver. “A careful comparison of the proposed revision with the terms of the present regulations . . . will show, I believe, that the public interest in inventions which come out of nasa’s research and development contracts is more clearly stated and would, in practice, be fully protected .... “It is evident from nasa’s present waiver regulations and the proposed revision that we are convinced that the public interest is often best served by permitting a contractor or subcontractor to retain commercial rights to inventions made in the course of doing research and development work funded by nasa—provided, of course? the Government acquires a royalty-free license for use of the invention for governmental purposes, and provided, also, that the invention is actually worked, nasa’s policy is intended to encourage use of inventions in two ways: first, by bringing the stimuli of the patent system into play and, second, by withholding the full benefits of waiver until public realization of the fruits of the invention have been achieved. Such a policy offers many advantages over a restrictive policy which would permit contractors to retain patent rights only in the exceptional case. The economy should not be deprived of the substantial benefits of the patent system. Incentives for contractors to conceal and protect new technological developments as trade secrets rather than to disclose them as patentable inventions are not desirable in government contracting for research and development. Historically, patent protection has been one of the rewards for full disclosure and publication . . . .” (Testimony; Wash. Post, 3/15/63)
nasa announced granting of three patent waivers to Ampex Corp. (for two inventions) and Space Technology Laboratories, Inc. Action brought to 46 the total of nasa’s waivers of U.S. commercial rights to inventions developed under nasa contracts. (nasa Release 68-128) Jwne 11: Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony on U.S. space program from U.S. scientists: Dr. Lloyd V.	Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center of the Southwest; Dr. Lee DuBridge, President, Cal Tech; Dr. H. H. Hess, Chairman nas Space Science Board; Dr. Martin Schwarzschild, Princeton Univ. Dept, of Astronomy; and Dr. Frederick Seitz, nas President. Dr. Berkner testified: “Men everywhere see in the conquest of space the peaceful demonstration of the superiority of one of the two competing systems of economic organization—capitalism vs. communism .... [The nation gaining space superiority] will have won the equivalent of a war in demonstrating the superior viability of his system in the eyes of the world . . . .” Dr. DuBridge testified that factors such as national security, prestige, and advancement of scientific knowledge all were strong reasons for proceeding with Project Apollo. Dr. Hess outlined nas Space Science Board proposal for “reserve corps” of young scientists to participate in U.S. manned space program. Under proposed plan, nasa would select, about 500 volunteer scientists who would each year “do a period of active-duty training, say six to eight weeks, having to do with co-pilot activities on a space flight.” About two years before projected mission, 20 reservists would begin fulltime training and further screening at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. “Maybe five would be chosen, and maybe one would fly .... “Train astronauts to be scientists ? I think this would be virtually impossible. It would take 10 years.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/87; Averill, L.A. Times, 6/12/63; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/12/63)
A number of unofficial reports from Moscow have identified two key figures in the Soviet space program, according to Theodore Shabad, the New York Times Moscow correspondent. One of the men was Valentin P. Glushko, known as a rocket propulsion expert who worked with Friedrich Zander in the first Soviet research in liquid fuel rockets in the early 1930’s. The other was Sergei P. Korolov, a mechanical engineer long associated with mechanics and structural problems of flight. Both are full academicians in the Soviet Academy of Sciences. (Shabad, NYT, 11/12/63, 2)
Under questioning by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed the future space programs to follow the manned lunar landing program: “There are three principal candidates for what might be called the next program. These are the manned orbital laboratory; the further exploration of the moon; and finally, man’s interplanetary travel. “One difficulty is the definition, mercury is a one-man orbital laboratory; gemini is a two-man orbital laboratory; apollo is a three-man orbital laboratory; and all will stay up for the duration of the trip to the moon. “If you are going further, you come to a question, Do you want something for 3 men, 6 men, 12 men, or 20 men ? “One of our problems is to define the requirements and both the Department of Defense and ourselves are making studies. We have agreed there should be only one project for the time being because this will be a 2 or 3 billion project. We have agreed we will not proceed unilaterally. A decision, of course, has to be made as to what, if anything, in the 1965 budget will be in this field or another .... “As to the further exploration of the moon, the definition is a very variable one. You might leave an astronaut out and, figuratively speaking, take camping equipment along for a few days. Or you might convert a whole lunar bug to a freight carrier to extend the length of stay. You can go from that to a lunar base where you try to build a station, as m the Antarctic, that man can occupy for some time .... “All of these things run into the billions of dollars and certainly Congress will be involved in it. “There are people who favor one or another of these projects. I personally favor the manned orbital laboratory as being the next project. What we find on the Moon may change our minds on this, but from present knowledge I feel priority should go to a manned orbital laboratory. Some of this equipment has been in space for a period of a year or more. That is the length of a trip to Mars or Venus and back. “As you know, the matter of making major decisions of this kind in Government is a complicated one and I cannot say at this time when the hardware will be recommended by the administration. One reason for saying the manned orbital laboratory has priority is the possible military application.” (Hearings . . . Independent Offices Appropriations for FT 1964, Part 3,242-243)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in address at Topeka, Kansas, traced the historic role of the Federal Government in animating science and pointed to the quickening pace of science and technology today. Major considerations? which “make it clear that an understanding of the space environment, and the development of the technology which will enable us to operate in space, are imperative,” Webb said. “First, the modem rocket engine, which can operate in the vacuum of space . . . has given us and other nations for the first time the means to explore and utilize the space medium. Given this ability, and the spectacular achievements already made, Americans and citizens of other nations assuredly will not remain confined to this small planet. We and they will explore space, nrt+fln	r> Alkinnr 5 v*o van	mi ■■■»■ ■■» iuio w mg uno less than a position at the forefront of that pioneering effort. “Second, it is generally recognized, I believe, that our national security itself is heavily involved in the space competition. Not only our prestige but our capacity for constructive international leadership depend upon a superiority in science and technology— for economic development of national defense—that is understood and accepted. The nations of the world, seeking a basis for their own future progress and security, continuously pass judgment upon our ability as a nation to make decisions, to concentrate effort, to manage vast and complex technological programs in our own interest. It is not too much to say that in many ways the viability of representative government and of the free enterprise system, in a period of revolutionary changes based on science and technology, is being tested in space. “Third, our national defense—perhaps even our national survival—demand that we act to insure that no hostile force will be permitted to use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us. “The fourth and most important of the major reasons for undertaking a broad national program of space research and development—the one which promises the greatest rewards for mankind—the technological applications which will flow from it, will offer vast returns op our space investment here on earth over many years ahead.” (Text)
Speaking in New York at a special seminar at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc director, told scientists that benefits from America’s space program would far outweigh the cost. The revenues from communications satellites alone would, by 1975, exceed the cost of nasa’s program in that area. There would also be benefits on which no pnce tag could be placed, such as discovery of the Van Allen radiation belts and the accomplishments of the weather satellites. Dr. von Braun said that man himself is a very important link in space exploration, and that the value of placing a man on the moon cannot be debated. . “Instrumented equipment can do the job if one knows exactly what he is seeking,” he said. “However, if one doesn’t know, then automated equipment is not quite good enough.” (Goddard News, 2/25/63, 2)
Space Systems Division (ssd) recorded its 200th Thor launch. The figure includes the use of the Thor as a space booster—Thor-Agena, Thor-Delta, Thor-Able, and Thor-Able-Star—and as an intermediate range ballistic missile (irbm) . (afsc Release #312-R-114, Atch #2, 1/1/64, 2) June SO: Estimated 10,000-15,000 persons visited nasa Marshall Space Flight Center on “Family Day.” (Htmtsville Times, 7/1 /63) During June: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, writing in Ordnance, said: “It should be unnecessary to point out that the space race is between the United States and Soviet Russia, not between nasa on the one hand and the Department of Defense or any of its services on the other. Yet, I believe the point needs to be made. “We are trying to build national competence and international good will and cooperation through our space program, not agency competence or intragovemmental rivalries. We are trying to build an effective image of a nation devoted to peace, to the improvement of mankind’s well-being, and to the furthering of man’s abilities and knowledge. “To do so we must be able to discourage aggression, which is the antithesis of our objectives. To fail to develop strength for peace through competence in space would, in a sense, be to disarm by default.” (Ordnance, May-June 1963,658)
Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Washington chapter of aiaa, said that funds for the space program thus far in this decade had (1) created a team of trained people; (2) developed basic technology; (3) constructed facilities; and (4) been used up in consumption of consumable items. Consumables, he said, represented the cost of launches and costs of the recovery forces. This category amounted to less than eight per cent of the total. “The remaining 92 per cent of the funds are used for creating permanent capital . . . .” (Text)
nasa announced withdrawal of controversial research grant to Columbia Univ. School of Journalism at the University’s request because of an apparent misunderstanding of its scope and purpose. nasa had awarded the grant for studying “ways of making scientific advances of the space program more readily available” to news media. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/19/631
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Kansas State Univ. in Manhattan, and said: “It might surprise you if I were to suggest that, in an important sense, Kansas had a part in the beginnings of the scientific age in America, almost 160 years ago. It was in 1804 that Lewis and Clark camped for three days at the junction of the Kansas and Missouri Rivers while en route to the Pacific Northwest on the United States’ first important scientific exploration. “Although the Congress authorized the investment of only $2,500 in that expedition, it established the precedent for a growing federal participation over the next 150 years in scientific research and exploration .... “And what of today ? In Fiscal Year 1964, Congress is considering the investment of almost $15 billion for scientific research and development and the tools and facilities with which to do it. More than $5 billion 700 million is being requested for the civilian space program alone—an activity so vast and so demanding of resources that it is something which only an entire nation could undertake ....'' (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said:	“. . . It is important to note that the budget requested for the total program of nasa for fiscal year 1964 includes less than $50,000,000 for new programs. The remainder is to maintain the projects now underway on schedule and to pay the contractors for the work they have obligated themselves to do to meet these schedules. “The policy on which this budget is based is the mastery of space, and its utilization for the benefit of mankind. This mastery, and the relation of our position to those of other nations, will not be determined by any single achievement. Superiority in the space environment will be won and very likely can be held by that nation which first fashions into usable systems all of the scientific knowledge, all of the technology, all of the experience, all of the space launch and terminal facilities, and all of the aids to space navigation required for safety and regular operation. “These are the capabilities and resources which the United States must have, and this budget, is designed to make rapid progress toward acquiring them ....*' (Testimony)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told the Senate that it was unwarranted to assume from Premier Khrushchev’s Oct. 26 remarks that the Soviets had pulled out of the space race. “The competition in space between the United States and the Soviet Union is still intense. It would be foolish indeed if this country were to attempt to reorient its vast space program each time the Soviet Union made some pronouncement about its goals. We should take cognizance of Russian statements but we should not let ourselves be diverted from sound objectives on the ground that competition no longer exists.” {CR, 11/6/63, 20140)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) and nasa Administrator James E. Webb were co-hosts at luncheon at Senate for three women accorded national recognition for space age accomplishments—Marcia S. Miner, student at American Univ. and winner of National Rocket Club’s 1963 Goddard Memorial Scholarship Award; Dr. Nancy C. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics in nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Program and 1962 winner of Federal Women’s Award; and Eleanor C. Pressly, Head of Vehicles Section, Sounding Rocket Branch, in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., and 1963 winner of Federal Women’s Award. ( nasa Release 63-94)
Editorial in The Houston Post: “Why Khrushchev’s word should be accepted on this [commenting that Russia does not have a definite program for putting a man on the moon] any more than on anything else is hard to understand .... It . . . must be kept in mind that Soviet policy in any area is a zig-zag affair and subject to quick change. Moreover, under the Soviet system, Khrushchev does not have to worry about congressional attitudes or reaction if he should decide upon a change .... “. . . why should Khrushchev be permitted to set the policy on this country’s space program? That is something for the Legislative and Executive branches of the United States government to do on the basis of careful study and evaluation. “The fact is that the United States government made its decision several years ago. It stands committed to a program of trying to put a man on the moon in this decade. What the Russians do or don’t do should be a matter of secondary importance at this point in the program. Much more is involved than merely a contest with Russians as to time.” (Text)
An editorial in the Washington Daily News supported the idea that a slower program would not save money in the long run. “. . . today the moon and space programs are in high gear and almost $5 billion in prime contracts have been placed with American industry. Plants are tooled up, scientists are on the job, research centers are going up and near Houston even a new city is being built. “We are inclined to agree with Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Director James Webb and others that a major slash in space funds at this stage would not save money in the long run because a stretched-out lunar landing program would come to an even greater total cost. Mr. Webb, for example, estimates an extra $3 billion for the additional overhead costs alone of a three-year stretch-out. “It was judged two years ago by the President and Congress to be in the national interest to place a man on the moon—and before the Russians, if possible. If the reasons were valid then, and we think they were, they are valid today.” (Text)
Testifying at Space Posture Hearings, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Administrator James E. Webb revealed that nasa “did submit to the Director of the Budget and discussed with the President, the level of effort that might be obtained under four budget figures [$5.2 billion, $5.8 billion, $6.2 billion, and $6.6 billion] .... the figure recommended by the President, $5,712 million, was based on two policies established directly by the President after thorough disevery element respond to the surge is to cussion .... [1] the areas of space science . . . must fall under the same kind of criteria as other scientific areas in his budget . . . [2] with respect to the manned space flight activity, the budget level is set at the lowest level which will permit us to maintain target dates that give us a margin and still permit us to assure manned lunar exploration within this decade, barring some situation .... “. . . it is not a lavish budget by any manner of means; it is an austere budget set at this lowest level which would permit the maintenance of target dates that we believe are realistic .... “When John Glenn was here last week and we presented his spacecraft to the Smithsonian Institution and found it there under Lindbergh’s ‘Spirit of St. Louis’, Dr. Dryden used the phrase, ‘An aura of obsolescence is hanging over the Friendship 7.’ “It is important to recognize that just a year ago this spacecraft was the most modem thing we had in the United States. Today it has an air of obsolescence and is now in the Smithsonian Institution.” (Space Posture Hearings, 2/25/63, 3-18; Posture of the National Space Program, Rpt. of House Comm, on Sci. and Astron., 5/7/63, 5)
The space program would not change greatly under the new President, Lyndon B. Johnson, William Hines of the Washington Sunday Star predicted: “The reasons are twofold and simple. “First, Mr. Johnson is fully as enthusiastic about the space program as was Mr. Kennedy, if not more so. Second, the new President has been in on the space program from its start, and tVl W/M1 nrb + n	O A	*vi/\*.4V»n n-f *D wnr.1,/1 n«\ 4	U’	f nnimn w»An Lxiiuugu uiio	wt	mt/xiiiio vi x acoiuciii	ikcmicuV	o lcuuic nao	uxi • Space.’ ” Mr. Johnson was head of the Senate Preparedness subcommittee at the time the U.S.S.R. launched sputnik i, Hines pointed out. As Senate Majority Leader he caused the inquiry into U.S. space posture and sparked the special Senate committee that later became the standing Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “More than any other one man, President Johnson is personally responsible for the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and the sprawling agency which it created .... “With the advent of the Kennedy administration, the space program immediately grew in importance, largely through Mr. Johnson’s urging. The Space Act was amended to make the Vice President head of the [Space] council .... “Under then Vice President Johnson, the council took on real meaning. . . . “The Johnson-organized council staff prepared the studies which the Vice President used to persuade President Kennedy in the spring of 1961 that a manned lunar landing should be undertaken before the decade is out.’” (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/24/63)
In column discussing hostility of some leading U.S. scientists to the “rotarian character” of the space program, Joseph Kraft pointed out the inherent stimulation of science: “To be sure there is something seedy about using the space program as a cover for serious scientific inquiry. Still the atmosphere of the affluent society offers only rare openings to direct public energies and resources to purposes that are not vain. For the most eminent scientists to overlook the powerful grip of space on the public imagination would be to forego an almost unique opportunity for the advancement of science. Which of them would have forgiven Galileo had he turned his back on the heavens because a donor whose heart was impure held out the telescope?” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/10/63, A9)
You now face a new world, a world of change. The thrust into outer space of the satellite, spheres, and missiles marks a beginning of another epoch in the long story of mankind. In the five or more billions of years the scientists tell us it has taken to form the earth, in the three or more billion years of development of the human race, there has never been a more abrupt or staggering evolution.’ ” General LeMay went on to say that the “trained man, whether in a manned space vehicle or in a ground surveillance control point, will be one of our most valuable assets in our national space effort—and for our survival .... “We must remember that any medium . . . can be a region of danger to peace and security. In this new medium of space I believe that the military defenses of the western world must be objective, applicable and evident. “The Air Force will use, to the benefit of military space capabilities, all scientific advances and acquisition of knowledge achieved by nasa. We don’t plan to wait for a program of fallout—if we can hasten advancement or increase its utilization through collateral efforts. This we are doing, in national interest, toward advancing our considerable space testing and development of approved space programs.” {A-N-AF Journal and, Register, 2/9/63, 15; Text, CR, 4/6/63, A1202-1203)
President Kennedy, asked in press conference if he “had any cause to reconsider” his commitment to goals of U.S. lunar program, replied: IooItaH al ii rvf nniircA xtIiab tro nrnnACAtl nnr Kntlm»i for ..	-	------	— v.	—	*' this year. We are looking at it again in relationship to next year’s budget. We are also looking at it because of the concern that has been raised in the Congress and out of the Congress. I have seen nothing, however, that has changed my mind about the desirability of our continuing this program. “Now, some people say that we should take the money we are putting into space and put it into housing or education. We sent up a very extensive educational program. My judgment is that what would happen would be that they would cut the space program and you would not get additional funds for education. We have enough resources, in my opinion, to do what needs to be done in the field, for example, of education, and to do what needs to be done in space. “Now, this program passed almost unanimously a year ago. What will happen, I predict, will be a desire perhaps, possibly, to cut it substantially, and then, a year from now or six months from now, when the Soviet Union has made another new, dramatic breakthrough, there will be a feeling of ‘Why didn’t we do more.’ I think our program is soundly based. I strongly support it. I think it would be a mistake to cut it. I think time will prove, even though we can't see all the answers which we will find in space, that tire overall expenditures have been worthwhile. This country is a country of great resources. This program in many ways is going to stimulate science. I know there is a feeling that the scientists should be working on some other matter, but I think that this program—I am for it and I think it would be a mistake to arrest it.” (Transcript, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/25/63, A5)
Speaking at “ground making” ceremony for Titan III launch facilities, Cape Canaveral, Col. Joseph S. Bleymaier (afsc Titan III program manager) disclosed that 17 development tests were planned for Titan III launch vehicle, beginning autumn of 1964. Ceremony took place on dredge Pittsburgh anchored in Banana River, west of Cape Canaveral; dredge would move land from nearby swamps to form island in river for Titan III. (AP, Balt. Sun, 2/16/63)	....
fcc Chairman E. William Henry predicted in address to American Bar Association’s Committee on Communications, meeting in Chicago, that a single communications satellite eventually may equal carrying capacity of all telephone cable circuits between U.S. and rest of the world. Last year 5 million telephone calls were made from U.S. to 176 countries. Existing facilities probably will be used to capacity by 1965, he said, and $500-million international communications system will be in operation by 1970. New transistorized cable, with capacity of almost six times present capacity, will be available. (Wolters, Chic. Trib., 8/15/63) August 15: stncom ii communications satellite was successfully maneuvered into synchronous position 55° west longitude, over Brazil and South Atlantic Ocean. The satellite was slowed from westward drift speed of 1.2° per day to nearly zero drift by firing of onboard nitrogen jets. Previous firings of hydrogen peroxide jets occurred Aug. 11, when syncom ii was slowed from 7° drift per day to 2.7° drift per day, and Aug. 12. when satellite was reduced to 1.2° drift. Firings were directed by engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and actual command was executed from ground station at Lakehurst, N.J. stncom n was now stationed about 22,300-mi. altitude and traveling at speed of about 6,800 mph, matching earth’s rotation speed of 1,040 mph at equator to keep it on station. It was hovering in figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator, nasa Administrator James E. Webb called completion of the positioning maneuvers the culmination of “one of the outstanding feats in the history of space flight.” (nasa “stncom n Fact Sheet”; nasa Release 63-185)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, interviewed by the New York Herald Tribune, acknowledged that parts of Project Apollo were behind the schedule as written two years ago. He singled out on-board power—“we have counted on fuel cells .... To say that the fuel cell is behind is not an adequate statement, but to say that problems have been encountered in solving the problems of enough on-board electrical energy to do the job would be an accurate statement”—and the Titan II booster for the Gemini program—“We must know what happens to men and equipment under a weightless condition for a week or two. We had hoped to get this information at an earlier, date in making our plans for Apollo and future flight missions. We still will get it early enough to do the job within this decade.” (Ubell and Loory, N.Y. Herald Tribune, 10/13/63)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket, launched from nasa Wallops Station with U.S.-Japanese experiment to measure electron temperatures and densities in the ionosphere by two different methods: Langmuir probe, supplied by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and radio-frequency resonance probe, developed by Radio Research Laboratory, Tokyo. 185-lb. payload reached 141mi. altitude and transmitted approximately 8 min. of telemetry before impacting in Atlantic Ocean about 71 mi. from launch site. Data obtained from the daytime experiment were compared with data obtained from similar experiment conducted at night, three days earlier. ( nasa Releases 211 and 218)
Study of Soviet astronautics from 1957 through 1962 (RM-3595— PR) by F. J. Krieger of the rand Corp., under usaf contract, concluded that the Soviet space program is an integral part of the Soviet military program. Krieger listed four main categories of Soviet effort: (1) earth-orbiting man in space; (2) lunar scientific exploration; (3) interplanetary exploration; and (4) Cosmos earth satellites, paramilitary in nature. Cosmos satellites have come in two sizes—large ones similar to the Vostoks, launched from Tyuratam cosmodrome east of the Aral Sea, orbiting at around 65°, and brought back to earth; and smaller ones launched with smaller rockets from Kapustin Yar cosmodrome north of the Caspian Sea, orbiting at about 49°, and not recovered. Kreiger counted 10 Soviet attempts at interplanetary flight, of which 2 have been partially successful (one passing Venus, another Mars, but both with communications failure) and six have failed to get out of earth orbit. (M&R, 6/10/63,16)
In Barrow?s National Business and Financial Weekly, article entitled “Trackless Void: The U.S. Space Program Had Better Come Down to Earth”, said: “. . . Like Columbus, we have been told time and again, the United States today lives in an age of discoveiy. Like Columbus, the United States must got fail to seize its moment of greatness. “While popular and plausible, the comparison strikes Barron’s as unfortunate. To begin with, in contrast to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Columbus raised the funds for his epoch-making voyage at least partly from private sources. Far from setting out to discover America, moreover, the admiral and his financial backers merely sought to find a shorter—hence more profitable—route to the Indies; their primary aim was to make money, not history. Finally, though Washington has chosen to ignore the inconvenient fact, the conquest of the new world yielded Spain, after a short-lived fling at glory, four centuries of economic and political decay. “The parallel to Columbus can be pushed too far, not only by friends of the space program but also by its foes. Nonetheless, the lessons of the past, coupled with some contemporary widsom on the subject, underscore the need for a sweeping reappraisal of the current U.S. space program. For example, lawmakers now suspect that nasa’s skyrocketing budget (from which, according to the administration, not 1 cent can be cut without courting disaster) is designed to serve political as well as scientific ends. In turn, scientists, who know how to weigh alternatives, have grown increasingly skeptical of the overwhelming emphasis which Washington has placed upon landing a man on the moon. Thereby, they claim, the United States has ignored far less costly and more fruitful avenues of lunar exploration, while neglecting other promising ventures in space. The time has come, we submit, to ask ‘Is this trip necessary?’ ” (CR, 5/28/63, A3428-3429)
West German scientists outlined plans for German space program at Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart. Program includes: communications satellite to be placed in polar orbit; high-energy rocket propulsion stage; space transport system ; space probe rocket with paraglider landing system to allow recovery and reuse. (Wilcke, NYT, 5/26/63,13)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, in Associated Press interview, was asked: “Mr. Vice President, as chairman of the Space Advisory Council [i.e., National Aeronautics and Space Council], you were intimately concerned in drafting the 5.7-billion-dollar space budget. Former President Eisenhower says the budget is spongy, and there is no hurry about getting to the moon. In view of this recent Russian shot [lunik iv], what is your reaction?” The Vice President replied: “The Administration has submitted to the Congress what we believe is a sane and responsible proposal to insure the maximum efficiency and effectiveness of our space program. I know of no reckless desire in any responsible quarter to get to the moon at all costs and without regard to the consequences to other vital aspects of our national policy. “The objective of reaching the moon is one aspect or our national space program which will be of great benefit to our country, and I think to all mankind. It may be possible by appropriating more money to speed up slightly the attainment of that goal and, of course, we all know it would be mighty easy to slow that goal down. But I don’t think that either alternative would be helping our country. Gaining a short period of time would almost certainly be at the expense of other crucial programs. Slowing down might bring us some one of these days face to face with the shocking knowledge that we had permanently assigned ourselves to second place. “So, all in all, I think the Administration has submitted a program which we can all embrace and both parties can fully support.” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/63)	’
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before annual meeting of Texas Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association in Houston, quoted President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations toward joint lunar exploration: “The President’s statement has captured the imagination of the peoples of the world. In itself, cooperation in space activity between the great antagonists of the Cold War is a thrilling prospect. But the significance of this possibility is not limited to space; rather, it lies equally in the fact that cooperation in space is one more step toward cooperation on Earth, toward the banishment of the fear of the annihilation of life as we know it. “The President’s statement received weight and conviction from the fact that the United States has a powerful space capability; and from the fact that this Nation is well on its way to achieving preeminence in this new environment. “This national strength in space represents a massive and productive effort on the part of the United States during the past five years, an effort whose potential value is only now beginning to emerge .... “While proceeding with the development of the launch vehicles and spacecraft of the future, more than 90 per cent of it under contract with American industry, we have also learned the essentials of space operations, and achieved a degree of reliability which has produced many specific achievements in space. “In 1958, the United States had five successful flights, but for each success we had two failures. By 1961, out of 54 flights, the success ratio was 83 per cent. In the first eight months of this year every nasa launch has succeeded, with the exception of one small Scout rocket launched from Wallops Island . . . .” (Text) September 25: Eugene Wasielewski, Associate Director of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, in address before Scientific Research Society of America in Paoli, Pa., emphasized accomplishments of nasa during its first five years: “While it is easy for me to say that nasa has, as an organization, launched over 50 satellites, of which 30 were put into orbit by Goddard . . ., I am sure that you must all realize the tremendous research and development effort that was required to put these spacecraft into orbit. “Certainly Goddard . . . owes much to the successful development of the Delta launch vehicle which has given us 20 successes in 21 shots . . . .”	(Goddard News. 10/7/63. 6]
Rep. James Weaver (R.-Pa.) spoke on the space race following Premier Khrushchev’s statement that Russia was not sending a man to the moon: “This ‘moondoggle’ has been a wrong objective in a race with the Soviet Union that never existed and has resulted in a space gap which threatens our national security. “Therefore, it becomes imperative that we immediately realine [sic] our space objectives to national security and eliminate this gap. I call upon James E. Webb, Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, to carry out this objective. If he cannot immediately reevaluate and report frankly and honestly to this Congress that this has been accomplished, then I feel it is our responsibility to demand his resignation. The Congress and the public can no longer tolerate public relations gimmicks and double-talk concerning the space program and our space gap when our national security is threatened.” {CR, 10/28/63,19365)
nasa Administrator James Webb spoke in Washington before the American Council on Education on the relationship of university activity to the space effort: “Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Sciences and head of the Department of Physics at the University of Illinois, noted recently that he could ‘think of no aspect of university activity relating to science or technology which is not involved in a fundamental way in the space effort’ .... “nasa [sponsors] a pre-doctoral training program with the ultimate objective of assisting in the production of 1,000 Ph. D.’s a year ...	..... “I think I can say categorically that the universities with which nasa works are not becoming so reliant on federal research funds that it is interfering with their traditional role of undergraduate instruction. Although the ratio of graduate to undergraduate effort in many universities may be increasing, those with which we work are not reducing their undergraduate instruction role. In fact, we know that all the major schools are most concerned about keeping up with the undergraduate demand. “It is worth emphasizing that nasa is attempting to foster a broader base of competence in graduate research by awarding training grants to institutions rather than to individual scholars. Thus the university as an institution is given the opportunity to select its own candidates for instruction on its own campus.” (Text)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov of Soviet Academy of Sciences announced U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached agreement on coordinated launching of satellites for measuring earth’s magnetic field. Agreement was subject to final approval by nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences; agreement was expected to be approved in about a month. (NYT, 5/25/63,25)
