Speech by Peter Hackes of nbc News inserted in Congressional Record by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.—Conn.) advocating a progressive space program. Hackes said: “Some of those who have studied space age economics tell us that by the mid-1970’s our space spending will return to the American economy a dime for every nickel we’re spending now. Aside from the very obvious race with Russia to be first to land on the moon; in addition to advancing science to the point where we may locate life on another planet and might discover the secrets of the beginnings of mankind; and besides the use of space to defend ourselves militarily—besides all these reasons, the U.S. space program will bring us two other exceedingly important dollars and cents 'benefits: a sizable advance in industry and employment. And an as-yet uncalculated fallout in new civilian products. . . .” (Text, CR, 7/2/64, A3690-92)
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, told the Council on World Affairs in Dayton, Ohio: “Space has become one of the newest dimensions of power: a dimension that ranks potentially with that of the land, the sea, and the air. And because national security is based on such dimensions, our security is heavily involved in our space achievements. Prudence demands that we conduct our program on a scale and at a pace that will permit no hostile force to employ space against us as an unchallenged avenue of aggression, politically or militarily. “At the same time we must never lose sight of another powerful concept, that in the eyes of the world, space has become an area of active competition with much more at stake than considerations of national pride or prestige. In the view of other nations, the relative effectiveness of the American system of free enterprise is, in a very real sense, being tested in space.” (Text)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) said in the House: “On Wednesday we saw the successful launching of the Saturn rocket carrying into orbit around the earth 18 tons. This included the largest payload ever placed in orbit by man and exceeds the largest Russian payload by 11 tons. For several years now this Nation has been plagued with the uncomfortable knowledge that the Russians were ahead of us in the space effort. This has been based primarily on the fact that they had a greater lift capability. The United States is now ahead in lift capability and in every other phase of the space program. . . .” (CR, 1/31/64,1443)
NASA’s newly created Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight convened for first time at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Formed to advise Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, the committee met for briefings by NASA officials and tours of nasa facilities at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island. (NASA Release 64-72)
At NASA Hq. awards presentation ceremony, Joseph Mandelkorn of Lewis Research Center and William R. Cherry of Goddard Space Flight Center jointly received NASA Contributions Award for development of improved (n-on-p) radiation-resistant solar cells. Mandelkorn received $5,000 cash award and Cherry, $1,000. William W. Smith, formerly of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and Bruce W. Schmitz of JPL received $1,000 award for their contribution of Trajectory-Correction Propulsion System, used recently in ranger VII lunar photography mission. Wilmer H. Reed III of LaRC received $1,500 award for his contribution of a Test Unit Free-Flight Suspension System. Howell D. Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., of Langley Research Center, received $1,700 award for their contribution of Dynamic Precession Damper for Spin Stabilized Vehicles. Awards were presented by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. HughL. Dryden. (Program)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in address at Annual Management Banquet of the National Management Association, in South Bend, Ind., that the “most important trend in NASA’s procurement activity today ... is our effort to use more incentive contracts. “Three years ago we had no incentive contracts. Today we have 52 totaling more than half a billion dollars. And we expect to raise that to one billion before the end of this year. . . . “So far we have experimented with a new type of incentive contract called the award fee. ... So far our experience with this type of incentive contract has been good; and efficient contractors who appear to be saving the government money have earned extra profits for themselves. The award fee contract is especially applicable to service contracts where targets are difficult to fix. We feel that the award fee has motivated contractors to perform better, to cut costs, and to make quick corrections when they have been deficient. Contractors, in turn, have expressed their satisfaction with this new procedure. . . .” (Text)
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said in address at centennial convocation luncheon, Worcester Polytechnic Institute:	* “The new era promised by the Space Age perhaps connotes a return to what was once called natural philosophy. The unifying element of these developments of the space program is a general spirit of inquiry into the nature of the external physical world. It represents a re-direction of interest away from the increasingly narrow specialization which has characterized the physical sciences in the last decades. “The second distinguishing feature of the scientific research in space is the fact that the various scientists have only been able to make their observations ... by virtue of the hardware developed by the engineer. This is in distinct contrast to the biologist who could invest in a good microscope and do research comparable with the best. . . . Generally, the engineer exploits and puts to practical use the knowledge acquired by the scientists. But in space, the scientist seems to be particularly dependent on the engineer to develop new devices and techniques. Engineering, in this context, has become a more creative and trail-blazing profession. “The third and possibly most imposing challenge of the space age is the potential feed-back of its developments into the civilian economy. In the long run, the justification of our space budget must stand on this ‘fall-out.’ . . .” (Text)
NASA announced Univ. of Arizona would receive $1,200,000 NASA grant to construct Space Sciences Center on the campus at Tucson. The four-story structure would “further the University of Arizona’s multidisciplinary program that is proving invaluable to the national space effort,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said, (nasa Release 64-183)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and aiaa Board Member, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial: “For some years past, it has been asked whether electric propulsion meets a ‘requirement’ in our space program. It may be well to remember that the airplane, the atomic submarine, the radio, and the first satellite were not developed in fulfillment of ‘requirements.’ An artificial atmosphere is certainly a requirement for an astronaut in space, and must Be developed for that reason. But the astronaut does not go into space because it is his requirement, but because our country has decided to excel in the exploration of outer space with the most appropriate means. Electric propulsion promises to be a very appropriate method of vastly expanding our exploration capability in space beyond that of chemical and nuclear systems. For that reason, its development should be pursued with high priority and great vigor.” (A&A, 8/64, 14—15)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in remarks at Univ. of Alabama: “In the 5% years since the launching of Explorer I in January of 1958, scientists in the nation’s universities and in government laboratories, supported by the engineering competence of American industry, have made an impressive record. In this 5% years 42 different university sponsored experiments have been orbited on 22 NASA satellites. Twelve of these experiments on five satellites are still operating. There are pending at the present time a total of 123 experiments representing 36 different experimental concepts contributed by nineteen universities. These experiments have been approved and will be flown on 19 NASA satellites including the orbiting geophysical observatories, the orbiting astronomical observatories, the orbiting solar observatories, and the Explorers. Of great significance is the fact that some of these experiments will be flown on future international satellites, particularly the United States-United Kingdom series.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb stated Boston still appeared to 'be the most suitable site for NASA electronics research center. NASA’s Electronics Site Selection Committee had reviewed presentations by 50 groups representing 19 geographical areas, in accordance with P.L. 88113 (NASA Authorization Act for FY 1964). Mr. Webb still had not officially notified Congress of NASA’s site selection. (SBD, 1/24/64, 1.29)
Disclosed at press conference in Florence, Italy, in connection with COSPAR meeting, mat U.S.—U.S.S.R. cooperative space negotiations would be held in Geneva within two weeks. Heading U.S. team would be NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, meeting with Soviet team led by Anatoli Blagonravov. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/14/64)
NASA’s Group Achievement Award was presented to Paul F. Bikle, Flight Research Center Director, and Brig. Gen. Irving L. Branch, afftc Commander, on behalf of all Government personnel connected with the X—15 program. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, made the presentation at fhc ceremony, and said in his remarks: “Earlier this month the Research Airplane Committee approved nine additional test-bed experiments for the X-15 Program. With the 19 experiments approved before and the flights required to complete the original research program, these additional experiments will require X—15 flight tests until the end of 1968. “The X—15 flight-test program has been eminently successful during the last four years. The Research Airplane Committee, by its action this month in approving these new experiments for the program, has given concrete evidence of its faith in the future program. . . .” (frc X—Press; Speech Text)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D.—Mo.) speaking before the Annual Meeting of the Cape Girardeau, Mo., Chamber of Commerce, said: “Our policies are peaceful in nature, and our space program is peaceful in purpose and content; but it is also a sound investment for our future national security, economic as well as military. . . . “Landings on the moon will add to our knowledge of the origin of the universe, and also contribute to our knowledge of the broad spectrum of science and technology in such areas as meteorology and communications . . . “But the lunar project is not the whole space program; and the military significance of the program cannot be judged by examining that project alone; nor can anyone today estimate the great wealth and resources that will flow from this new knowledge. Knowledge is, and will be, the basic power of modern states. “Moreover, the Defense Department is now deeply engaged in the space effort . . . “The true defense value of the lunar project rests with the development of our over-all space capabilities; and no one can say today how this stockpile of knowledge will be used in the defense of this Nation or how important it will be. . . .” (Text)
First intercontinental communications tests conducted with relay ii communications satellite were successful; nasa officials described the satellite’s performance as “excellent.” The tests were conducted between ground stations at Nutley, N.J., and Raisting, West Germany, consisted of voice transmissions and radio signals. (AP, NYT, 1/23/64, 7)	_
nasa Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, decisions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require serious attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space exploration—including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4, 27292804)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director for Space, Defense Research and Engineering, said in address before National Space Club in Washington that the Manned Orbiting Laboratory would be the first phase of DOD’s National Orbiting Space Station and would provide means of carrying out experiments to prove or disprove the military role of man in space. mol would carry two astronauts for 30 days, also would carry experiments of nonmilitary nature, primarily for NASA. Discussing nonmilitary unmanned space program, Dr. Hall disclosed that the Army had secretly launched secor last month and that it was performing “exceptionally well.” (SBD, 2/19/64, 274; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/19/64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Because of the initiative and the daring of the Wright Brothers, this nation gave man the capacity for powered flight, freeing him forever from the bonds which for thousands of years of human existence had confined his activities to land and sea. The United States became the first country in the world to possess a military airplane when, in 1908, the Army Signal Corps contracted for a Wright biplane. “Yet, prior to World War I this nation was still so pre-occupied with conventional weapons systems that it totally neglected the development of aeronautics—the force which was to dominate warfare for the next quarter century. In 1914, the United States possessed fewer military aircraft and of inferior types than the six leading aeronautical nations (including Mexico). The United States in 1914 was the only major nation in the world not to possess an aeronautical laboratory with an up-to-date wind tunnel. By November 1918, not one aircraft of American design and manufacture had entered combat operations during World War I. “In the 30’s we were so pre-occupied with refinement of conventional piston-driven aeronautical systems that we made little progress in jet propulsion. Meanwhile, the Germans set out to build a bigger and better NACA and to a large extent, they did, developing jet propelled military aircraft and 5%-ton V-2 rockets, which almost spelled disaster in World War II. “In the late 40’s, despite the fact that Robert Goddard had demonstrated the feasibility of a liquid-fueled rocket engine in this country in 1926, and despite the memory of V—2’s raining on London during the blitz, we were so pre-occupied with mating jet carriers to our exclusively held atomic bomb capability that we neglected missilry while other nations forged ahead. And finally, in the 50’s, our A-bomb advantage gone, we were so pre-occupied with the development of our ballistic missile program that we neglected a clear opportunity to become first in space. “Today, the nation faces, we all face, this question: Have we learned enough from the often bitter and always costly experience of the last half century not only to carry out with determination this effort to meet the requirements of the present in space research and exploration, but to exercise the vision which is demanded if we are not, once again, to find ourselves lagging in the next phase of this most challenging effort? . . . “The present gap in manned flight activity is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960, until May 1961, when President Kennedy recommended the present manned lunar landing project as a national goal. “The decisions which confront us today are those which will determine whether this kind of history will repeat itself a few years hence and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space missions of the future. . . .” (Testimony; CR, 2/5/64, A548-50) February 4: Nike-Cajun sounding rockets with grenade experiments were launched at Wallops Island, Va., and Ft. Churchill, Canada, in current nasa series of comparative upper atmosphere studies. The experiments were designed to obtain wind and temperature data and to measure the effects of the “warming trend” at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops reached 73.8-mi. altitude, with all 12 of its grenades exploding; Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 78-mi. altitude, with 11 grenades functioning normally and the twelfth ejecting but not exploding. (Wallops Release 64-14; NASA Rpt. SRL)
Col. Robert P. Young (usa), Executive Officer of NASA since 1961, was awarded NASA’s Medal for Outstanding Leadership. In making the award, NASA Administrator James E. Webb cited Young for “his outstanding leadership and dedicated service displayed in all aspects of performance while serving as executive officer of NASA, and for his significant and noteworthy contributions in co-ordinating internal management of the agency.” (nasa Release 64-181; Wash. Post, 7/22/64)
James E. Webh, NASA Administrator, and Allen Fairhall, Australian Minister for Supply, announced jointly that a tracking station to support the Apollo manned lunar flight would be established near Canberra, Australia, as a part of the worldwide unified S-band Apollo tracking network. The station would be equipped with an 85-ft. diameter parabolic reflector antenna to support the lunar phases of Apollo missions. (NASA Release 64-290)
John H. Glenn, Jr., discussed with NASA Administrator James E. Webb the possibility of the former astronaut’s returning to NASA in advisory capacity, according to NASA spokesman, but nothing had been decided by the two. (upi, Wash. Post, 7/2/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, A8)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was planning to hold further hearings on the NASA proposed electronics research center, although Committee Chairman George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) had described NASA Administrator Webb’s report to the Congress as “very comprehensive.” (M&R, 2/17/64,17)
President Johnson named Dr. Charles Stark Draper, head of Dept of Aeronautics and Astronautics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as a recipient of the National Medal of Science. Dr. Draper, a leader in developing aeronautic and astronautic instruments and controls, was one of 11 scientists to be so honored. (NYT, 11/28/64, 16) November 28: NASA mariner rv Mars probe was successfully launched into interplanetary orbit from Cape Kennedy, Fla., by an Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. The Agena D separated from the Atlas 115 mi. up and injected itself into a parking orbit around the earth. It then reignited and injected itself into a Mars trajectory, mariner iv was detached and locked onto the sun for solar power and stabilization on one axis and opened its solar panels. Later, the probe would lock on the star Canopus for second-axis stabilization—the first time a star would be used for an attitude reference on a long space mission. In addition to equipment for televising the Martian surface, mariner iv carried instruments to study radiation, space dust, and magnetic forces near earth, Mars and in deep space. The trajectory as presently calculated would carry mariner iv within 151,000 mi. of Mars by mid-July, (nasa Releases 266, 288; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/64; NYT, 11/29/64; Miles, Wash. Post, 11/30/64)
Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems, sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, Fla., with some 200 engineers and scientists attending. In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 'or Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion and control of energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. “The state of man’s technology in every age has depended on his ability to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge of the equivalence of different forms of energy. . . . “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy conversion and control are breathtaking. New methods of energy conversion from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program. . . . Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in the NASA program are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite reactor at 6000° R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a device about the size of an American motor car. . . .” (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of nasc staff said in address at the Conference: “. . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite different. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for the year before. ... “My 'best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very complex missions. Let us look at j ust the main outlines. “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit: . . . The Soviet Union is clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In the Earth-orbital regime, it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites with a minimum of fanfare, and these have included a range of experiments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles. “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of unmanned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accomplishments. . . . But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet capabilities. . . . “Lunar and Planetary Probes:. . . In absolute number of launchings the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner II carried about 40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are rightfully proud of this accomplishment. “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962, ten such launchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a difficult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner II. Not one of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . . “While neither country should he overly proud of its lunar probe record, the pictures taken by Lunik III back in 1959 are still a high-water mark. “Manned Space Flight: . . . Through the 1963 season each country had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astronaut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. . . . “Human Safety: . . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika, four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs, before the first man was sent. . . . “Future Manned Missions: ... To the best of our knowledge, the Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of convenient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then, if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that the United States is building a lunar capability either. . . . “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . . With all this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even probable that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant manned flights. . . . “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reactions, but with sound, consistent planning. . . .” (Text)
President Johnson told a Texas news conference that he would establish a seven-man advisory board for the U.S. supersonic transport (sst) development. Members of the board would be: Defense Secretary McNamara, Treasury Secretary Dillon, Commerce Secretary Hodges, cia Director John McCone, NASA Administrator Webb, FAA Administrator Halaby, and New York banker Eugene Black. Asked whether he had given the Supersonic Transport Advisory Board a specific assignment, the President replied: “The executive order will do that. It is being drawn. I wanted you to know that we are doing that. It has not been finalized yet. It may be changed in the details. But we want to have the broad spectrum of the Government interested in it, to get the best judgments of all of our people in an advisory capacity.” Asked if we were setting a deadline on the Board’s report back to him, the President answered: “No. This will be advisory. I am not asking for a report. I am asking them to advise in connection with the contracts and all the matters covered by the Black report and by the report that I made in connection with the testimony before the Congress. The Congress has already appropriated $60 million. We have already had an evaluation of the various proposals. But we just want to get this senior group of officials to sit in and counsel with us.” (Transcript, NYT, 3/30/64; WSJ, 3/30/64)
Article written by Sen. Barry Goldwater, Republican nominee for President, in which he laid down his views on the form the U.S. space program should take, appeared in Science and Mechanics: “The concept that speeding men to the moon is the same as jockeying trotters over a muddy track must be abandoned, regardless of Kremlin propaganda. The idea that we can cooperate with the Russians to do the job quicker and cheaper is too ludicrous for comment. We are spending entirely too much money on the manned moon program, when a carefully plotted program using unmanned lunar landing equipment could steadily build up a solid body of scientific knowledge about the lunar environment that would increase the safety factor for astronauts much later. Automatic landing equipment could be designed at minimum cost. The program should expand in easy steps, each one leading to the next. The billions of dollars thus saved could be profitably invested in other aspects of space research.”	, Speaking of the military role in space, he said: “All manned space research should be directed by the military, with national security and control of the access to space as primary goals. The threat from space now and in the foreseeable future is from spatial regions within a thousand miles of Earth and not from lunar distances. Routine daily surveillance of these regions must be established, and the additional capabilities of positive identification, interception, and destruction of hostile enemy space vehicles will be necessary. This would be the greatest deterrent to an enemy’s military space aspirations. It would also give us the means of developing experienced space pilots, scientific and technological methods, and new scientific knowledge which could be used later in sending men to the moon and the planets. The hardware, on a routinely reliable basis, would be available ofi-the-shelf. “It might be added that almost every successful NASA launch to date, manned and unmanned, has been made with military support—with missile rocket-boosters, launch facilities, technical know-how, communications (including air transport of boosters) or safety procedures—or with all five. . . . “Finally, I believe that an immediate initial step of any effective military space program must be a manned station in near orbit about the Earth, with necessary support equipment. . . .” Senator Goldwater also stated that in his opinion there was the need for two crash programs in space research. The first would develop the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, and the second would develop the potentiality of lasers for use as military weapons. (Science and Mechanics, 6/64; Wash. Post, 7/21/64) During June: France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aero-spatiales (ONERA) revealed it had successfully flight-tested hybrid rocket engine in a rocket launched April 25 from Ceres sounding rocket facility on the lie du Levant in the Mediterranean Sea. Engine employed combination of liquid nitric acid oxidizer and unidentified solid fuel. (Av. WL, 6/29/64, 24)
NASA-DOD-AEC committee studying space power requirements of U.S. space program through 1975 presented its report to Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (aacb). (M&R, 6/22/64)
Paul G. Johnson, of the AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, said in an article in Astronautics and Aeronautics that solid-core nuclear rockets would power the next generation of manned space vehicles. “The exact way in which nuclear rockets will he used in the space program will depend on many factors other than payload comparisons. One of the primary influences will he the relative emphasis placed on manned operations in earth orbit, on the moon, and to the near planets. An equally strong influence will be the experience in the nuclear-rocket development program, which will indicate the possible characteristics and availability dates of propulsion systems.” (A&A, 12/64, 22-28) During December: In the British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight, Brian J. Ford suggested that the first men on the moon might be imperiled by the residue of an electric charge which he said formed its craters. Mr. Ford proposed the theory that the moon’s craters were caused by a gigantic electrical discharge when the earth and moon were still hot and close together, and said that he had reproduced the theoretical conditions in miniature in a laboratory. He had found that electrical discharge created craters which showed the characteristic central peak of a lunar crater and formed other corroborating detail. He suggested that the moon might still carry an electrostatic charge from this original discharge which “might seriously imperil” the first men to land there, (upi, Chic. Trib., 12/28/64)
Vice Adm. Rufus E. Rose (usn, Ret.) was sworn in as Director of Policy Planning Div., NASA Office of Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. The most recent assignment during Admiral Rose’s 44-year career was as Commandant of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, (nasa Release 64-73)
Permanent Hall of Science was dedicated at World’s Fair, New York City. Participating in dedication ceremony, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said the Hall of Science would “contribute to the understanding of those many disciplines which comprise modern scientific undertakings. . . .” Robert Moses, World’s Fair president, noted particularly the “extraordinary public interest in space exploration” in his remarks. (Webb Text; nasa lar III/172-78; NYT, 9/10/64)
Federation of Italian-American Democratic Organizations of New York presented to NASA a plaque honoring the late President Kennedy and Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci. The plaque, which commemorated Vespucci’s sighting the area now called Cape Kennedy, was accepted by NASA Administrator Webb in ceremonies at NASA Hq. (nasa Announcement 64-47. It was subsequently hung in the Hq. building of Kennedy Space Center, NASA; KSC Release 61-64)
At Institute of Navigation meeting in New York, panel discussion on proposed civilian navigational satellite system reportedly indicated only mild interest by potential users of the system. Unnamed NASA officials were said to be optimistic that NASA-FAA-Commerce-DOD-Interior representatives would agree “in the near future” on setting up an ad hoc committee to study the requirements of such a system. {M&R, 6/22/(A,
Breene M. Kerr, who had been NASA’s Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization, became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization. He thus took over part of the duties of Dr. George L. Simpson, who would function as Associate Deputy Administrator and Assistant Administrator for Policy Planning. (NASA Release 64-291)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said U.S.S.R.’s successful orbiting of three-man voskhod I spacecraft “shows they are actively in the race with manned spacecraft.” He noted Soviet emphasis on life sciences in their space program. “They have done more in this field, I believe, than we have.” Asked about U.S. chances for landing a man on the moon before U.S.S.R., he replied: “We have a 50-50 chance of getting there first.” But, he added, U.S.S.R. might be first with a circumlunar flight. Citing buildup of Soviet space program, Dr. Welsh said ratio of their spacecraft launchings in 1964 to comparable portion of 1963 was about 3-to-1. He described voskhod i as a “logical follow-on from a very rapidly stepped-up space program.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, dedicated J-4 propulsion engine test cell at Arnold Engineering Development Center. He said: “In recent years, there has been much talk about a ‘space race’. There is such a race and we should not forget it for a minute. However, we must not let the pace of our national space program be determined just by the actions of others. Actually, the real opponent in the space race is time.” We must continue “to push technology vigorously,” and “recognize the importance to the national space program of adequate technical facilities.” In answer to reporters’ questions following dedication, Dr. Welsh said the U.S.S.R. still led the U.S. in the space race and was speeding up its program. (Text; Clark, NYT, 6/17/64)
NASA and U.S. Dept, of Commerce announced agreement to develop National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (NOMSS). Signed by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges, agreement provided for NOMSS which would be based on NASA-developed Tiros technology and would become operational in 1965. Compared with earlier plans, this joint program was expected to save Dept, of Commerce some $125,000,000 over five-year period. Once NASA orbited the satellites, Weather Bureau would operate and control the system and analyze, process, and distribute the meteorological data gathered by the satellites. Under reimbursable order from Weather Bureau, NASA would design, procure, test, launch, and track the weather satellites, (nasa Release 64-25; Commerce Dept. Release G 64-20; Text, nmi 2-3-30)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed World Affairs Council of Northern California, in San Francisco, discussed national and international aspects of the U.S. space program: “The competition is tough. The U.S.S.R. has the ability to concentrate its efforts without public debate and without the regard for individual freedom of choice or living standards which enjoy high priority in our own country. But it does not follow that our own space effort should be similarly concentrated. The implications of space are broad, broader than we can now know, and they do not end on the moon. The necessary technologies are enormously demanding and therefore enormously promising. And, whatever we do in space, we are critically dependent upon a thorough knowledge of the space environment. Moreover, the Soviet program, which has appeared to many of us to be so narrow and directed almost exclusively to prestigious exploits, more recently gives signs of broadening to include considerable basic research as well as practical investigations, for example, through the use of weather satellites in which we pioneered. “Therefore, we must not be trapped into a narrow competition— focusing our energies on one mission or even on manned flight alone. Our preparations must be broad enough to give us a flexible base suitable for a continuity of effort and ability to move in a direction or directions perhaps still unknown. “The projects and programs, national and international, in which we are engaged have unprecedented scope and potential. It is this scope and this potential which make space activity a valuable instrument of national and international policy. It is a many faceted tool to be used for the economic and social advance of this and cooperating nations as well as for the preservation of our technological and political leadership in the world. This tool and its importance should be fully understood and appreciated. At the same time, as Lord Hailsham has said, we should remember that international cooperation is not a substitute for national excellence. “Europe has not been alone in recognizing these factors. In the complex of UN organizations, great interest has been evidenced among nations great and small in the problems and benefits of space. “Here again, space has served to bring East, West, and neutrals together in a code of legal principles to govern space activity, which was unanimously adopted in the last session of the General Assembly. In the associated forum of the International Telecommunications Union agreements were reached on the assignment of radio frequencies for space research and space communications. Without these arrangements the future of communications satellite systems would be heavily clouded. And in another UN agency, the World Meteorological Organization, a start has been made in the evaluation and planning of requirements for a world weather satellite system which also promises real economic and human benefits. “Thus it is clear that our national effort in space research and exploration is becoming a powerful force in developing greater international cooperation—cooperation which is not limited to the nations of the Free World, but which spans the Iron Curtain, as well. It is in this context, as a force which joins all mankind against a common enemy, the hostile environment of space, rather than against each other, that the space effort may bring the most significant and enduring rewards.” (Text)
Liquid-hydrogen-powered rocket engines for Saturn I’s S—IV stage exploded during preparations for static-firing at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento, Calif., facility. Explosion, which demolished the test stand, was evaluated by NASA to determine if forthcoming Saturn SA—5 706-598 0—65-----3 flight test at AMR should be delayed; NASA officials decided the explosion was not sufficient reason to interrupt the SA-5 launch preparations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/64; AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/64)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Missouri Cotton Producers Association in Sikeston, Mo.: “Whether the Russians are attempting to build a rocket and spacecraft to match Saturn V and Apollo, we simply do not know. When they start flight tests of such a rocket, we should be able to identify it. Flight tests of our Saturn V will not begin until the 1967-68 period, and it is quite possible that the Russians may also be testing a super rocket by then. “This much we do know: It would be very foolish on our part to sit idle or to delay the Saturn V until we could confirm that the Soviets were also building super rockets. By that time, it would probably be too late for us to match them again in this century. “In our national space program we are moving rapidly and vigorously to do the things we need to do as a nation to prevent technological surprise, to prevent another major Soviet initiative based on space superiority. “We believe that peace and security and the possibility of useful cooperation with the Soviet Union all depend on our making doubly clear that they can hope to have no monopoly of space achievement to exploit for the purposes of communism. “Some people seem to think that our present space effort can be justified only if we are in a neck-and-neck race to the moon. These people miss the point. Our aim is not to race the Soviets, but to thoroughly discourage them from making an all-out effort to use space as a political, propaganda, or military weapon for greater power on earth. “I don’t believe the American people are investing $20 billion in the Saturn-Apollo program of manned space flight in this decade just to keep even with the Soviets. I think the American people want to lead, and lead without doubts and excuses. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator since 1958, received the aiaa premiere award, the Louis W. Hill Award for 1964, for the Outstanding Contribution to Space Transportation. Dr. Dryden was honored for his fluid mechanics research leading to space era, technical leadership of naca and nasa teams which made civilian space program a reality, and personal contribution to research in the X—15 program. He was called “a symbol of our aerospace success.” In his address at the aiaa Honors Night Banquet, Dr. Dryden said that those involved with our space program must consider broad national goals in addition to scientific details. Other goals mentioned by Dryden were “to obtain maximum benefit to the welfare of the Nation and to all mankind” and “to provide not only material benefits to free man in a peaceful world, but also incentives for mental and spiritual growth and accomplishment.” While recalling the day about 40 years ago, “when an airplane was essentially the product, from concept to final machine, of one man, the designer with the aid of two or three assistants,” Dr. Dryden said today’s space technologist “. . . must search for knowledge of the facts, conduct our work with devotion to intellectual honesty and objectivity, and realize in our activities the highest moral aspirations and ideals of which we are capable.” Dr. Dryden expressed confidence that the Nation would continue to support comprehensive space exploration program because of sum total of goals space planning strove for. These included national prestige, national defense, human knowledge of space, development of efficient space vehicles, and utilization and international exchange of technological information. He added: “I believe that the rate and scale of the program are not excessive in view of the great resources of this country.” (aiaa, The Louis W. Hilt Award pamphlet, 7/1/64; aiaa Booster, 7/2/64,1; Speech Text; NASA Release 64-161)
gao complained nasa had spent money unnecessarily by producing four basically similar films on the flight of astronaut John Glenn, three on the Alan Shepard flight, three on the Apollo lunar exploration project, two on the Ariel satellite, and two emphasizing international cooperation in the space program. The cost of the films ranged from $216,000 for one of the Glenn-flight productions to $1,500 for one of the three on Shepard’s flight. (Orlando Sentinel, 11/4/64; NYT, 11/4/64,40)
NASA position paper on DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory, embodying eight principles of NASA policy toward the mol, was made public. The paper stated: “The dod Manned Orbital Laboratory is a single military project (a specific goal; not a broad program) within the overall National Space Program. . . . “The mol should not be construed as the national space station, a separate program currently under joint study by NASA and the DOD. Such a space station project would be considered under the terms of the Webb/McNamara agreement on manned orbital research and development systems larger than Gemini and Apollo. The mol is, rather, a specific experimental test bed utilizing NASA’s Gemini project and the Titan III for certain potential military space applications not within the scope of NASA’s activities. . . .” (Text; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/2/64,1; A&A, 2/64,90; AF Mag., 74)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing Harvard Business School of Washington, presented an appraisal of U.S. aerospace power in 1964: “My appraisal for 1964 indicates continuing increase in airpower. All of the atlas and titan missile squadrons were operational by the end of 1963. Our total U.S. strategic power, the backbone and starting point of deterrence, will more than double in 1964 when new min-uteman strategic missile wings become operational. . . . “Today’s appraisals of airpower must also cover the space front. “The Air Force space program will have a Manned Orbital Laboratory as its central project. The switch from Dynasoar to mol reflects a change in emphasis toward on-orbit experiment rather than re-entry experiments. . . .” (Text, dod Release 18-64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb remarked at Univ. of Notre Dame that the establishment of its new Aero-Space Science and Engineering Department placed Notre Dame “in a vigorous and growing group of the nation’s leading educational institutions. . . . “What is happening this fall at this university is in some ways symbolic of what is happening all over the nation. For the space program has been a catalyst to science, to engineering, to research, and to education at all levels. The power of the modern rocket has given man a new, and in many ways, an unlimited tool for probing the mysteries of the universe. ... .” (Text)
A spokesman for the Senate’s Select Committee on Small Business’ Subcommittee, headed by Sen. Russell B. Long (D.—La.), reported it would meet shortly after Congress convened Jan. 4 to consider senatorial requests for an investigation of charges that NASA had given away to business firms valuable patent rights developed at public expense and worth millions of dollars. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, claimed the agency was following Federal law and guidelines laid down by President John F. Kennedy shortly before his death. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/64)
Henry O. Slone, Snap-8 project manager at NASA Lewis Research Center, reported a successful 76-hr. test of Snap-8’s turbine alternator assembly (taa) using mercury as the working fluid. “This test demonstrated operational capability and machine performance up to 80% of its rated power,” Slone said. Snap-8 (System for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) was designed to supply electric power onboard a spacecraft and would use nuclear heat to produce 35 kw. of power. When fully developed, it would have the capability to operate unattended in space for 10.000	hours, (lrc Release 64-111; M&R, 12/14/64, 10)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in article on nasa and usaf relations in The Airman: “At a time when possible military missions for manned spacecraft have not yet been clearly defined, the nasa Gemini and Apollo programs and the Air Force mol program are developing American manned space flight technology and operating experience at a rapid rate. “We believe that the progress called for in the Gemini, Apollo, and mol will enable us to demonstrate clear superiority over the Soviet Union in manned space flight capabilities during this decade. “Our accomplishments in these three programs will prepare us much better for whatever further steps may be necessary to meet our national defense needs in space. . . .”	(Airman, 8/64, 6-11)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, received honorary degree in mechanical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute of the University of Milan, (nasa Release 64-74)
Results of space poll of 2,000 randomly selected AAAS members, 1,134 of whom responded, were published in Science. To the statement, “The vital national interests of the United States require that a high priority be given to landing a man on the moon by 1970,” 31% of the respondents said “Yes,” 62% “No.” To the statement, “A reasonable objective would be a lunar landing by 1970,1975,1980,1990, [or] Never,” 20% chose 1970; 23%, 1975; 19%, 1980; 9%, 1990; and 7%,Never. Asked to select “the most important justification for manned exploration of the moon” from prepared list of alternatives, respondents said: military, 7%; scientific, 58%; resources on moon, 1%; national prestige, 13%; technological fallout, 6%; spirit of adventure, 7%. Asked to rank following fields “in order of their potentiality for producing new knowledge,” respondents said: earth-based astronomy, 2%; manned lunar research, 10%; biomedical research, 51%; oceanography, 6%; physics research, 15%; chemical research, 9%; other, 7%. Asked to choose “what fraction of the total federal $15 billion” R&D funds “should be devoted to the space program,” 30% chose 0-10%, 31% chose 10-20%,' 14% chose 20-30%, and 5% chose 30-40%. Commenting on the poll, Robert C. Toth of Los Angeles Times noted that Science editor Philip Abelson was “an outspoken opponent of the moon program” and that the survey did not directly ask the key question: Should the existing program be slowed down now? Journal of the Armed Forces space editor James J. Haggerty, Jr., pointed out that “it all depends on who you ask.” Of the 1,134 respondents, he said, “it turned out that 86% were not connected with the space program. As a matter of fact, there is a strong suspicion that they are all medical researchers, since 51% of them indicated that biomedical research is the scientific field with the potential for producing the greatest amount of new knowledge, where only 10 percent thought manned lunar research would contribute anything of value. . . .”	(J/Armed Forces, 8/8/64, 12; Science, 7/24/64, 368; Toth, Wash. Post, 7/27/64)
At Missouri Valley College commencement exercises, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “For some time we in NASA have been concerned with doing our part to help build up the nation’s supply of scientific and engineering manpower, and to ensure that our national competence grows rather than diminishes. Accordingly, in 1962, the agency initiated its present program of training graduate students in space-related fields, and nearly 900 students are already in training. “This fall the number of schools participating will grow from 88 to 131, located in 47 states—with four of these colleges here in Missouri. . . (Text)
Formation of a National Academy of Engineering under the charter of the NAS was announced by Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Augustus B. Kinzel, President-elect of the National Academy of Engineering. Among the founding members were Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, (nas-nrc Release; Wash. Post, 12/12/64, 20)
Gen. B. A. Schriever (usaf), Commander AFSC, at a 10th anniversary commemoration of usaf ballistic missile and space programs, said Communist drives toward world domination presented challenge to U.S. to maintain technological superiority as war deterrent. At same time we should develop military flexibility to deal with conflict levels below all-out war. In future such flexibility would be provided by manned aircraft of novel design, to be used for support as well as actual lighting. Next step in space would be to investigate military strategy of manned space flight. This was a major purpose of usaf’s recently acquired mission of developing Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). Another possibility to investigate would be recovering used boosters to save new construction costs. “This would be a very important building block for future operations in space.” (afsc Release 46-R-72)	_	_
Aviation Week recounted an exchange between Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) in which McNamara stated that the Apollo program had psychological value but no direct military worth. In response to a question about the effect of the Apollo program on the mission of dod, McNamara said: “... if a psychological victory that might result from the Soviets arriving at the moon first leads to a shift in attitudes in the world, tending to reduce the belief in the strength of the West, and in increasing the Soviet’s view of the weakness of the West, this is bound to have a military effect. This is exactly what occurred in connection with our space programs, and it led to a very costly response by this country.” (Av. Wk., 7/20/64)
First of series of background briefings on scientific and technical aspects of NASA programs was held at NASA Hq., with Dr. John E. Naugle, Director of Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, reviewing the broad scientific objectives of the space program. Dr. Naugle revealed NASA planned to ask three separate companies for independent design studies of Advanced Ogo’s and Oao’s (Orbiting Geophysical Observatories and Orbiting Astronomical Observatories). The Advanced Oso (Orbiting Solar Observatory) design work by contractor Republic Aviation was progressing, and Aoso should be in operation in 1969. (NASA Memo; SBD, 3/6/64, 360)
Article in Fortune magazine said: “The U.S. is spending a lot of money—but it is also getting a lot of results in technological breakthroughs, any one of which would have been regarded as wondrous only a few years ago. The milestones passed since last summer indicate how fast the space program is now moving. ... “The Soviet Union isn’t going to collapse if it loses the race. If the U.S. loses, it isn’t going to collapse either. For both countries, there are other goals in space that may yield rich rewards in both prestige and scientific advance. Meanwhile, NASA has much to be proud of. . . . “The superiority of liquid hydrogen as a rocket fuel has been proved and the U.S. has definitely overcome the Soviet lead in big boosters.” (Fortune, 3/64)
Editorial in Washington Evening Star said postponement of manned Gemini space flight into 1965 came as “scant surprise,” since “as long ago as last Christmastime a ‘space forecast’ story in the Star made the prediction that this would be the case, and for several months the ‘last quarter of 1964’ target date has been hardly more than a tongue-in-cheek fiction at NASA Headquarters. . . . “Of course, it is far better to delay the flights than to run the risk of tragic failure due to haste or carelessness. Wouldn’t it make sense to forget about phony schedules—and phony excuses for not keeping them—and just carry on with the space program as fast and effectively as possible?” (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, gave address at dedication of Magic Mountain Laboratory of the Marquardt Corp., Van Nuys, Calif.: “There is a considerable degree of misunderstanding of the overall purposes of our national space program. Many people seem to believe that a landing on the moon is our paramount objective. This is not so. “Our principal goal is to make the United States first in space. The Apollo mission milestones—manned flight in earth orbit, into deep space, and to the moon and back—provide a focus for the development of the total capability that will enable the United States to compete in the race for space. . . .” (Text)
In a speech before the Briefing Conference on Government Contracting for Research and Development sponsored by the Federal Bar Association and the Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., in Boston, Ernest W. Brackett, NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator for Procurement Policy, spoke of NASA’s policy towards incentive contracts: “Incentive contracts are not the answer to everything, but much good can and will come from them. They will effect more realistic cost proposals. When a company’s incentive fee or profit is based on its cost proposal, it will not be on the low side. This means less cost overruns which are subject to so much criticism and which disrupt Government budgets. . . . There will also be more careful and detailed work definitions because a contractor wants to know what he is expected to do and be able to price it out if his incentive fee depends on performance and cost. It takes longer to negotiate incentive contracts and negotiations are harder. . . . Government personnel will be more careful, particularly in the technical areas, when incentive provisions are included. Another advantage should be fewer controls by Government over contract administration details, such as approval of overtime or sub-contractor selection. NASA would like to see contractors make higher profits but wants to have proof they have earned them. The health of the aerospace and electronics industries depends on their realizing a reasonable return for what they do. Incentive methods of contracting appear to be the best way this can be done.” (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper revealed at luncheon meeting with newsmen in Washington that scientists would be invited to volunteer for training for lunar missions. Plans had been finalized at meeting between nasa officials and’members ; of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board. ’ Up to 50"’ scientists would be selected to train with the Gemini/Apollo astronauts at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center during the summer months. Then, perhaps two years before a lunar landing, nasa would select some persons from the reserve to begin full-time training as crew members for later lunar flights. (AP, 4/30/64)
Missiles and Rockets reported that NASA planned two Mariner-type flights to Mars in 1969 and a Voyager mission to Mars in 1971. M&R reported that D. P. Hearth, of the office of Advanced Lunar and Planetary Programs in the NASA Office of Space Sciences, said that he expected both new projects to be funded in the FY ’66 budget. According to Hearth, neither project had won program approval by top NASA officials, but the chances for both appeared good. Both 1969 and 1971 would offer attractive launch windows because propulsion requirements to complete the missions would be the smallest of any period in the next 15 years. (M&R, 6/1/64, 15)
Soviet Government had rejected the space agreement negotiated in Geneva by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Soviet Academician Anatoli Blagonravov last June, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. After the negotiators had returned to their respective countries, Simons reported, U.S.S.R. notified U.S. in July that it chose to reject the agreement. NASA officials had no comment on the report, but other sources (unnamed) said the tentative agreement had called for exchange of information and publication of a book about space medicine and bioscience by Soviet and U.S. experimenters. U.S.S.R. refusal was based on insistence that topics be covered by either U.S. or Soviet author, although Blagonravov had agreed to U.S. proposal that each topic be covered by a Soviet and a U.S. author. This was said to be first instance of exercising the usual option to reject the space agreement reached by negotiating teams. (Simons, Wash. Post, 10/6/64)
In an address to Plans for Progress Seminar, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said American success in space technology represented several accomplishments and potentialities: we can make benefits available to other nations; space achievements are vital in maintaining technological balance of world power; and it gives opportunity for utilizing all our human resources in carrying out the broad-gauge programs necessary for making significant inputs into space knowledge, regardless of race, creed, or color. (Text)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, noted on Senate floor that 100th flight of X—15 was made yesterday. “During the past 4^ years the program has achieved a very commendable record, providing a wealth of research data for the aeronautical and space program of the United States. The past accomplishments of the X-15 program reflect a superb job of management, flight-test operation, and cooperation between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Air Force, and the Navy. . . . “The X-15 program not only has contributed to the increased confidence of designers of current high-performance aircraft but, in doing so, has focused attention on a few areas which require additional research. The planned program will be directed toward these areas. This program is providing information for the next logical step in the NASA’s flight research program, the hypersonic. “In addition . . ., the X—15 program is going to produce information of value, I believe, to the development of supersonic commercial airplanes. This data will include flight controls, materials and surface temperatures.	, “The lesson from the X—15 is that cooperation among agencies having an interest in a project pays off.” (CR, 1/29/64,1358-59)
Republican National Committee Chairman Dean Burch said in open letter to President Johnson that NASA Administrator James E. Webh was engaging “in the most blatant and transparent politics by suggesting he will shift the top space scientists and executives from Huntsville, Ala., to New Orleans. . . . This is political blackmail, pure and simple. . . .” (ctps, Chic. Trib., 10/27/64)
Both stages of first Titan II launch vehicle for Project Gemini were successfully static-fired for 30 seconds at Launch Complex 19, Cape Kennedy, producing combined total thrust of more than half a million pounds. Purpose of test was to evaluate overall Gemini launch vehicle system performance—fueling, countdown, ignition and cutoff commands, guidance control, and telemetry; and to verify engine performance by thrust generation and engine gimbaling. The stages were mounted side-by-side on separate mounts; electrical signal cut off first-stage engine after 30 sec., then started second-stage engine, which was cut off by radio signal from ground computer just as in actual flight. Charles W. Matthews, Gemini Project Manager, Msc, said static-firing test met all prelaunch requirements, (msc Release 64-9; M&R, 1/27/64,10)
James J. Kramer, research scientist at NASA Lewis Research Center, was named Project Manager of large (260-in.) solid-propellant rocket motor demonstration project at LRC. (Lewis News, 9/25/64, 1)
NASA instituted revised patent waivers and related procurement regulations in accordance with the late President Kennedy’s directive for a more uniform patent policy among Federal agencies. New regulations gave contractors greater chance to obtain patent rights to their commercially applicable inventions made in the course of work on Government contracts. Announced Aug. 21, the new regulations were expected to accelerate contractors’ efforts to identify and report technological advances, thus enhancing technology utilization from the space program. (NASA Release 64-209; Av. Wk., 10/5/64, 26)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in Tyler, Tex., that the U.S., “in the short space of three years, has more than tripled its industrial, scientific, engineering, and governmental space capability. This was accomplished through the close cooperation of what might be called the ‘triad’ of government, industry, and the university community, in carrying out the largest peacetime research and development effort in all history. Management techniques developed in coordinating this complex endeavor sure beginning to find their way into business and industrial executive processes. Experience has been gained that may prove useful in solving other difficult national and international problems... .” (Text)
mariner ill (Mars 64) was launched into interplanetary orbit from Cape Kennedy with an Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle, but spacecraft communications failed when fairing did not jettison, preventing solar panel deployment. The Agena stage pushed the mariner iii into a parking orbit around the earth and coasted to the proper position for injection into a Mars trajectory. The Agena again ignited 32 min. after launching and sent the spacecraft toward Mars. Tracking data indicated that the second-stage Agena D booster shut down four seconds early on the second burn, mariner ill’s four solar panels, designed to use power from the sun to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries, were prevented from deploying by failure of nose fairing to jettison. Further, the spacecraft did not align itself properly with the sun so that the communications antennas would be properly pointed. In addition to TV equipment for taking pictures of the Martian surface, mariner in carried instruments to study radiation, space dust, and magnetic forces near Mars and in unmapped space after swinging past the planet. This launch marked the first use of the USAF’s new Agena D upper stage and also the first U.S. space mission requiring a second igniting of the Agena D. (nasa Releases 266, 288; ksc Release 20664; msc Roundup, 11/11/64, 7; Sullivan, NYT, 11/6/64, 16; Chic. Trib., 11/6/64; Balt.Sun, 11/6/64,1; hhn-48)
NASA employees Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., and Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr., were among the 10 outstanding young men in Government service awarded the 1963 Arthur S. Flemming Awards. Kraft was Assistant Director for Flight Operations, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Townsend, Assistant Director of Space Science and Satellite Applications, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Notice)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at Hq. press conference that U.S.—U.S.S.R. communications experiments with echo II balloon satellite would begin after Feb. 21. In response to question, Mr. Webb said failure of attempts to acquire lunar photographs had not adversely affected Apollo schedule: “. . . up to this time we have not had to make any changes in the program due to this, nor do I think we will.” Asked whether 1969 date for manned lunar landing was a “deadline” or a “planning date”, Mr. Webb said: “The view President Kennedy had . .. was that he was setting a deadline by which he wanted this nation to get the job done, and he was providing resources for us to plan the flight in 1967, or early 1968, giving some leeway for intractable technical problems, for unknown and unforeseeable things, and also to avoid having to put into parallel development systems that would be more expensive if done that way. . . . “Now, the 1967, early 1968 target date that we were setting was to mobilize the effort, to press forward with it, but not to do so in such a way as to run this cost up from $20 billion to something much higher. “So we were thinking of it as pretty much of a deadline that it was in the interests of this nation to meet. “Now, with the cuts last year of $600 million and the reorganization of the effort to all-up systems testing, the cancellation of a number of Saturn flights, things of this kind, I think you’ve got to think of it somewhat differently. I think the target date for the flights, which is a tight date but still attainable, is mighty close to the January 1, 1970 period. “. . . I believe we can do it within the latter six months of 1969 if we proceed vigorously under the plan we have presented to the Congress. But again we don’t have any leeway. . . . We have lost that, and we’ve got no more than what I’d call a fighting chance to do this by January 1,1970.” Mr. Webb discussed NASA relationship with Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, manager of NASA’s lunar and planetary exploration programs. The current three-year contract “expires next June and we have now for some months been examining together with the California Institute of Technology ways and means to make a better relationship from their standpoint and from NASA’s standpoint.” Mr. Webb said NASA was seeking a reorganization of JPL to achieve a “hardheaded type of industrial management.” (Finney,- NYT, 2/12/64; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/12/64; Simons, Wash, Post, 2/12/64; M&R, 2/17/64, 16)	_	_
General William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in as Assistant Administrator for Management Development, NASA. In this position, General McKee would be responsible for review and development of recommendations concerning major management matters and would report directly to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 64-216; nasa Announcement 64-190)
Unnamed NASA officials were quoted as saying U.S. had detected Soviet failure within the last week in an attempt to launch a probe to the moon, by John Finney in New York Times. Failure was said to have occurred within minutes after rocket booster rose from launch pad near the Aral Sea. (Finney, NYT, 4/30/64,9)
Sixth anniversary of NASA. In Headquarters ceremony honoring the first NASA Administrator, President T. Keith Glennan of Case Institute of Technology (Aug. 1958-Jan. 1961), and the first Deputy Administrator, Dr. Hugh L. Dry den (Aug. 1958-present), official portraits were unveiled. Administrator James E. Webb made informal remarks on the role of NASA in fulfillment of the American concept of power and purpose in human affairs. He read a letter from President Lyndon B. Johnson which said, in part: “We must be first in space and in aeronautics to maintain first place on earth. The accomplishments of this past year show clearly that we are making rapid progress to achieve and maintain that position. “Significant as our success has been, it is but indicative of the far greater advances that mankind can expect from our aeronautical and space efforts in the coming years. We have reached a new threshold of competence in the air and beyond it in space which opens to us the widest possibilities for the future.” Associate Administrator Dr. Robert Seamans (1960-present) reviewed the personal contributions of Drs. Glennan and Dryden in the initiation and progress of the U.S. civilian space program. Friends and relatives of those honored and official NASA guests attended the ceremony. (Program; Letter)
In Aviation Week editorial, Robert Hotz said that until the past two years most nations in the world considered space technology to be monopoly of the competing U.S. and U.S.S.R. Now they were beginning to participate in space programs themselves. Two primary reasons given were technical success of weather and communications satellites and “enlightened and effective” program in international cooperation operated by NASA. Hotz saw international space cooperation as the most powerful force binding nations of the world if early promise of international space technology is realized. “Perhaps the most heartening aspect of the international expansion of space activity is the manner in which the hard technical and financial facts are persuading nations to work together on cooperative projects ranging from global satellite systems to booster development and scientific exploration. “Part of this has been achieved through the NASA international cooperation program for which Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy NASA Administrator; Arnold Frutkin, head of the international programs office of NASA; and Dr. Harry Goett, director of Goddard Space Flight Center, deserve special credit. “The other portion has been achieved through Communications Satellite Corp., currently organizing global communications system with heavy international participation, and through the U.S. Weather Bureau’s leadership in developing a global weather satellite system. . . .” (Av. Wk„ 7/6/64; CR, 7/31/64, A4040-41)
Dr. Alan T. Waterman, physicist and former director of National Science Foundation, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. He is also a member of the NASA Historical Advisory Committee. (nasa Release 64-240) *	NASA msc’s Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, announced Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Lt. Cdr., usn) would serve as his executive assistant. Dr. Gilruth called this a “convalescent assignment,” because Astronaut Carpenter still had minor injuries from a motorbike accident several months ago. Also announced was selection of Carpenter for promotion from Lt. Cdr. to Commander. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/18/64)
DOD announced award of $7,112,913 contract to Franchi Construction Co. for construction of NASA launch operations center headquarters building at Merritt Island, Fla. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers. (dod Release 96-64) During January: President Johnson sent letters to all major space/defense contractors urging them to achieve significant reductions in expenditures. In separate letters from NASA Administrator James E. Webb, contractors were told of three areas offering greatest potential for significant savings: purchasing at lowest price compatible with reliability requirements, placing greater emphasis on incentives, and reducing operating costs, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/10/64,1)
Second rocket in India’s space program, a Nike-Apache, was launched from Thumba Range on southern tip of Indian peninsula, releasing sodium vapor clouds used to study high-altitude conditions. The Nike-Apache’s peak altitude was estimated at 106 mi. The Physical Research Laboratory of Ahmedabad provided the instrumented payload for the NASA rocket, (nasa Rpt. SRL; Reuters, NYT, 1/9/64, 15)
Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) inserted in Congressional Record a Wall Street Journal article on the “declining demand” for engineers, and said: “According to the Wall Street Journal article, the current slump in demand for engineers results primarily from uncertainty about future spending on defense and space programs. Although the defense budget for the next fiscal year calls for a reduction of only $1.3 billion, the space budget is $200 million above last year’s appropriation. If this minute shift in defense spending is sufficient to bring about a severe curtailment in the demand for engineers and other skilled technicians, it makes one wonder what will happen to our economy when there is more than a token cutback in defense outlays....” (CR, 2/27/64,3666-67)
In NASA Hq. ceremony, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented cash awards to 10 inventors in recognition of their outstanding contributions to space science technology. Awards under the Space Act: $1,000 to Conrad Josias of jpl for invention of “bipolar logarithmic current-to-voltage transducer” which made possible the discovery of interplanetary plasma; $1,000 to James D.	Acord and Howard C. Vivian of jpl for invention of “space vehicle attitude control” employed in Ranger and Mariner spacecraft; $2,000 to Robert C. Baumann and Leopold Winkler of gsfc for invention of “spin adjusting mechanism” used on oso I, syncom ii, and Aerobee sounding rockets; and $4,000 to Harold R. Kaufman of lrc for invention of “ion rocket engine,” representing great step forward in ion propulsion r&d—the engine will he used in first Space Electric Rocket Test flight (Sert I). Awards under the Incentive Awards Act: $1,000 to Pleasant T. Cole, gsfc, for invention of “system for recording and reproducing pulse code modulated data,” capable of achieving significantly larger packing density on magnetic tape to reduce weight requirements; and $1,400 to William C. Morgan, Jack B. Esgar, and Richard H. Kemp of lrc for invention of “thin-walled pressure vessel” for use in testing materials subjected to cryogenic temperatures. (Hootman Memo, 2/18/64; nasa Release 64-45; lrc Release 64—16)
President Johnson transmitted to Congress his annual space report, United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, 1963 (H. Doc. 207). In his accompanying message the President said: “. . . Our space program, in both its civilian and military aspects, is peaceful in purpose and practice. Moreover, it combines such objective with a policy of international cooperation based upon a mutuality of participation and benefits as well as the wide dissemination of knowledge. “Space progress is essential if this Nation is to lead in technology and in the furthering of world peace. Such progress requires the use of substantial resources, which must be employed efficiently and effectively in order that we obtain the maximum benefits with a minimum of waste. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/27/64,1045)
Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D.-Wash.) was quoted as saying: “In view of the tremendous success of the Saturn flight, perhaps further savings in the cost of the space program might be possible between now and the first Saturn V flight by leap-frogging some of the intermediate steps.” (SBD, 1/31/64,169)
NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dry den announced U.S.S.R. had notified U.S. that it would participate in space communications experiments using Echo II passive communications satellite which NASA would orbit in the coming week. Soviet officials planned to begin optical and radio experiments with the 135-ft.-diameter balloon satellite a week after it was orbited. Soviets would photograph Echo II and track it with telescopes as it passed over U.S.S.R., bounce radio signals off the balloon between U.S.S.R. and England. U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative experiments were based on 1963 agreement reached by Dr. Dryden and Soviet Academician A. A. Blagonravov. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/21/64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, interviewed in Washington World, replied to interviewer’s question: “Yes, Gemini is really necessary to the Apollo program. As a matter of fact, Gemini would be necessary as the next major step in manned space flight even if there were no Apollo mission. Gemini provides the United States large increments of manned space flight capability. Gemini is vital to the Apollo program since our astronauts must learn— and perfect—the techniques of rendezvous and docking in space before attempting the trip to the moon and hack. . . .” (nasa)
usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif., acquired 12 more students, bringing enrollment to 35. The school’s one-year course was designed to produce pilots, project managers, or consultants for future manned space programs. {A—N—AF J&R, 5/30/64, 17)
First test patterns had been sent over special cable link between Suitland, Md., and Moscow, for exchange of meteorological data, according to U.S. Weather Bureau. The link was considered operational, could be used any time U.S. and U.S.S.R. agreed on scheduling and other details of the cooperative exchange. The cable was result of cooperative space agreement reached in 1962 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden for the U.S. and Academician A. A. Blagonravov for the U.S.S.R. (Gustaitis, Wash. Post, 10/13/64)
In letter to chairmen of Senate and House space committees—Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) — NASA Administrator James E. Webb detailed findings of committees investigating failure of ranger vi lunar probe. Although the committees had not yet identified any specific cause for failure, Mr. Webb’s letter outlined five major faults in the spacecraft: 1.	The two onboard TV systems “were more complex than required and were not completely redundant. They included a number of common components in which a single failure would lead to disablement of both television systems.” 2.	“Possibilities of failure . . . increased as a. result of practices employed in the design and construction of the spacecraft. . . .” 3.	Preflight ground testing “may have obscured potentially dangerous situations which could have enhanced accidental triggering of critical control circuits.” 4.	The antenna for transmitting the lunar photographs had never been tested with the TV transmitters. 5.	“Because of reluctance to risk possible damage to the space vehicle, pre-launch systems verification was not complete. . . .” (Loory, htns, Wash. Post, 4/3/64, 8)
NASA Administrator James E.' Webb was presented with Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association’s Distinguished Service Honor Gold Medal Award and Certificate at the Association’s annual banquet. {A-N-AF J&R, 5/23/64,2)
It was reported that contractors were accusing nasa of naming a Mars exploration idea “Project Beagle” just to appeal to President Johnson. NASA officials denied this and stated that the project was named after the ship in which Charles Darwin sailed around the world. (Av. Wk.. 7/20/64, 15)
NASA Astronaut Donn F. Eisele dislocated his left shoulder during weightless flight training at Wright-Patterson AFB in KC-135 jet aircraft, and was placed on limited duty for about three weeks. (Houston Post, 9/17/64) ■September 15: Two NASA-USAF memoranda of understanding providing for exchange of technical management and scientific personnel became effective. Signed by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and usaf Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert, the agreements were based on recommendation by joint usaf/nasa Military Requirements Review Group. Previously no NASA personnel had been assigned to USAF; under the new terms, NASA would assign personnel to usaf on a “when-needed” basis. NASA personnel would be GS-13’s and above, and usaf officers assigned to NASA would be majors or higher unless “the position offers exceptional opportunity to the Air Force,” according to agreement. Under basic agreement dating from 1959, about 100 USAF officers were now on duty with NASA, including 13 astronauts, not affected by the agreement, and 40 recent rotc graduates. About 40 more senior officers were scheduled for assignment to NASA in the near future. (nasa Release 64r-234; dod Release 671-64)
In an editorial, Robert Hotz, editor of Aviation Week and Space Technology, said: “There is a . . . good possibility that the national space program may get its most severe shellacking to date if some plans currently finding favor within Administration executive circles are, in fact, implemented. One of these proposals would slice the scientific programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to the bone and concentrate the NASA budget on the Apollo manned lunar landing program. Some portions of the scientific community have been making this charge without much justification for several years. If NASA does virtually abandon its highly successful scientific exploration program now, the howl from scientists will rise in a swift crescendo. It would be a major mistake to make such a drastic switch in what is now a pretty well-balanced NASA effort.” (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,11)
nasa-dod agreement that instrumentation ships required to support NASA and dod space programs would be pooled and operated by dod on behalf of both agencies was announced. By end of 1967 pool would have 20 operational tracking ships. NASA would participate with dod in all phases of the program, including systems engineering and development of the plans and specifications. Navy Dept, would have central responsibility for design, construction, and modification of the ships. Military Sea Transportation Service (msts) would be responsible for ship operation, and dod Range Agencies would be responsible for scheduling and ship instrumentation operation. Senate and House space committees released $83 million of FY 1964 funds, which had been authorized subject to NASA—dod agreement. The funds would be used to acquire three ships from Maritime Reserve Fleet and to modify two ships for Apollo already in the joint tracking system, (nasa Release 64-34; dod Release 137-64; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/64)
A six-month study was concluded of public acceptability of sonic boons that had been conducted by the faa in the Oklahoma City area since February 3, 1964. The study was designed to gather data on public reaction to the noise that would follow the supersonic airliners of the 1970’s. During the test approximately 8 booms a day (total in test, 1,253) were created. During the 6 months the agency received 12,588 telephone calls, most of them complaints. In addition to these direct manifestations of opinion, the Univ. of Chicago conducted a detailed public opinion survey in conjunction with the experiment. Gordon M. Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, said in announcing the completion of the study: “Sonic boom presents the most imposing single challenge to design and operation of a supersonic transport plane. The people of Oklahoma City have been helping explore this challenge as, in effect, major participants in the nation’s supersonic transport development program.” (faa Release 64-74; Clark, NYT, 8/1/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, addressed Texas City Chamber of Commerce, discussing these summarized points: “1. The space program is a sound investment to improve the economic health of the country and is not a wasteful expenditure of funds so long as the program is handled on a business-like basis. “2. The space program is being carried out as a partnership with private enterprise and requires cooperation with communities throughout the country. “3. The space program does not and should not drain resources from other important projects, such as schools and housing; in fact, it stimulates both. “4. The space program is essential to our national security—through both its NASA activities and its Department of Defense activities. “5. The lunar program is a key feature in the space program, as it provides a clear objective and it requires the orderly development of a wide range of competences, all of which will have value for future space performance. “6. International cooperation in our space program can be mutually beneficial and will not impair our national security or inhibit the development of our own space capabilities. “7. The space program stimulates the supply of trained scientists and engineers, but does not require them in such quantities as to interfere with the constructive employment of the vast majority of them in other lines of endeavor.” (Text)
NASA Electronics Research Center Site Evaluation Committee was formalized by Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. First task of the six-man committee would be to draft proposed plan for criteria and procedures to be used in the site evaluation; after doing this, the Committee would begin evaluating proposed sites in the Greater Boston area. Col. Robert P. Young, nasa Executive Officer, was appointed Chairman of the Committee. (NASA Release 64-67; NASA Circular 311)
In an editorial in Astronautics and Aeronautics, H. H. Koelle said: “Suppose . . . that a space station could be made available with working area in the station and a round-trip ticket purchased by individual countries for their scientists, and that an advanced aerospace transportation system will be developed anyway as part of the U.S. space program. Analysis of such an operation indicates that an international research station of this kind could be built in the late 1970s, and that the price of a three-month field trip to the station might well be kept in the order of a million dollars a person. Many countries . . . would be able to pay this price and would enthusiastically participate in the project. During the 1980s, . . . the charges should be reduced considerably, thus increasing international participation.” (A&A, 11/64, 20-21)
Prime contractors of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center were assuming additional responsibilities in Saturn launch vehicles program, MSFC Director Dr, Wemher von Braun announced. Principal contractors immediately affected would be Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., ibm Corp., and General Electric Co. Dr. von Braun said this was “a continuation of the Marshall policy to transfer research and developmental work, as well as fabrication, from ‘in house’ to contractor plants as soon as practical. Not only has this been our philosophy but prime contracts in most cases have spelled out the eventual taking over by industry of full responsibility for major elements and stages of the vehicles. . . .” MSFC would retain overall systems management responsibility for the three Saturn launch vehicles and continue to “maintain a technical and managerial competence in our own organization. Without it we cannot monitor the work of our contractors to insure that we are getting the quality and reliability that a manned space program demands. . . .” (Marshall Star, 2/26/64,10)
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said in Saturday Evening Post “As a Republican I believe in what has been called the ‘conquest of space,’ but which I prefer to think of as a thorough exploration of a new scientific frontier to improve our living here on earth. This is an exploration we should pursue vigorously with a step-by-step program in line with our means and our needs. That was the aim of the space program as initially undertaken during my Administration: On the advice of eminent scientists we conceived a long-range effort, not a stunt, with costs to be stabilized around two billion dollars a year. That hardly could be called picayune by any reasonable standards. “But now, under the Democrats, this program has been blown up out of all proportion. With hysterical fanfare our space research has been presented as a crash effort, as a ‘race to the moon’ between the United States and Russia which we must win at all costs. And the costs are tremendous: They now are running well over five billion dollars a year. The Government now has more than 73,000 engineers and scientists working on the nonmilitary space program, either on the federal payroll or employed under contract. This swollen program, costing more than the development of the atomic bom'b, not only is contributing to an unbalanced budget; it also has diverted a disproportionate share of our brainpower and research facilities from other equally significant problems, including education and automation. “We are breezily assured that the cost and dislocation brought about by this moon race are worthwhile for the new ‘prestige’ they will bring us. There is no way of telling how true that may be, but we can be sure of one thing: The voyage to the moon will set a new record for a trip taken on borrowed money.” {Sat. Eve. Post, 4/11/64, 17—19)
James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, talked and dined with Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., at the home of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of MSC, in Houston. Afterwards, Col. Glenn told an interviewer: “We talked about a number of different areas in which I could work. I want a part-time job, a consulting job.” (NYT, 7/12/64)
Addressing Oklahoma Frontiers of Science Foundation in Oklahoma City during ceremonies celebrating its tenth anniversary, NASA Administrator James E. Webb pointed out that “some of our NASA projects in education and in the transfer of space technology to the general economy owe much to the philosophy and concepts threshed out in the early days of the Foundation. . . .” (Text)
President Johnson presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom, highest U.S. civilian award, to Clarence L. Johnson, designer of U—2 and A—11 aircraft, and 29 other distinguished Americans in White House ceremony. (AP, NYT, 9/15/64, 26) *	NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in New Orleans that progress in development of vehicles for manned lunar flight was “very good.” He predicted: “If things work well, we’ll be there by late 1969. This would not be possible if it were not for Michoud [nasa Michoud Operations].” At present, he said, 11,505 persons were employed at Michoud Operations and $927 million worth of contracts had been let there since it opened. Mr. Webb was in New Orleans to meet with former members of NASA New Orleans Coordinating Committee, formed in 1961 to assist NASA in establishing Michoud Operations. (N.O. Times-Picayune, 9/15/64)
Interviewed in Missiles and Rockets, Presidential Science Adviser Donald F. Hornig replied to question about U.S. space goals after Project Apollo: “There are clearly a series of successively more difficult scientific objectives which we will pursue with unmanned spacecraft. It’s very difficult, though, to document a convincing case for a national commitment on major space goals that are far in the future. In any case, I can’t believe that the momentum gained by our space program is going to be allowed to be lost when we achieve the first major objective.” (M&R, 4/20/64, 35)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in letter to NASA Center Directors and Heads of Headquarters Program and Staff Offices: “I call upon each of you ... to demonstrate full equality of opportunity without regard to sex, and that personal attitudes must not be allowed to operate adversely against women, or men, in recruitment, selection, training, or promotion. ... I now ask your full cooperation in meeting these stated objectives.” (nasa Hq. PB 64-14)
Addressing Aerospace Industries Association Council in Seattle, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, summarized future aerospace trends. He foresaw no immediate substantial decrease in dollar amount of defense spending, but said industry should be able to shift emphasis from production of weapon systems to “other useful types and forms of economic activity”— which he said should be toward an expanding space program and an increase in r&d of advanced weapons technology. Of space program values he said: “The space program has been a catalyst, a stimulus to education at all levels, with particular attention to science and engineering. How much is it worth to have raised the educational sights of our young people and at the same time to have increased significantly the wealth of knowledge with which to condition them? I cannot put a price on it, but I believe its value will exceed the total cost of the space program. “The contribution of our space program to our national security is also considerable. How much more secure are we, due to improved communications, more accurate navigation, more complete weather information, and better world-wide mapping? How much is it worth to be better informed about potential sources of danger? How can we assess the advantage of developing competence to detect and offset possible aggression from space? I cannot put a price on these contributions to national security, but I am confident that their value also exceeds the total cost of the space program. “The space program stimulates the development of new products, new productive processes, and new managerial techniques. I cannot place a precise value upon such innovations, but I would estimate that such investment will repay itself many times over. “A substantial difference in influence in world affairs evolves from whether a country is in a first position or a second position in power. To a significant degree, a nation’s relative position depends on how it stands in advanced technology. . . . “Combining, as the space program does, the best talents in management, in engineering, and in science, with the most modem facilities available, the net result is the production of progress. A program which stimulates education, expands research and development, augments total productivity, increases employment, and improves our international relations, is a program of the greatest economic significance. . . .” (Text)
The platform adopted by the Republican National Convention contained a number of statements pertaining to the U.S. space program. The platform stated: “This administration has delayed research and development in advanced weapons systems and thus confronted the American people with a fearsome possibility that Soviet advances, in the decade of the 1970’s, may surpass America’s present lead. Its misuse of cost effectiveness has stifled the creativity of the Nation’s military, scientific, and industrial communities. “It has failed to originate a single new major strategic weapons system after inheriting from a Republican administration the most powerful military force of all time. It has concealed a lack of qualitative advance for the 1970’s by speaking of a quantitative strength which by then will be obsolete. It has not demonstrated the foresight necessary to launch as many as five satellites. The system, called Multiple Orbit“It has endangered security by downgrading efforts to prepare defenses against enemy ballistic missiles. It has retarded our own military development for near and outer space, while the enemy’s development moves on. . . . “We pledge . . . replanning of the present space program to provide for a more orderly, yet aggressively pursued step-by-step development, remaining alert to the danger of overdivision of skilled personnel in critical shortage from other vital areas such as health, industry, education, and science.” (Text, CR, 7/28/64, A3934, A3939) Mid-July: The U.S. Weather Bureau prepared a letter to the World Meteorological Organization advising that Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) pictures from TIROS VIII were no longer usable. Useful apt pictures totaled 4,067. (GSFC Historian)
Rep. F. Bradford Morse (R.—Lowell) of Massachusetts said he had written letter to NASA Administrator Jame E. Webb recommending NASA abandon plans to locate Electronics Research Center in Cambridge and, instead, select another site in a nearby community. In his letter, he said: “It is difficult to understand why the administration [nasa] persists in locating in Cambridge when there is such intense opposition. . . .” (Boston Sun. Globe, 10/4/64)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in informal press gathering in Washington that when nasa had decided on 30 trainees for its astronaut pool, it had anticipated losing 4 of the 30 men, for various reasons, before completion of Project Apollo. Commander Shepard said, “we figured on two casualties as a result of space flight,” explaining that the figure was “just pulled out of the air” but was considered a reasonable guess. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden emphasized “We have no idea what the casualty rate will be. We’re hoping it will be zero.” (Troan, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 2/21/64)
Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.) submitted in Congressional Record “An Accounting of Stewardship 1961—1964,” which included summary of U.S. accomplishments in space: “Since 1961 the United States has pressed vigorously forward with a 10-year, $35-billion national space program for clear leadership in space exploration, space use, and all important aspects of space science and technology. “Already this program has enabled the United States to challenge the early Soviet challenge in space booster power and to effectively counter the Soviet bid for recognition as the world’s leading nation in science and technology. . . .” Among the achievements listed: Saturn I rocket’s successful flight; Saturn IB and V development; mastery of liquid hydrogen as rocket fuel; six manned Mercury space flights; Gemini spacecraft and Titaq II launch vehicle test-flight; Apollo spacecraft development; first close-up observations of another planet (Venus) with mariner ii and pictures of the moon with RANGER vu; orbiting observatory program initiation; Tiros weather satellite operation; and ComSatCorp establishment. “In short, the United States has matched rapid progress in manned space flight with a balanced program for scientific investigations in space, practical uses of space, and advanced research and technological pioneering to assure that the new challenges of space in the next decade can also be met, and U.S. leadership maintained.” (CR, 9/15/64, 21498)
ranger vii briefing to members of Congress, with Harris (“Bud”) Schurmeier, Ranger Project Manager, JPL, and Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar and Planetary Div., Univ. of Arizona, as principal speakers. Dr. Kuiper said: “I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that a new era has begun in the exploration of the Moon.. . . “Here, in one step last week a gain of a factor of 2,000 was made— 2,000	in the effective magnification of the image of the lunar surface [earlier reported as 1,000].. . .” Discussing preliminary results of the lunar photographs, Dr. Kuiper said: “. . . down to the size of approximately two or three feet, the primary craters caused by direct impacts on the moon covered ... an area amounting to about one percent of the lunar surface. So this is a very great help in landing operations, either by unmanned soft landings, such as Surveyor, or manned landings as planned for Apollo. “. . . the innocent-looking ray systems, such as one has around Copernicus, Tycho, Kepler, a number of craters really are danger spots. When you look at them closely, . . . one sees them resolved into multitudes, clusters of secondary craters. ... I wouldn’t be surprised if slopes of the order of 15 degrees would be found. This would be somewhat difficult. This is a rather uncomfortable inclination on which to land. “. . . the surface between these craters is, smoother than I had thought. ... I have . . , many times hypothesized that if you would go to higher and higher magnification, higher and higher resolution, that there would be a large number of cracks on the moon, fissures similar to those one finds on lava fields such as on Mauna Loa, Hawaii, or recent lava fields which have not yet been eroded. “This apparently is not the case. This was wrong . . . these cracks are not present. It looks as if the surface of the moon has been buffeted, has been simply pounded on, and has been sort of smoothed out, and the cracks filled in the process.. . . “Now the question is, what about the surface? What is the nature of the surface. ... It is not just a loose pile of sand, dust. It has considerable stiffness. And . . . while we know from other data that the top structure is open, it is sort of like snow or a biscuit, a cracker. It has an open structure; nevertheless, it looks as if the moon may have considerable bearing strength. That, however, is something which must be measured separately, with separate equipment. “However, we can say that there are not enormous depths, several feet, ten, or a hundred feet of dust, which would simply not have permitted formation of the sharp little craters as we observe them.” (NASA Transcript)
Echo, Relay, and Syncom communications satellites were presented to the Smithsonian Institution in ceremony at Museum of History and Technology. Among the NASA officials participating in the presentation were Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Langley Research Center Director Dr. Floyd Thompson, and Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry Goett. Carl T. Rowan, Director of U.S. Information Agency, said in address at the ceremony: “As we view the unfolding drama of the American space program it can be clearly seen that one of its most significant aspects is that it has been carried out in the full, open view of an interested and anxious world. When it was written into the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 that the activities of the new space agency were to be open to the widest practicable and appropriate spread of information, the Congress cast into law one of the deepest instincts of the American people. It was an act of faith to specify that this enterprise should be carried on openly before the gaze of those who wished us well and those who hoped otherwise; it was truly an expression of faith in freedom and the ability of Americans to meet the challenges and opportunities of an era when each day unfolds new perils and new promises. “If openness to public scrutiny was a basic concept in the entire space program, the decision to carry out a satellite program dedicated to freedom of communications on a global scale represented that concept converted into a highly meaningful fact. . . . “It is obvious that the over-riding quality of communications satellites is their internationalism. A practical system based on communication satellites is inherently universal, for it would be of little use if it did not mean communicating between the peoples of widely separated lands. Its basic premise involves the inclusion of as many countries as possible in the interchange that the system allows. “This presentation of communication satellites to our national museum of science and technology is, therefore, most truly an international occasion. For it is their international utility in the cause of world understanding, peace and progress which gives them their deepest meaning.” (Text)
(1) Isolated locations and atmospheric dispersion, and “(2) Containment and neutralization. . . . “In . . . our nuclear propulsion activities, neither routine reactor development testing and flight operations nor conceivable accidents are expected to release sufficient radioactivity into the atmosphere to constitute a hazard to public health and safety. “In chemical propulsion, there are some propellants that are toxic prior to combustion and some rocket exhausts that contain toxic products. Fortunately, the NASA space program is primarily concerned with non-toxic propellants. In our largest program, the Apollo effort, for example, the giant Saturn I and V boosters both bum oxygen and kerosene in their first stages and oxygen and hydrogen in their upper stages. The Apollo spacecraft uses toxic nitrogen tetroxide and a mixture of hydrazine and unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine, but the quantity is small compared to that used hy the Saturn boosters . . . [and is not used] until the Apollo is well into space under normal operation. . . . “In most rocket testing and in vehicle launches, the rocket exhausts directly into the atmosphere. The very high exhaust temperature and velocity serve to rapidly disperse the exhaust products. In some rocket testing we must simulate the low pressures encountered at altitude. In these facilities, the rocket exhausts into a duct where there is an opportunity to scrub the products with water before discharging into the atmosphere. A unique facility, an example of the containment and treatment method for use in populated areas, was built at the Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, for rockets using fluorine. This facility, put into operation in 1956, was designed to handle hydrogen-fluorine rockets up to 20,000 pounds thrust. . . .” (Testimony)
The U.S. and the U.S.S.R. reached further agreement during negotiations conducted in Geneva on cooperative efforts in space research. A joint weather satellite program would go into operation by the end of this year. The weather program would consist of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. launching meteorological satellites on a coordinated basis with the data being exchanged via a special telegraphic link between Moscow and Washington. In addition, preliminary agreement was reached for extension of scientific cooperation in space matters to cover biology and medicine. Although details of this agreement were not available, it was reported to cover a wide exchange of information on the biological and medical problems raised by prolonged manned space flights. The negotiations were conducted by Dr. Hugh Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, and A. A. Blagonravov, a member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences; both agreements were subject to the formal approval of their governments. (Wash. Post, 6/6/64; NYT, 6/6/64; upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/6/64)
In Astronautics & Aeronautics article on Germany’s space program, Dietrich E. Koelle discussed recoverable sounding rockets being studied. Preliminary research and development as well as testing had been begun on the new guidance system for these rockets, which would make guided descent with assistance of Rogallo wing. Largest German space project was production of third stage for eldo launch vehicle, which would have its first live flight-test in 1966.	(A&A, 5/64, 66 ff) During May: At annual meeting of Soviet Academy of Sciences, Academician L. A. Artsimovich, physicist, observed that U.S.S.R. did not have a leading role in astronomy because of inadequate facilities. He said that astronomy was more important than high-energy physics, but “our expenditures on high-energy physics many times exceed those on astronomy.” Head of the Academy M. V. Keldysh replied: “There are some areas of science in which it is necessary for us under all conditions to maintain a high level. But we don’t have to try to maintain such a level in absolutely all sectors. In scientific development, it is necessary to base oneself on international scientific cooperation. “I think that it is from this aspect we must examine the problems of astronomy’s development and in this area broadly utilize international cooperation. It is not obligatory to try to have in our country the world’s largest telescopes and radio telescopes, and telescopes in balloons, and on sputniks, etc.” (Schwartz, NYT, 6/1/64, 2)
In letter to Speaker of the House and President Pro Tempore of the Senate, NASA Administrator James E. Webb indicated NASA electronics research center should be located in the Greater Boston area. “It is our carefully considered opinion that to meet the specific requirements of the nasa program in respect to time and in respect to existing resources, the center should be located in the Greater Boston area.” In accordance with P.L. 88-113, NASA had reviewed some 50 locations as possible sites for the center, (nasa LAR III/18; upi, Houston Chron., 2/1/64)
DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-II facility at Seal Beach, Calif, (dod Release 788-64) Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on this concept have shown that the basic station module should have a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards banquet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life. The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revitalizing effect upon our whole economy—our whole educational system— our whole attitude toward the future. Let us use all our power of persuasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military possibilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the dod totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that is 1961 through 1964, the dod spent about $4.6 billion on its space responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and development. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observation, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation, command and control techniques, interception, and manned and unmanned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from Tyuratam range at the 65° inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites, these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text; A&A, 11/64,116; Dr.EdwardC. Welsh) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights, said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least 81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192 were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were injected into escape trajectories, and 84 were listed as failures. (Text) Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload capacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan III, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-biter were launched as two separate Titan III payloads, rather than as a combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk., 11/9/64, 27) aiaa made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1964 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems operations”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C. Innis, usaf pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, until Oct. 1964 NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col. Robert C. Miller (usaf) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on turbulence. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19; msc Roundup, 11/11/64,1) Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA’s Flight Research Center, described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV). Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and checkout flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965. The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control rockets were operated briefly. The llrv was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically regulated to counterbalance five-sixths- of the vehicle’s weight to compensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth. This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forthcoming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable of delivering from 100 to 500 lbs. thrust each, would be used to regulate lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar take-off. (frc Release 28-434) Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. O. Tischler, Director of NASA oart Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of msfc Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The authors reported that the F-l engine represented “the largest thrust engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-l engine has been under development for six years. Five F-l’s will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000 pounds. . . . “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than 15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. . . . “[Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated almost as much test time as in the previous five years. . . .” (Text) November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa’s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile program on a top-priority basis. . . . The second decision a year later was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort, completely separate from the ballistic missile program. . . . The third decision . . . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. . . . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s 1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.” Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of space. “As sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space, as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize on his presence in space.” (Text) 766-598 0—65----25
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, said in address at Commercial Museum, Philadelphia: “It takes a certain type of ability to manufacture plausible-sounding myths, and unfortunately such ability has been working overtime regarding the space program. . . .” He examined “several of these confusing rumors”: national security— “The critic who belittles what is being done in space to strengthen the nation’s defense is either ignorant, irresponsible, or both. . . . Progress of a substantial nature is being made in strengthening our national security through space competence”; crash program—“Crash programs have unlimited funds, unlimited overtime, and parallel approaches to the end objective. None of these aspects applies to the space program or even to the lunar project . . .”; either /or philosophy—“Actually investments stimulate other investments; they do not deter them. . . . What is more, decreased spending in education, for example, does not automatically increase the funds available for space exploration, or vice versa . . .”; and slowdown—“such an approach would be of great benefit to the Soviets as it would make it easier for them to increase their lead in some aspects of space and attain the lead in others. Do not think for a moment that they are not trying hard to do just that. So far this year, the USSR has put more than twice as many spacecraft into orbit as they had put into orbit by this time last year. In a sense, they are doubling their space effort. . . . To slow down a carefully planned project, such as Apollo, would be to increase its cost and reduce its likelihood of timely success. ... Those who propose the stretchout or slowdown in the space program are in fact arguing for inefficiency and higher costs as well as delayed accomplishments.” (Text) *	Appointment of Charles W. Harper, authority on simulation and aircraft flight research at NASA Ames Research Center, as Director of Aeronautical Research, NASA Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology, was announced by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 64-239)
NASA Administrator James E. Wdbb, addressing Texas Technological College, said that the role of NASA was “essentially the same as that of its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Both were created in an atmosphere of chagrin and deep concern because prior to World War I and following World War II the nation had forfeited early leadership in a new field of technological opportunity—aeronautics in 1915 and space in 1957. In recommending the creation of naca in 1915, a committee of the Smithsonian Institution presented a Memorial to the Congress which began: ‘This country led in the early development of heavier-than-air machines. Today it is far behind. . . .’ “This was at the outset of a war in which, despite the fact that the Wright Brothers had first demonstrated powered flight at Kity Hawk in 1903, the United States had no aircraft design or manufacturing capability of its own. No aircraft of American design or manufacture flew in Europe during World War I, and it remained for naca, in the years which ensued, to provide the basic research and development upon which achievement of ultimate U.S. air supremacy, civil and military, was based. . . . “The advent of Sputnik I in 1957 revealed that once again, this time in space, the United States had neglected a clear opportunity for technological leadership and to overcome the deficiency, the President and the Congress turned once again to the formula which had proven so effective in aeronautics for more than 40 years. It created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration as a research and development agency charged with restoring the nation’s leadership in space by developing the rockets, the spacecraft, the facilities, the scientific knowledge, and the operational skill required. And like naca, nasa has fulfilled its mission to the extent that we have now reached a point of parity in space with the Soviet Union. . . .” (Text)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD i spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said voskhod i was first of a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard voskhod I, revealed he had made astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aeronavigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously on hoard the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed voskhod i’s attitude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described voskhod i’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the spacecraft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after parachutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of general discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/ 22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/22/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/64) • Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I. Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the moon “may be somewhat commonplace. . . . The moon will also be serving as an important scientific station for radio astronomers . . . [and] many other kinds of scientists. . . . We may be maintaining sizable installations on the moon. . . . “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . . In space stations orbiting above the earth we shall likely be fabricating space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one continent to another. . . . “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory expeditions to the outermost reaches. We will be considering the extension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am somewhat doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man. “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established outposts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I doubt that this will take place on the moon, unless the moon turns out to contain resources of great economic value to us here on earth. The resources required for such extensive exploration of Mars will require cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not, likely to be accomplished. . . .” (Text)
The report that the White House might establish a “space czar” cabinet post to direct dod and NASA space programs was discounted. The White House was against it, as were Secretary of Defense McNamara and NASA Administrator Webb. (M&R, 11/16/64, 7)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, discussed utilization of space technology for commercial application before American Management Association in New York: “In the present century, the lag from basic discoveries to applications has become progressively shorter. The Space Age is still further reducing the lag. “Two major programs are under way to meet the Congressional mandate for the widest possible dissemination of the results of space activities. The first aims to make available the primary technical data to aerospace scientists and engineers. The second repackages the information and moves space-generated technology out of the agency’s laboratories and the plants of its contractors into the non-space industrial complex. “NASA collects, organizes, and disseminates scientific and technical information on its in-house and contractor work by means of the latest in computer, microfilm, and other methods. Decentralization with local access is the keynote. “To be of most use this information must be identified and repackaged to meet the special needs of nonaerospace industries. This is the purpose of the Technology Utilization Program, the first national program of its type. Staffs at each NASA Center are systematically organizing the reporting of new or improved ideas, materials, methods, and technology developed in the course of research and development activities. The more promising reports go for analysis to a group of industrial research institutes familiar with current industrial needs and requirements. If the analysis indicates promise, reports are published and indexed so that they are readily available to any segment of the economy that may find them useful. “NASA is making significant contributions to the growth of science and technology in most major fields. More important, NASA is dealing with the organization and utilization of expanding knowledge in a highly advanced and, we believe, very effective manner.” (Text)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, DOD Deputy Director for Space, Directorate of Defense Research & Engineering, discussed the objectives of the military space program at Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers’ Winter Convention on Military Electronics, Los Angeles: “Our problems . . . are twofold: First: the United States military space program must be one of action, not reaction. We must concern ourselves with military space developments—not necessarily to match or offset any Soviet development, but to sustain and augment our own versatility and strength. The successes we have already obtained should encourage us in this drive. Second, mindful that in the past we often have been optimistic in the short run and pessimistic in the long run, we must expect that some of the new discoveries and developments that appear may suggest applications and capabilities in wholly unplanned ways. Accordingly, while we pursue efforts where applications are clear we must also lay a foundation of technology, knowledge, and experience which is sufficiently broad in scope to provide for future contingencies as they materialize or are identified. “From these considerations, then, are derived the two fundamental goals of the Defense space program: “First, to continue with the development and exploitation of space systems and capabilities which measure up on a cost-effectiveness basis to meet clearly defined high priority national defense requirements. “Second, to develop through a program integrated with other government agencies, such as NASA and the AEC, a broad base of technology and experience to permit the timely development and exploitation of space systems and capabilities which may be needed in the future, recognizing that lead times in certain areas, such as manned military space operations, may be 10 years or longer. . . .” (Text, DOD Release 106-64)
In the U.S. for speaking tour, Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, told the Boston Globe: “. . . I am terribly impressed by the dynamic effort this country is making to be first in space. It appears to me the signs are extremely favorable so far as the West is concerned in the stake it has in America’s space program. . . . “This is the greatest challenge man has ever faced. If you’re going to be the leading power in the world, you simply can’t afford to come in second. . . .” Sir Bernard said press reports quoting him as saying the U.S.S.R. had given up going to the moon were “completely erroneous. “I have every reason to believe the Russians are trying to get to the moon every bit as fast as the Americans are.” (Leland, Boston Globe, 3/19/64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden stressed to Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at opening of its third session in Geneva, that U.S. scientists shared the concern of those from other countries over possible contamination of Mars and other planets. (NYT, 5/23/64)
Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland (usaf), Deputy Commander for Space, afsc, discussed in aas luncheon address the role of usaf in U.S. space program, tracing history of icbm development: “The task for the Air Force in those early days was a tremendous one. It had full responsibility for the development, acquisition, and deployment of an icbm force capable of deterring any missile threat the Soviets might develop. This meant that we had to develop reliable high thrust boosters, materials that could withstand extreme heat caused by re-entry friction, guidance components, and a host of subsystems for use in our icbm’s. We had to develop command, control and tracking systems, and a wide range of support and test facilities for launch and retrieval. We had to recruit and train a tremendous force of highly skilled specialists and technicians. In addition we had to set up whole new management structures and apply expedited management methods under which these tasks could be accomplished with the greatest possible speed. “Time was the critical factor. The Soviets had a very substantial advance in technological lead times over us. For this reason it was essential that we have the fullest cooperation and support from all segments of our society. The response to these needs was characteristic of the American people. . . . “We had tremendous support from many government agencies. The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, which became the National Aeronautics and Space Agency in 1958, gave unfailing support. For example, naca’s Moffett Laboratories did a major portion of the high speed wind tunnel testing for our nose cone development program. naca’s Cleveland Propulsion Laboratories provided vital support to the Air Force in the rocket engine field. These are just two examples of the highly successful partnership which has evolved between the Air Force as the primary military agency in space and the NASA as the primary civilian agency in space. The partnership continues to be one of the most vital and dynamic aspects of the national space effort. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-51)
Richard H. Nelson, Boeing’s project manager for production of Saturn V rockets, said production was about 10 weeks behind schedule because of a parts shortage. However, first rocket scheduled for flight was to be delivered on schedule in late summer or fall of 1966. Present delay affected Saturns designed to test design and engines in ground firings at msfc. Last 10 of Saturn V’s were expected to be delivered to Cape Kennedy by late 1968. Nelson was addressing Aviation Writers Association in Houston. (Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told University Club in New York that NASA’s last 25 attempts to place satellites in orbit were all successful. Of the 25, only one payload failed to function. Mr. Webb pointed out that in 1959, NASA’s first full year of operation, the record showed 6 successes and 13 failures. By 1961, rocket reliability “had improved to the point that we had 54 successful space flights with five successes for each failure.” (NYT, 1/10/64, 85)
At MSC press conference, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Deputy Project Manager of Project Gemini, stated that an experiment assigned to the second manned flight (GT-4) in Project Gemini would involve the first exposure of an astronaut to the hazards of outer space without full space vehicle protection. He said that the experiment would involve “stepping into space,” but modified this later to say that it might involve nothing more than the crewman’s opening up the spacecraft hatch and standing up in his seat In addition to this experiment, the second flight (scheduled for early 1965) also would include other scientific assignments, including medical tests, radiation measurements, and measurement of the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, NYT, 7/30/64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dry den, appearing on CBS radio program “Capitol Cloakroom,” said that before U.S. and U.S.S.R. could cooperate in a manned space flight effort, the U.S.S.R. would have to radically change its secrecy policy in space exploration. Some changes might be required in U.S. space policies also. “To conduct cooperative manned flights,” Dr. Dryden said, “I think you’d have to . . . start from the beginning with a joint team to consider all the problems together.” Regarding U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements reached on weather satellites, communications satellites, and magnetic field studies, Dr. Dryden commented that “implementation of the agreements has been proceeding rather slowly. . . . We hope they’ll give us some clear indication as to whether they are ready to exchange cloud pictures in 1964, or not.” Regarding Project Apollo timetable, Dr. Dryden said that if Congress supported the proposed budget for the project it should be possible to land a man on the moon by 1970. However, two year’s “slack” built into the schedule to allow for contingencies was lost by the FY 1964 budget reduction, (upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/3/64; Wilson, Minneapolis Morning Trib., 1/3/64)
Stanford Research Institute was being awarded $1,409,346 contract for study and evaluation of Nike-X system’s potential effectiveness, dod announced. Nike-X project at Redstone Arsenal, Ala., awarded the contract, (dod Release 708-64) * Report of Aviation Human Resources Study Board, created by faa last February and chaired by Dan A. Kimball, was released by faa. Study showed that career planning and manpower training were deficient for meeting needs of civil aviation for the next 20 years. Comparatively few people under 30 were now learning to fly. Enrollment in aviation courses had declined, number of schools offering aviation training was decreasing, and only a few military trained airmen were seeking professional aviation careers. Number of professional pilots needed by airlines and general aviation was estimated at 3,650 in 1965, 4,300 in 1970, 5,700 in 1975, and 6,300 in 1980. Report urged expansion of on-the-job and apprenticeship training programs, scholarships, extensive career motivation programs, and other measures, (faa Release 64-89) September 30-October 1: faa sponsored National Aviation System Symposium in Washington, which was attended by leaders of airlines and aircraft manufacturing and officials in other Government agencies. In address at the symposium faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby discussed current national air space system and forecast the future of aviation. He outlined some aviation goals: “It is in the national interest to see the products of our entire aviation industry sold to the other nations of the world. . . . [Also, we must] promote the use of our concepts, techniques and procedures of managing an airspace and an airport system. “In my opinion, our most important domestic goal is the establishment of a truly effective air transportation system. In terms that the traveling public can. understand, this means the connection of any two population centers within the United States by a door-to-door travel' time of not more than 8 hours. . . . “Finally, there is an over-riding goal which must be uppermost in the minds of everyone. None of the accomplishments I have already discussed will be possible if they are not accompanied by improvements in air safety and, here, primary reliance must be on the aviation community itself. . . .” (Text, CR, 10/2/64, 23043-46) During September: After dod installed small ground station in Saigon, military communications experiments using syncom II communications satellite began between Saigon and Hawaii. Limited experiments also were made with syncom hi, which was in a position to relay messages from Saigon to Camp Roberts, Calif, syncom ii was being used on a virtually 24-hour basis, dod had been experimenting with syncom II for months—before installation of Saigon station, when syncom ii relayed messages between Manila and points in the U.S., and even earlier, when the satellite relayed military communications over the Atlantic Ocean. (Bus. Wk., 9/12/64; Finney, NYT, 9/29/64,4) During September: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, described use of nuclear energy in space propulsion and electric-power generation: “We have observed repeatedly how a given technology has been advanced 'by the military requirements and how this technology is later borrowed for consumer products. However, these underlying technologies may be catalyzed with equal effectiveness by significant peacetime objectives set by the President, as exemplified by the Nation’s space program. “Therefore, the nation must support activities during peacetime which have as their purpose large-scale technological goals separated from commercial and military needs. The application of nuclear energy to space exploitation offers such a goal—one which can provide enormous subsidiary benefits in addition to opening the gateway to deep space.” (GE Forum, 7/9/64,15-17)
Senate’s narrow margin of defeating amendment to cut NASA’s FY 1965 Apollo authorization by 10% was subject of editorial by Robert Hotz in Aviation Week: “. . . There should be little satisfaction for supporters of the U.S. space program in the narrow margin by which the Fulbright amendment was defeated. It indicates clearly what a long, hard pull still lies ahead to educate the people of this country fully on the long-term needs to maintain this nation’s pre-eminence in the vital area of space technology. There will never be any lack of criticism of any legislative program that has progress as its goal. But it should be the genuine concern of the supporters of the U.S. space program to state their case with such force and clarity that this conservative carping from Sen. Fulbright and his ilk will produce only the hollow echo in history that it merits.” (Av. Wk., 6/29/64,11)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in his remarks in Grand Rapids, Mich.: “We have a fighting chance to maintain our schedules for the manned lunar exploration mission in this decade. By so doing, we will increase our ability to operate in space for any mission the national interest may require. And we will be using space for peace, discouraging those with other ideologies from political propaganda or military threats. . . .” (Text)
JPL dedicated its new Space Flight Operations Facility at Pasadena, Calif., the facility to act as command center for future unmanned space flights to the moon and planets. Participating in dedication ceremonies were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Rep. George P. Miller, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Dr. Homer E. Newell, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, and Dr. William H. Pickering. At dedication ceremony, radar signal was bounced off planet Venus, the 83 million mi. round trip taking seven minutes and 25 sec. (SBD, 5/14/64,75-76; AP, Houston Post, 5/14/64) 9 At the dedication of the jpl Space Flight Operations Facility, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, remarked: “Often in our discussions of the Space Program we refer to the ‘manned program’ and the ‘unmanned program.’ We even talk about manned space science and unmanned space science. Strictly speaking, this is loose talk. There is, in fact, no such thing as unmanned science. Man and his thinking are the prime ingredients of science. “In the Space Program, it becomes simply a matter of where the man is in relation to his instruments and measuring devices. For those space missions that we call unmanned, man is back on earth while his eyes and ears and other senses are extended electronically and mechanically far out into space by the spacecraft and its instrumentation. From his remote position, he must monitor, issue commands, receive and record data, make routine or emergency decisions as required in a continuing interchange with his inanimate partner out in space. “It is to make this partnership effective and productive of data, measurements, observations, and information that a centralized facility like the sfof is necessary. . . .” (Text)
NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight was holding three days of meetings with msc officials on problems related to Project Apollo. Members of Committee, established by nasa Administrator James E. Webb in December 1963, and which functioned in advisory capacity to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, delved into problems posed by launch vehicle systems, spacecraft systems, launch operations, science program, and space medicine. MIT physicist Dr. Charles Townes said at msc meeting of the Committee that he believed astronauts, not scientists, should be first men to explore moon. Scientists, he said, would concentrate on their own specialties in exploring the moon’s surface, but astronauts trained in scientific principles would bring back important information on the moon as a whole, (msc Roundup, 7/8/64, 1; Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee that 15 Saturn V flights were planned for Project Apollo program, the lunar landing to be accomplished in the last three months of 1969 with the fifteenth flight. Webb also said that if the proposed $5.3 billion nasa budget for fiscal year 1965 were cut so that the Apollo program had to be slowed down, the cost of the program would increase by a billion dollars with each added year of delay. (Text)
Rep. Hale Boggs (D.-La.) asserted that top management personnel would be moved from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., to Michoud Operations, Louisiana, quoting NASA Administrator James E. Webb as saying that NASA was analyzing the situation. Mr. Webb told Huntsville Times of difficulties in hiring and keeping top executives for 766-598 0-65—24 the Alabama installation, added: “There’s nothing in this situation that can’t be corrected, but it has to be worked out.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 10/25/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/26/64)
Titan II launched unmanned Gemini spacecraft into orbit in first Project Gemini flight (GT—1), a test of Titan II launch vehicle system, Gemini spacecraft structural integrity, and spacecraft-launch vehicle compatibility. After an uninterrupted countdown at Cape Kennedy, the Titan II lifted off and placed the spacecraft in orbit of 204-mi. apogee, 99.6-mi. perigee, and 89.27-min. period. Walter C. Williams said all systems functioned “well within manned tolerances.” Only imperfection in the flight was Titan II’s 14-mph excess speed (17,534 instead of 17,520 mph), sending spacecraft 21 mi. higher than planned. However, this was within tolerance and, on manned flight, crewmen could easily correct the extra height. The 7,000-lb. spacecraft was not separated from the spent rocket casing, and NASA officials estimated the orbiting assembly would re-enter the atmosphere and disintegrate in about 3^2 days, (nasa Release 64-70; msc Roundup, 4/15/64,1,3)
Senator John Stennis (D.—Miss.) said on the floor of the Senate:	* “In exploring space, our Nation as well as any other nation is straining at the state-of-the-art and technology. We are moving into a medium where relatively little is known. As we move into such a medium we are confident that we can stay abreast in the field of scientific discovery and its application to space with any other nation. In this medium it is not a case of being able to defend ourselves by building ten planes to every five planes of a potential aggressor nation or five ships to two ships or three tanks to one tank in order to establish our superiority. By staying abreast of advancements in science and technology our Nation will be able to prevent any surprise in this new medium. Our national space program is geared to this accomplishment. As for the present, our Nation subscribes to the philosophy that space should be explored for peaceful purposes, and we will do so. However, should an aggressor attempt to utilize this medium for warlike activities in the future, I am confident that our Nation will be prepared to defend itself.” (CR, 8/5/64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was briefed on comparative U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs by National Aeronautics and Space Council Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh and NASC staff members. Committee Chairman Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said the executive session gave the committee a better appreciation of Soviet scientific space exploration and reaffirmed his belief that the U.S. “must keep up its effort to stay in the space race.” (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 30)
British Minister of Aviation Julian Amery announced at banquet of Society of British Aerospace Companies the government’s decision to develop Black Knight rocket as an experimental satellite launcher. The new rocket, designated Black Prince, would be a three-stage configuration using hydrogen peroxide and kerosene in the first two stages and a solid-propellant spin-stahilized third stage. The first stage would be powered by a cluster of eight engines. Also announced were plans to accelerate research on an ocean-going hovercraft to fill a naval role. (AP, 9/9/64; A&A, 11/64, 116)
NASA officials told Missiles and Rockets that Phase I of the floxed Atlas development program, which was to end this year, would be continued until mid-1965. Also delayed was the decision whether to move on to Phase II, which called for development of flight hardware and two flights in the 1966-67 period. (M&R, 11/9/64,9)
President Charles de Gaulle approved France’s plan to establish satellite launching center on east coast of French Guiana as an alternative to the Hammaguir complex in Algerian desert. Hammaguir site would come under Algerian control in July 1967 unless new treaty could be concluded. Later on, Gen. Robert Aubiniere, director-general of France’s cnes, said in London that by 1966 France’s space program would stabilize at $100 million per year. By 1966 France annually would launch two Diamant-boosted satellites, about 100 sounding rockets, and 300 balloons. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,30)
Space flight of NASA’s Sert I (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft marked first successful operation in space of an electric rocket engine. NASA launched the Sert I on a suborbital trajectory from Wallops Island, using four-stage Scout booster rocket which lofted the Sert I to 2,500-mi. altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean about 2,000 mi. downrange from Wallops. One of the two ion propulsion engines aboard the 375-lb. Sert I was operated twice, for total run of 30 min.; this engine was built by NASA Lewis Research Center. The other engine, built by Hughes Research Laboratories, did not produce thrust. Primary purpose of the experiment was to verify that electrostatic (ion) engines can produce thrust in space, and all technical objectives were achieved. NASA later announced the test was so successful that a second test would not be necessary (Oct. 16). (nasa Releases 64^167, 64-180; lrc Release 64-63; Wallops Release 64-58)
Brig. Gen. Thomas J. Hayes, III, Assistant to the Chief of Army Engineers for NASA Support for the past two years, received certificate of appreciation from NASA Administrator James E. Webb. General Hayes supervised such Engineer Corps activities as design and construction of NASA facilities, lunar mapping, and advance engineering related to future programs. He was cited by NASA particularly for his “skillful direction” in the “planning, design and construction of the massive and complex structures required for the manned space Right system.” (NASA Release 64-84)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications, said before House Subcommittee on nasa Oversight about Project Ranger: “. . . From the outset, the concept was advanced. It was conceived to seize the initiative in space exploration from the Soviet as well as to obtain important information about the moon. Had it succeeded, it certainly would have been a major first for this country, and it may still obtain that objective. The spacecraft itself is quite complex. ... It is comparable to the most sophisticated launch vehicles in terms of electromechanical system complexity. Launch vehicles developed in this country have typically taken 20 or more flights to achieve 50% reliability. Some have not done much better than this after many more firings. Indeed, we have read recently that last year there were 13 consecutive failures of the Atlas. In addition, the Discoverer project took 13 attempts to recover its first payload from orbit. Polaris experienced 5 initial failures before its first success. Skybolt experienced 5 flights without achieving complete mission success. In each of these projects, partial success in early flights helped improve later flights. Although I believe Skybolt was dropped for other reasons, Atlas, Discoverer, and Polaris all went on to become vital elements in the defense posture of this country. “Ranger is going through this same process. We have solved some of our launch vehicle problems to the point where the reliability is improving appreciably. The basic spacecraft bus has been retained and has now demonstrated its capability to deliver a payload to a precise spot on the lunar surface. We now must make the payload work. The payload also is pushing the state of the art in high power television telemetry. This was necessary to obtain high resolution photographs. . . . “Our reviews of the Ranger system continue to convince us of its capability of performing the mission. While we know we cannot have 100% reliability with launch vehicle, spacecraft, or payload, we expect to achieve at least one complete success with the remaining three flights. . . . “Ranger is a tough job. Although success has eluded us, it is within our grasp. We must have the fortitude to proceed. Space will only he conquered by those who do have such fortitude. It might he well to point out that our competitors in this area of exploration are not lacking in this respect. It is reported that the Soviet Union has failed in from 15 to 20 consecutive lunar and planetary mission attempts since Lunik III photographed the hack side of the moon in 1959. “Even should subsequent Rangers fail through unforeseen causes, we must move ahead. We must look at the totality of the space program. . . . The over-all picture is very good and is most convincing of this country’s capability to successfully complete these undertakings. The trends are all in our favor. . . .” (Testimony)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb informed Mayor Edward A. Crane of Cambridge, Mass., that 29-acre site offered by Cambridge had been selected for NASA’s new Electronics Research Center. Decision was result of four-month study of 160 proposed sites in the greater Boston area by nasa committee. (NASA Release 64-208)
NASA announced 1964-65 Alfred P. Sloan Fellowships in executive development were awarded to three NASA employees: Walter C. Scott, Chief of Chemical and Solar Power Generation Branch in Office of Advanced Research and Technology; Edward J. Lievens, Jr., member of Technical Staff, Plans and Analysis, in Office of Manned Space Flight; and Neal A. Holmberg, Aerospace Technology Program Manager at NASA Western Operations Office, (nasa Release 64-94)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden said in keynote address at Fourth National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space: “We have chosen to go to the moon because manned exploration of the moon involves every facet of overall space capability this nation must develop if we are to become a leading spacefaring nation. Also, the moon’s pockmarked surface, untouched by water or wind erosion since it has no atmosphere, bears the traces of everything which ever occurred there. . . . “We are carrying forward an active national space program, not limited to the moon, encompassing science, advanced engineering, practical applications, including manned space flight. “We are building toward pre-eminence in every phase of space activity—all the way from microscopic electronic components to skyscraper-tall rockets. “We are building a network of large-scale engineering facilities, space-yards, proving grounds, and space ports to assemble, test, and launch the space vehicles we need now and in the future. “We are creating new national resources of lasting value in these facilities; in the industrial and managerial capabilities we are developing; and in the growing number of scientists and engineers who are learning about space and space technology. “We sure filling the pipelines of hardware and knowledge, and as measured by the financial resources required, will be halfway toward our first manned lunar mission by mid-1965. “We are accumulating, in space, the basic scientific knowledge about the earth, the solar system, the universe, and about man himself. “We are bringing benefits not only to the United States but to all the world through the use of space and space technology, employing such new tools as weather, communications, and navigational satellites, and applying space-based techniques, equipment, and materials to improve industrial products, processes and services. “We are providing a much-needed stimulus to the energies and creativity of people everywhere, particularly to the minds and aspirations of young people.	. “We are bringing about increased economic activity at a time when the effects of automation on our society are beginning to be felt. “And we are making certain, through our sustained efforts, that the realm of space now opening up to us shall be a domain of freedom. “It is for these reasons that we have mounted the greatest peacetime undertaking in the history of mankind. . . (Text)
Forum on Developments and Techniques for Air Traffic System of the Future, sponsored by Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics, held in Washington. At the forum, details of Westinghouse Electric’s concept of navigation satellite system were disclosed by E. S. Keats, Westinghouse project manager for navigation and surveying systems. The single, synchronous-orbit satellite could provide navigation, communication, and traffic service to aircraft over North Atlantic or Pacific. The satellite would interrogate each aircraft periodically, measuring time to determine navigational position. (Av. Wk., 5/4/64, 69)
Eighteen top business leaders accompanied by NASA officials toured NASA Michoud Operations as part of a Life magazine-sponsored visit of space facilities across the country. They were briefed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, and Dr. G. N. Constan, Michoud manager. (N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/4/64)
In Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut to orbit the earth, announced that he would he a candidate for the Ohio Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator in the May 5 primary. He added that he was retiring from the U.S. Marine Corps after 22 years of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is certainly a challenge and a high calling.” Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It could very well he wishful thinking on my part to train for another six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old. “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best opportunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other research and development activities. These are areas with which I am well acquainted. . . .” (AP, Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/64, Al; Finney, NYT, 1/17/64,17)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in speech to Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association, Washington: “At the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, it has been estimated that about 40 percent of our booster costs, 70 percent of our major spacecraft dollars, and 90 percent of our tracking and data acquisition funds go into electronics. Unfortunately, as Dr. Albert Kelley . . . recently pointed out in this same context, a vast majority of our flight failures, not to mention flight delays, arise from electronic failures. Success in this area is obviously a major factor in overall mission accomplishment. . . . “In space activity the United States is now at the mid-point of a 10-year program. It might be said, in a sense not entirely figurative, that we have reached the ‘mid-course maneuver point.’ Just as the Mariner II Venus fly-by mission would have missed by almost a quarter of a million miles instead of coming within 22,000-mile target area, we can fail to (achieve our full potential if we do not seize every opportunity to correct our course as we go along. . . .” (Text)
It was reported that NASA planned to cancel its lease for a Lockheed JetStar at the ksc in Florida and purchase the plane outright. This came out in a report by NASA to a Senate appropriations subcommittee. The report indicated that NASA planned to operate a total of 80 aircraft in FY 1965, an increase of 4 planes. NASA officials told the committee that 37 of the 80 would be used for research, 20 for proficiency and flight training, and 23 for administrative aircraft. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64,
Eighty-three scientists, engineers, and operating groups received medals, citations, and cash awards totaling 87,900 for outstanding contributions to U.S. civilian space program, in NASA’s 6th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony. Recipients of awards for exceptional scientific achievement: William R. Lucas, msfc; Ernst Stuhlinger, msfc; Frank B. McDonald, gsfc ; and Daniel G. Mazur, gsfc. Recipients of award for outstanding leadership: Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, ksc; Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director, gsfc; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director, msfc. Group achievement awards were accepted by Dr. Debus for ksc and by Dr. von Braun for msfc. Recipients of awards for exceptional service: I. Edward Garrick, Oran W. Nicks, and Leonard Jaffe of NASA Hq.; Hans F.	Gruene of ksc; and Wesley L. Hjornevik of msc. Public service awards went to Bernie P. Miller, of rca, and Harris M. Schurmeier and Allen E. Wolfe, of JPL, for their work on ranger vii lunar-photography mission. Special award was presented to Newton W. Cunningham, Hq., for his work on ranger vn. Cash awards for inventions and contributions were presented to personnel from Ames Research Center, Lewis Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Personnel from Hq., frc, LaRc, lrc, msc, and msfc received Presidential citations for contributions to economy and efficiency in Government. (Program; NASA Release 64-263)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to the President that nasa had accomplished cost reductions totaling $128,783,000 in FY 1964. This greatly exceeded the agency’s target of $81,780,000. (nasa Announcement 64-162)
In conjunction with dedication of the Center of Science and Industry in Columbus, O., NASA Lewis Research Center sponsored a comprehensive exhibit of U.S. space program. The new center was designed as a museum of science, industry, health, and history, (lrc Release 6425)
Speaking at the dedication of a monument at Cape Kennedy honoring Project Mercury and the nation’s seven original astronauts, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Acting Chairman and Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council said: “Mercury served to lift the selfrespect of our nation when it badly needed such a boost. I know that we still have widespread public support of our national space programs in spite of the criticism of some short-sighted individuals.” (NYT, 11/11/64, 48; AP, Balt. Sim, 11/9/64; Rossiter, upi, Miami Herald, 11/11/64)
faa announced purchase of runway traction device to enable engineers to predict stopping distances for aircraft on wet or slippery runways. Designed and developed by J. I. Thompson Co., the equipment consisted of hydraulically operated mechanism mounted on aircraft tire and towed behind specially equipped truck; special controls permitted technicians to duplicate actual speed, skid, and braking effects of aircraft landing on slick runways, (faa Release T'64-44) “. . . Space propulsion using nuclear energy offers a capability for accomplishment of high energy increment, high payload missions in space beyond the capability of the chemical combustion propulsion systems when considering practical operating limitations. Work now underway in the United States indicates that nuclear rockets can be anticipated for earliest use in the space program. Reactor tests being conducted during this year should provide a firm technical basis for system development. Electric propulsion using the nuclear reactor energy source offers promising storable propellant performance if light-weight, long-life power supplies can be developed. Technology investigations are now underway to evaluate the feasibility of achieving the required performance. This work will simultaneously provide the information that is required to provide large amounts of electric power for non-propulsive purposes in space. Beyond these systems, a host of new and advanced concepts have been proposed. These are not well enough defined or evaluated to assure that their high performance potential can actually be achieved. Some research work is underway on these systems.” (Text)
West Germany’s Ministry of Scientific Research said estimated 4,300 West German scientists had left to work in U.S. between 1949 and 1961, and number was expected to increase. (Reuters, NYT, 10/31/64,8) October 30~November 1: Inventors’ Congress and Space Symposium held in Little Rock, Arkansas. NASA Administrator James E. Webb spoke on American progress and goals in space. He described “the Southern Crescent of the space program”—Cape Kennedy, Fla.; msfc, Huntsville, Ala.; Michoud Operations, La./Mississippi Test Facility; and msc, Houston, Tex. “One of the central facts about this great complex of space activities ... is the possibility that many varied research, development and production activities will gravitate in this direction. This is made likely by reasons of economics and of convenience. “By and large, these will be activities that require heavy contributions from science and technology, and Arkansas and the other states of the South are now in a position to get ready to take full advantage of the
President Johnson ordered prompt removal of NASA tracking station from Zanzibar shortly after President Abeid Karume requested that the U.S. remove it before the end of this month. President Karume made the request to Frank Carlucci, U.S. Charge d’Affaires in Zanzibar, and reportedly told Carlucci that the action was a result of statement by U.S. Ambassador-to-Eenya William Atwood at New York press conference that Red China and East Germany were trying to turn Zanzibar “into a kind of non-African state to be used as a staging base for political maneuvers” on the African continent. NASA announced in Washington that the loss of the station would have no adverse effect on the U.S. manned space program. The station had been on a stand-by hasis since end of Project Mercury, would have been of “minimum use” in Project Gemini and not used at all in Project Apollo. (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/8/64; Smith, NYT, 4/8/64, 11; Sehlstedt, Bah. Sun, 4/8/64)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara held a press conference at which he responded to questions regarding the mol project: question: “Mr. Secretary, Senator Anderson has suggested that a billion dollars could be saved by merging the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory with nasa’s Apollo. [See Dec. 7, 1964.] Can you tell us how you feel about that?” secretary MCNAMARA: “I feel very strongly that we must avoid duplicate space programs. There must be only one National Space Program. The great bulk of the expenditures for that National Space Program should be in NASA, because the bulk of the National Space Program will be oriented toward civilian scientific and other objectives. There is a place, there is a requirement for a military component. We must maintain security, a high level of security, on certain elements of the space program and that portion of the program must be handled by the Defense Department. I think Senator Anderson was simply emphasizing the absolute essentiality of fully coordinating the NASA and the Defense Department programs. With that, I agree 100 percent. . . . My principle is a very simple one ... I believe we are a military organization, we are not interested in space except insofar as it bears directly on our military mission. If there is anything that NASA can do, that we can in effect hire them to do as our agent, I am 100 percent in favor of doing so.” question: “A related question. Could you say, specifically, whether you are backing the mol or not?” SECRETARY mcnamara : “Yes, indeed.” question: “That could go ahead under the Air Force.” secretary MCNAMARA: “Yes, but I want to be sure that the mol program, the details of it, are fully analyzed by NASA and fully taken into account when NASA establishes any portion of its Apollo Program not directly related to the Lunar Program. ... I want to be certain that the Air Force, when it established the MOL, takes account of what NASA is required to do as part of the Apollo Program that in turn is directly related to the Lunar Program.” (Text; M&R, 12/21/64, 20; SBD, 12/15/64)
Three airframe manufacturers and three engine manufacturers submitted initial design proposals for the U.S. supersonic transport, FAA Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development Gordon M. Bain announced. The airframe manufacturers: Lockheed Aircraft, Boeing Co., and North American Aviation; engine builders: Curtiss-Wright, General Electric Co., and Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft. (FAA Release 64-4)
NASA announced revision of its patent policy and regulations for waivers of commercial rights to inventions resulting from space program work. Effective September 28, the revised patent waiver and related procurement regulations implemented Presidential patent policy statement of last October which established guidelines for a more unified approach among Federal agencies regarding allocation of patent rights to inventions produced in performance of Government contracts. The new regulations also reflected more than three years of intensive study, including public hearings, on ways to improve NASA patent policies. NASA officials anticipated that they would encourage and accelerate contractors’ efforts to identify and report technological advances, thereby increasing the flow and dissemination of technical information derived from the space program, (nasa Release 64-209)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of .NASA, said he hoped for cooperation on space flights between the U.S., the U.S.S.R., and other countries at some future time. He asserted that such cooperation was not possible at the current time because of the secrecy that surrounded Soviet space efforts. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/5/64)
Examining the failure of ranger vi as well as previous Ranger lunar probes, William Coughlin pointed out in Missiles and Rockets editorial that Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Ranger project manager, is “the only NASA facility where NASA owns all the land, owns all the equipment, pays all the bills and allows a non-profit corporation to run the facility. . . . “An academic environment is neither comparable nor conducive to the kind of hard-driving industrial atmosphere required to make complex space hardware function in a highly reliable manner ... we think Congress should reopen the whole question of the JPL-Cal Tech relationship.” (M&R, 2/10/64,50)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary, delivered an address on occasion of the Martin Co. Honors Night Banquet. He suggested that private industry was not doing its share in the job of educating “the public to the value, the significance of space progress, space leadership, and space benefits. It should not be possible for anyone to take seriously the public diatribes against the national space program. Anyone who knows anything about ‘crash programs’ or the space program would never talk [about ‘moondoggle’]. Crash programs have unlimited funds, unlimited overtime, and parallel approaches to the end objective. None of these aspects applies to the space program or even to the lunar project.” Dr. Welsh said that in educating the general public, the contribution of the space program to education, national security, technological and managerial innovations, international status, and the national economy should be emphasized. He concluded: “The national space program is a creative force in our society. As we marshal our progressive strengths, let us use them to stamp out the evils of ignorance and misunderstanding. . . .” (Text)
Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.), speaking on the House floor, praised the team of scientists and technicians that made the successful RANGER VII lunar flight possible, and said that the “validity of the space program has been reconfirmed.. . Also in the House, Rep. Louis C. Wyman (R.-N.H.) said the transmission of lunar photographs was “a great tribute to the scientific progress of our experts in America’s space program,” and RANGER VII was “a highly technical success ... in the right direction; namely, the use of machines” rather than man in space exploration. He added that Project Apollo need not be called off, but he felt Congress should “hold back on the appropriations for Apollo space vehicle procurement until we have established that man can rendezvous in space by completing successfully the present Gemini program. . . .” He also advocated elimination of a target date for U.S. manned landing on the moon. (CR, 8/3/64,17203)
First tracking station to be built for Project Gemini was dedicated at Carnarvon, Australia, a site close to the antipodal point to Cape Kennedy, the launch site. Carnarvon was first land station over which Gemini spacecraft would pass as it went into orbit. NASA Administrator James E. Webb participated by telephone in the ceremonies, and his remarks initiated the new station into “scama,” the nasa 13-country network of operational voice communications connecting the manned space flight tracking network, (nasa Release 64-155)
Michael L. Garbacz was appointed Program Manager, Meteorological Flight Projects, in NASA Hq. Office of Space Science and Applications. Garbacz had served as Acting Program Manager since Sept. 1963. (NASA Announcement 64-59)
Saturn I SA—6 flight was conducted successfully from Cape Kennedy, the huge two-stage launch vehicle boosting into orbit an Apollo boilerplate spacecraft attached to the S-IV second stage. The one malfunction in the flight was premature shutdown of one of the eight first-stage engines, cutting off 24 sec. early. Preliminary analysis of telemetry data indicated that the remaining seven H—1 engines burned additional two sec. to compensate for lost thrust of the eighth engine, and the Saturn I’s guidance system corrected course deviations caused by the shutoff engine, so that orbital parameters (140-mi. apogee, 123.9-mi. perigee, 88.5-min. period, and 31.8° inclination to the equator) came very close to those predicted. This was first Saturn I flight test of active guidance system to inject upper stage and attached Apollo spacecraft into orbit. Eight movie cameras mounted on the Saturn I to photograph propulsion and fuel operations were ejected and recovered. Main purpose of the flight was further qualification of the Saturn I launch vehicle and continued development of technology necessary to build the more powerful Saturn IB and V launch vehicles, (Marshall Star, 6/3/64, 1; NASA Releases 64-113 and 64-130; M&R, 6/8/64,10)
Reporting its findings after series of hearings, Senate Subcommitte on Employment and Manpower forecast “a leveling off or actual decline” in the present $55 billion annual expenditure for weapons and space programs. Among the report’s predictions: thousands of scientists and engineers may have to seek jobs outside the aerospace industry; thousands of skilled workers may have to learn now trades; at least 10 states should plan now for converting to non-government markets. Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.), subcommittee chairman, said studies showed that “nearly one-tenth of the Nation’s work forces is employed in defense-related enterprise.” (Haakinson, AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/64)
NASA msc officials announced first Gemini spacecraft for a manned spaceflight (GT—3) had passed design and engineering inspections; project manager Charles W. Mathews declared it would perform its mission in satisfactory fashion. (Houston Chron., 6/11/64; msc Roundup, 6/24/64,8)
House and Senate received from NASA Administrator reports on a grant to Cornell Univ. of $1,350,000 for construction of facilities for research. Reports were referred to the two Congressional space committees. (NASA LAR, III/116)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an article written for the Florida Times-Union: “Expansion’s of man’s geographical horizons have almost invariably been linked with surges of creativeness in the arts and sciences. The Space Age could well revitalize human affairs even more than did the vigorous world-ranging of Western navigators that ended the stagnation of the Dark Ages in Europe. . . . “Already some philosophers see the possibility that world-wide interest in the space program and growing international participation in it could be the first steps toward providing our troubled race with a moral and constructive substitute for war. “It is entirely possible that, along with broadening of perspectives, there will be basic changes for the better in man’s aspirations as astronauts of many nations venture deeper and deeper into the vastness of space in which ours is but one small planet circling a sun-star of relatively minor importance. . . .” (Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/64)
Success of ranger vu spotlighted NASA’s preparation for further lunar and planetary exploration, including two more Rangers (early next year), Surveyor soft-landing spacecraft, Lunar Orbiter photographing spacecraft, and Project Apollo manned lunar expedition, as well as two Mariner spacecraft to gather data from the vicinity of Mars (last quarter of 1964). (nasa Releases 64—196,64-205)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said before National Security Industrial Association meeting in Washington that many achievements had been made “in that area where science and technology are indivisible. . . . Many of the most significant technological advances, for example, have been made in NASA’s space science effort. “Outstanding among them are our proven ability to launch payloads from earth orbit to deep space with consistent success; and the companion ability to make the necessary mid-course corrections far out in space. . . .” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Commercial Club of Chicago: “There is an analogy between our national space program and our national history. The exciting adventures of the settlement of North America captured popular fancy. But it was the quiet development of the free spirit of Americans and the growth of our form of selfgovernment that were to weigh heavier in the scales of history than Indian raids and campaigns of the colonial wars. “Another analogy closer to us has been the change in public attitudes that has led Americans to adopt new scientific ideas and concepts that may have been rejected only a few years ago. “Today we live in a period of unprecedented scientific and technological explosion. ... To be visionary is no longer to be labeled as impractical.” (Text)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) discussed national space program on Senate floor: “If our nation is to remain strong and a leader of men, then it is necessary that we maintain a position of leadership in the greatest adventure of our time. “Not only would a slowdown in this program have an adverse effect on U.S. leadership, but it would cost the taxpayer more money. NASA estimates that for every year the program is stretched out a billion dollars would have to be added to the program. That is not surprising. Any major r&d program requires a tight timetable if it is to be an efficient program and provide the necessary incentive. Without a tight timetable the work drags on through repeated changes and indecision. As in most human endeavors the establishment of a tight schedule in fact provides assurance that the program will in fact be accomplished. “For the present, however, there is the fact that the huge space industry complex—and the space psychology itself—has found a place in the Nation’s consciousness. The United States is more than six years away from its first puny satellite, and in that time the acceleration of progress has been on the edge of the fantastic. The space age has barely been born but we cannot see how anyone can misread the promise of adventure and discovery in the years to come.” {CR, 7/20/64, 15720-2i)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said at dedication of Aerojet General’s Dade County (Fla.) plant: “Leadership in propulsion is . . . synonymous with leadership in space—for both military and non-military purposes. We cannot afford to relax in this area. There is no room for complacency, only room for urgency. . . . “In supporting the thesis that there is real danger from complacency, I list the following points: “1. The USSR is having some economic difficulties, particularly in agriculture. Yet, their space program is expanding. “2. The USSR is far ahead of the United States in manned flight experience. Even their female cosmonaut has flown more orbits than all of our astronauts combined. “3. The USSR has flown their heavier Vostok spacecraft in manned and unmanned flights some 45 times as many earth orbits as we have flown our much smaller Mercury. “4. Practically all of the competences developed for space could be used for aggression as well as for peaceful purposes. “Please do not misunderstand what I am saying. We have made great strides, particularly in the past three years. We are actually ahead of the Soviets in some applications of space, such as communications and meteorology. We are, however, not yet ahead overall. But, our rate of progress is very impressive. “Probably what I am warning about more than anything else is the danger that we might slow down our rate of progress—that we might heed the voices of defeatism and impracticality. This is the one thing we cannot afford. We cannot afford to lose the momentum which stems from a growing program. To slow down is to be content with second place. This we should not do. In fact, we dare not do it.” (Text)
Rep. Lionel Van Derelin (D.-Calif.) said in a telegram to J. R. Dempsey, president of General Dynamics-Astronautics: “Spectacular success of the Ranger moon shot should not overshadow the equally spectacular record of consecutive successful launchings by Atlas boosters. Ranger shot was the 17th straight. Such amazing reliability is the backbone of our space program.. . {CR, 8/4/64,17368)
Titan II rocket booster for first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was turned over to the Government in ceremonies at Martin Co.’s Baltimore plant. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini project manager of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said parachute landing system and spacecraft’s ejection seats were all that remained to 'be flight-qualified, and GT-3 was still planned for first quarter of 1965. Mathews disclosed msc had been experimenting for more than a year with braking rockets to enable manned Gemini spacecraft to land on land instead of water. Para-sail also would be used in such a landing. Among other officials present were GT-3 crewmen, Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/64; Witkin, NYT, 10/29/64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden said in address before National University Extension Association in Washington: “The exploration of space is a continuation of the geographical exploration by man of unknown areas of the earth from the days of the Phoenician mariners three thousand years ago. The New World, the polar regions, the depths of the ocean, the limits of the atmosphere— have each in turn been the temporary goal. Space is the new frontier. . . . “We have as a nation accepted the challenge of the new frontier, and this year are spending a little more than five billion dollars on the exploration of space for peaceful purposes. This represents an expenditure of approximately 50 cents per week by each of the 200 million inhabitants of our country. . . .” (Text)
At nasa Hq. news conference, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said new contract with Jet Propulsion Laboratory would specify changes to improve JPl’s organization and management, “nasa is not going to try to impose rigid methods of organization and management on the Jet Propulsion laboratory. We believe they know a great deal about how to succeed at this business. But neither are we going to abdicate our own responsibility for this expenditure of public funds and for the success of the missions. “We are in a process by which we are both working to solve the problem. If this process produces the kind of organizational changes and the kind of ability to fix organizational responsibility that ... [is desired], then we will go forward. If they don’t both we and jpl will be looking for some other arrangement. . . . “I think all of us see the total picture better. Each of us tended to see one part of the picture rather than the total picture.” Under the new contract, jpl would be organized more like the NASA Centers. “. . . the United States government cannot find any arrangement under which the high quality of work which jpl has done and is capable of doing in the TO0-598 0—65—10 future can be available to the country better than the arrangement that we have negotiated. I hope and believe it will be signed. But I still feel it is my responsibility to make very sure that the contract represents a full meeting of the minds.” Mr. Webb stressed that he was not singling out anyone for blame for Ranger lunar spacecraft failures. “Our objective is success on the next flight and not to find a scapegoat for this kind of thing.” Of the next Ranger lunar probe, he said, “We are still striving to get it off about June, but there are lots of problems that have to be settled. Some of us feel quite strongly that we must have a very strong assurance of success before we would be ready to launch. But we also run into the problem if we don’t launch then we may have difficulty fitting into the schedule hiter.” Asked about effect of the delay in Congressional appropriation of $141 million supplemental requested for FY 1964 manned space flight, he said: “. . . this delay is at least reducing what the President gave us— a fighting chance. I mean, with each passing chance we have a little bit less of a fighting chance to do the job within this decade. ... I would say that costs are going to increase for the same amount of work with each passing month, and that each month roughly delays one month on the other end, or maybe more, and that this does certainly reduce the fighting chance.” (Transcript)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy for 1964, at National Space Club’s annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington. Other Space Club awards: Dr. Harold A. Rosen and Donald D. Williams of Hughes Aircraft Co. received the astronautics engineer award for contributions to conception and development of Syncom satellite. Tulane Univ. received a $1,500 grant to further advanced education in the field of science and astronautics; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. and General Dynamics/ Astronautics received Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for performance on Mercury spacecraft and Atlas booster of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; editors and staff of Fortune magazine received the Space Club’s press award for series of articles “which provided provocative insights into the motivations and accomplishments of the nation’s space-exploration programs”; Robert P. Walker, mathematics and physics student at Univ. of Maryland, received $1,500 Goddard Scholarship; and Robert Cargill Hall, historian of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., received $200 Goddard Historical Essay award for second straight year, (nsc Release)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
At aiaa, William G. Huber of msfc outlined NASA’s plans for space projects beyond Apollo project. According to one set of plans for the 1970-1990 period, space program costs would be $6,970,000,000 per year for 20 years. This figure was highest yet publicly discussed by a NASA official. Huber was outlining possibilities for the future in his discussion of large post-Saturn launch vehicles. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/3/64)	_
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed the American Assembly Student Conference at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs: “. . . in assessing the future one can always learn from the past, and if the thoughtful student of history learns anything from a review of the march of human progress, it is that the ultimate potential of contemporary undertaking is almost never perceived. “So, I believe, it is with research and exploration in space. . . . “Today, 500 years after Prince Henry and his use of the caravel to initiate die Oceanic Age, 400 years after Copernicus presented his theories about the solar system, 300 years after Newton worked out the formula for space flight, but less than 40 years after Goddard devised the vehicle to make it possible, man has left the earth, and widened his horizons to include the entire solar system. “Science today has at its disposal a modem caravel, the chemical rocket, which has already traveled to the moon and Venus. And, as with Henry and his explorations, we have improved navigation systems to guide them out and bring them back to make steadily more accurate measurements of the environment of space—that environment through which Gargarin and Glenn and others traveled, and through which our own planet, Mother Earth, is also traveling around the sun at the relative speed of 67,000 miles per hour. “And to complete the parallel, just as Prince Henry inaugurated an Age of Discovery which led man to all the seas and continents of the earth, and into the atmosphere up to twice the height of his tallest mountains, so have we today embarked on a new Age of Discovery in which there is no foreseeable horizon. . . .” (Text; CR, 4/6/64, 6686)
Commenting on Republican Presidential candidate Goldwater’s recently published views on the space program, Warren Burkett, science writer for the Houston Chronicle, pointed out that a good deal of research which can be of use to the military services was being carried on as part of NASA’s Project Apollo. He suggested that an Apollo Orbital Research Laboratory, based on components being developed in the Apollo program, could be used for military aspects of the space program such as space patrol and interception. The article suggested that the Apollo program was generally developing a group of “off-the-shelf’ space systems which could be adapted for military use should this appear desirable. (Houston Chron., 7/26/64)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicles in NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking: “. . . space vehicle research, first of all, produces knowledge that permits the accomplishment of new missions. When the knowledge resulting from research is obtained well in advance of the planning of new missions, we may proceed with confidence that the missions are feasible. For this reason, the generation of new knowledge through research should, when possible, precede developments that are beyond the current state of the art. Only when the pressures for immediate development are extremely great, as has been the case in these first years of our national space program, are we justified in violating the principle of order in favor of expediency. When we possess adequate research data, we not only are confident of the feasibility of any new missions for which we may wish to plan, but we also . . . lay the basis for improved reliability and efficiency and for reductions in the weight and cost of the space vehicles required for these missions. The truth of these principles has been demonstrated many times in the past by costly developments which either had to be abandoned for lack of the necessary technical capability to complete them -or which could only be salvaged by crash research programs. “We must, therefore, strive through research to develop new knowledge that will make new space missions possible, if and when national policy should dictate that any one of these missions must be accomplished. At the same time we must conduct the research required to ensure the success of on-going projects, and we must also strive through research to pave the way for increased reliability and efficiency of space vehicles of proven feasibility. . . (Testimony)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, spoke at 10th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control on misconceptions about national space policy: “First, the lunar project should not be confused with our total space effort. Of course, it is a complex, expensive, and difficult task, but it’s just a part of our young and growing national space program. Its major significance is that it sets a goal for an orderly development of competences—all of which will be useful for a wide range of space activities in the future. “Second, the national security aspects of space are not being neglected. The National Aeronautics and Space Act requires that they receive attention and they are receiving it. Careless thinking prompts critics to assert that practically nothing is being done by the military in the space field. For example, about two-thirds of all our space flights in the past two years have been launched by the Department of Defense. And just as careless thinking assumes that a larger space budget for NASA than for Defense means a neglect of the latter. While one need not be satisfied with the rate of progress in either the civilian or non-civilian aspects of space, nevertheless it is worth noting that national security objectives are being pursued by both nasa and the Defense Department. ... The fact that we do not plan space programs for aggression does not mean that we have a national security space gap or that we will allow one to develop. “Third, there is another misconception to the effect that the national space program is employing an unduly large portion of our engineering and scientific manpower. Added to this misconception is the parallel view that the space program is creating a shortage of such talents which otherwise would be applied in our civilian economy. Actually, profits in private enterprise are at an all-time high and, in general, higher in the non-space and non-defense companies than in those whose business is primarily government-financed for space and defense. If those very profitable companies do not hire scientists and engineers to engage in research and development, it is not because they can’t get them as their profit position gives them remarkable bargaining power. Rather, failure to employ such scarce talents in large numbers is the result of deliberate decisions on the part of private entrepreneurs and not because there are no such persons available. . . . Furthermore, government-financed research and development—particularly in such challenging fields as space—is having a salutary effect in stimulating an increase in the number of highly trained scientists and engineers. “Fourth, there has also been some criticism and confusion on the subject of international cooperation in the space program. We have formed a useful base for peaceful and constructive relationships with some 60 other countries in space activities. The benefits are mutual. Some of our projects could just not have been conducted successfully without the tracking facilities, sites, and other cooperative efforts of countries around the world. In no case do we impair our national security through such cooperation, and we do not plan to do so. . . . “Fifth, there are those who argue that it would be better to slow down—or even stop—our space effort in order to divert the resources to education, slum clearance, medical research, and other such purposes. As much as we need to do more in those important areas, it is unrealistic to believe that the resources are transferable—even if it were desirable to attempt the shift. . . . What is more, there is no assurance that the Congress would vote more funds for education or public housing just because it voted less for space. . . (Text)
British astronomer Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank observatory, told newsmen in Boston that there were “indications the Soviet economy is being strained” by their space program. He predicted that U.S.S.R. would next attempt “to achieve a rendezvous of two spaceships and to circumvent the moon.” (Long, CSM, 10/19/64)
Aviation Week reported that NASA and jpl were seeking a compromise to House subcommittee recommendation that NASA appoint a general manager to act as deputy to the director of jpl. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, opposed the suggestion that NASA make the appointment. It was reported that jpl was seeking someone mutually acceptable to the committee, NASA, and JPL. (Av. Wk., 6/22/64, 25)
NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden announced to newsmen the bilateral agreement negotiated between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in June 1962 (the “Dryden-Blagonravov Agreement”), by which the two countries would cooperate in space programs for communications, meteorology, and geophysics, was discussed by him and Academician Blagonravov at Geneva. Cooperation in Soviet-American communications for global meteorology was to be implemented by the two countries’ sharing costs equally, each supporting the program in alternate months; a bilaterally financed communications link between Moscow and Washington was to be solely for the purpose of exchanging cloud pictures. The 1962 agreement grew out of correspondence -between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev in Feb. and March 1962. Dryden and Blagonravov also discussed American-Soviet cooperation in space biology. Agreement was readied, subject to review before final approval, by which American and Soviet space biologists would prepare bilingual reports on similar subjects. Soviets had proposed cooperation in biology and medicine, both of which had great bearing on manned space flight when exploration extended beyond the moon. (Wash. Post, 6/9/64; NASA Transcript, 6/8/64[2] “Background Information,” “News Conference.”)
At AIAA meeting and press conference, Dr. Bernard M. Wagner, Chairman of New York Medical College’s pathology dept., reported Soviets had decided not to send any more women cosmonauts into space. Soviet doctors were not satisfied with performance of Valentina Tereshkova, first woman cosmonaut. She had been too excited during the space flight, as seen by wide variations in her pulse rate, and she did not recover from effects of space flight as quickly as the male cosmonauts. Dr. Wagner visited in Moscow earlier in June at invitation of Prof. Vassily V. Parin, Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology. Dr. Wagner reported Prof. Parin, prominent in Soviet space program, believed artificial gravity would be necessary for astronauts on long space flights, and Soviet space planners were considering possibility of equipping Vostok spacecraft with centrifuge providing periodic spin of Ys earth’s gravity for the crew. Dr. Wagner added that Soviets were preparing for another manned space flight before the end of the year. (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/30/64)
Rep. John W. Davis, (D.-Ga.) said dod had turned over the large solidpropellant rocket motor project to NASA, the decision made because no definite military mission was assigned for the technology. In FY 1965 NASA will cover cost of the large-motor rad; in FY 1964 usaf carried the cost. NASA officials said they planned to request $13 million for the project, with about half that going to contractors Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Aerojet-General. (Atlanta Const., 1/24/64)
