Four flashing light beacons on nasa explorer XXIX satellite had been turned on and were functioning normally, NASA officials announced. The beacons, each emitting a light of 1,580 candleseconds per flash, would permit the satellite to be photographed against the stellar background, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, A6)
Six Navy and Marine flyers emerged from a cylindrical chamber at Philadelphia’s naval air engineering center where they had spent 34 days in a simulated journey into space in an experiment sponsored by NASA. The project was designed to collect and analyze information on long confinement in a space atmosphere, specifically, how pure oxygen would affect the blood, the lungs, thinking, and eating. Cdr. Kenneth R. Coburn, project manager, called it “a major success,” noting that “we find that man can live for long periods of time—for a month anyway—without any bad effects.” (ap, Chic. Trib., 4/20/65)
In an interview with Izvestia, one of the two directors of the Soviet space program, the “chief designer,” whose identity had never been revealed, said the voskhod ii program had called for Lt. Col. Leonov to spend “10 minutes outside the cabin” but that he could have stayed much longer. He said the weight and space saved by having two men aboard voskhod ii instead of three men, as on voskhod i, had been used to install a decompression chamber and related equipment. The designer said Leonov’s spacesuit was equipped with “duplicate systems” to ensure a high degree of reliability and that a bellows had been installed to allow bending of the torso, arms, and legs. Izvestia said in another article that Leonov’s spacesuit consisted of five layers: a heat reflecting layer outside; material for strength; airtight material; heat insulating material; and an inside layer containing a ventilation system. The “chief theoretician,” joint director of the Soviet space program, told Izvestia that Col. Leonov’s venture into space had shown that future astronauts might find it easier to work in space than on earth. He said that “we shall yet live to see the day when orbiting platforms appear in space—resembling scientific research institutes in the earth’s upper atmosphere.” The theoretician was also quoted as saying that Leonov’s principal assignment had been to determine man’s reaction to “weightlessness in free space.” He told Tass: “We obtained in practice what we had visualized theoretically before.” (Tanner, NYT, 3/20/65, 1, 3)
A prototype Tiros weather satellite was donated to the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, on behalf of NASA, in commemoration of the fifth anniversary of NASA’s tiros I launch. Dr. Dryden said:	. . nine experimental meteorological satellites of the Tiros series have been successfully launched and operated. “Seldom, if ever, has a complex technological effort in its early phases returned such valuable dividends as this project. In the early stage Tiros was an Army project. When the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was created in 1958 it took over the development of the spacecraft. “The United States Weather Bureau utilized the data from the very first experimental flight. The first Tiros had been in orbit only a few hours when it began transmitting to NASA ground stations cloud photographs of good quality. The Weather Bureau was quickly able to apply the pictures to its day-by-day forecasting. During the years since then, Tiros satellites have literally been working their way around the world, benefitting men everywhere by supplying previously unobtainable weather data. At this stage, it is impossible to estimate how many lives have been saved and how much property loss avoided through use of Tiros information, but the totals must already be substantial.” David Arthur Davies, Secretary-General of the World Meteorological Organization, discussed international reaction to meteorological satellite developments, listing three main points: (1) “. . . the tremendous impact which this new means of observing the atmosphere has had upon the world scientific community. . . . [For instance,] it was the realization that the meteorological satellite was ... a turning point in the long history of man’s endeavors to improve his knowledge and understanding of his environment—the atmosphere” that led to the establishment of the World Weather Watch. (2) The impact of the meteorological satellite upon the United Nations. The “. . . impact of the tiros satellites was so great as to inspire the General Assembly of the United Nations to take the very unusual step of adopting a resolution on a scientific question of this kind [Resolution 1721 on International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space] and to maintain its interest from that time.” And, (3) . . the general feeling of gratitude and admiration towards the United States which the launching of tiros I and which the decision to distribute the data to all countries throughout the whole world engendered.” Speaking at the ceremony, Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, praised the Tiros program and said that the NASA-Weather Bureau Tiros Operational Satellite System (Tos), expected to be operational early next year, would modify a Tiros satellite similar to tiros IX to permit daily observation of clouds in the earth’s atmosphere. He added: “And one day we may even be using the moon as a base for establishing a weather station to monitor and study terrestrial weather.” Dr. White predicted continued NASA-Weather Bureau cooperation: (1) to further develop “satellite visual and infrared sensing devices for the indirect probing of the atmosphere”; (2) to “broaden the meteorological satellite system as a means of data collection”; and (3) to “pursue the use of synchronous satellites for weather observations.” Dr. Morris Tepper, Director of Meteorological Programs in nasa’s Office of Space Sciences, recalled the launching of TIROS I: “It was a very exciting morning—waiting for my first countdown . . . someone fixed a leaky lox line at the launching pad by wrapping a wet rag around the leak and freezing it solid . . . The launch vehicle, the Thor-Able, performed exceptionally well. The spacecraft was placed into an exceptional orbit. The next question was—what would we see? . . . And finally we had our picture—this first picture from TIROS I. Yes, there were clouds in it . . . The first three pictures were . . . carried to Dr. Glennan, the first Administrator of NASA, and finally we all trekked over to the White House and interrupted a Cabinet Meeting to show President Eisenhower the results of this remarkable space capability.” (Texts; nasa Release 65-102)
In an article in the San Diego Evening Tribune deploring the strikes and labor unrest at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island, Victor Riesel said: “Well over $100 million had been lost in strikes. “nasa officials report 78 walkouts between Dec. 1, 1962, and Feb. 15. 1965. Total work loss has been 63,784 man days. This means there has been an average of more than five vital strikes a month. At least 35 of them have been illegal and have cost 49,596 man days.” (Riesel, San Diego Eve. Trib., 3/18/65)
Vice President Humphrey and the gemini iv astronauts, Maj. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Maj. Edward H. White II (usaf), won cheers and applause from visitors to the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France. Attendance at U.S. pavilion, which had been poor, picked up appreciably. Also present were nasa Administrator James E.	Webb, and Charles Mathews, manager of the Gemini program. A scheduled formal meeting between the American astronauts and Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, fell through when the Soviets announced that Col. Gagarin would be “too busy.” However, at an official luncheon, Gagarin stopped at White’s table and the two astronauts shook hands and spoke briefly, (ap, NYT, 6/20/65, 38; UPl, Wash. Daily News, 6/19/65; ap, Hudgins, Wash. Post, 6/20/65, A28)
NASA officials released clear, detailed, color and black and white photographs of the gemini vii-vi rendezvous taken by the gemini vi astronauts, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/18/65, El)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was one of four persons named honorary chairmen of the Robert Hutchings Goddard Library Program at Clark Univ. The other three were Mrs. Robert H. Goddard; Dr. Charles G. Abbot, former fifth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution; and Mr. John Jeppson, executive vice president of the Norton Co. and Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Clark Univ. Mr. J. L. Atwood, president of North American Aviation, was named general chairman of the Library program. (Goddard, 7/65)
Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo program director in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said that 1965 would be a year of “heavy ground testing” in NASA’s lunar program. Among the major events he anticipated were completion of testing of the Apollo spacecraft for the first manned flight; qualification of all elements of the Saturn IB launch vehicle and delivery of first flight stages to Cape Kennedy; and initial testing of Saturn V elements, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/22/65, 4)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, addressed symposium on universities and Federal science policies held during meeting of National Academy of Sciences, in Seattle. He discussed the role of universities in space exploration and specified NASA-univer-sity relationships: (1) direct project support by means of research contracts to universities; (2) provision of new facilities, including those to encourage interdisciplinary groups for research in the interest of both the university and NASA; and (3) training support, including program to turn out 1,000 Ph.D.’s annually. He then turned to evolution of the university’s future role: “It is not expected that the university will become the primary action agency for solving the economic and social problems of our society or for setting basic social objectives, but it must have a prominent voice and influence. The university should, I think, aspire to intellectual leadership, to observe and analyze, to apply the power of the human mind—that faculty which distinguishes man from animal, to establish a rational basis for policy and action. The direct attack must be undertaken by other institutions, mainly by political agencies. We are now witnessing the evolution of government agencies, particularly those of the Federal government^ to meet social needs by direct action in all fields from economics and public health to science and technology. A beginning is being made in the mobilization and integration of the total available resources to attack the most complex social problems. “. . i. I believe that . . . the traditional values of pursuit of excellence, freedom of inquiry, preservation of creativity, and the support of the unconventional new ideas, particularly those of young scientists, . . . may not only be preserved but may even be strengthened within the larger framework of increased scope which can provide a sounder human motivation, bring allocation of increased resources, provide a satisfaction of great accomplishment in terms of human goals, and a sense of a community of interest with all mankind. If you will take the time to discover what is now going on in the exploration of space, you will find a free association of individuals, each with complete freedom of individual choice, in the largest and most challenging venture of man, the search for knowledge of his environment, and the application of this knowledge to his benefit. In this group of several hundred thousand people you will find innumerable examples of the pursuit of excellence from the renewed pride of the workman in his handicraft, to the intellectual effort of the scientist to analyze and observe. You will find mainly young men, unafraid of large problems or rapid change. You will find the unconventional idea being given attention. The university and the university scientist must and will adapt to the age of space exploration. . . .” (Text; Science, 11/26/65, 1129-33)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at a press conference held in conjunction with the NASA University Program Review Conference in Kansas City, Mo., that the space research program would cost $35 billion over a ten-year period. At the end of that time, NASA expected to have accomplished (1) 12 to 15 flights of the Saturn V, (2) 5,000 hrs. of astronaut flight time, and (3) the capability of lifting 240,000 lbs. from the earth and orbiting 90,000 lbs. (Kansas City Times, 3/3/65)
In an editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, editor Robert Hotz said: “The trail-blazing mission of the Soviet Voskhod 2 still is continuing as these lines are written, but it has already opened a new chapter in the history of man’s conquest of space. It also has emphasized again that, unless some drastic changes are made, this history will be written primarily in the Russian Cyrillic alphabet with only an occasional U.S. footnote technically necessary. . . . “All of this Soviet progress again emphasizes strongly the ultra-conservatism of the U.S. manned space flight program and the utter inadequacy of the tiny step-by-step approach that sounds so convincing when defending under-funded programs. This approach is sounding more and more idiotic in the face of Soviet space achievements. . . . “Each Soviet manned space flight makes it clearer that the Russians are widening their lead over the U.S. in this vital area. It also makes it clear that the many billions the American people have poured willingly into our national space program for the purpose of wresting this leadership from the Soviets are not going to achieve that goal under the present management. . . .”	( Hotz, Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 11)
f-111b, usn version of the F-lll multipurpose fighter designed for use by both usaf and USN, was displayed for the first time during a rollout ceremony at the Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. plant at Peconic, L.I. Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze was the principal speaker. Test pilots demonstrated the variable-sweep wing which could extend almost perpendicular to the fuselage for take-offs, landings, and slow flight, and then pivot back sharply for supersonic flight. In a news conference, Brig. Gen. John L. Zoeckler (usaf), F-lll project manager, acknowledged that f-111b was 500-600 lbs. “overweight,” but said that “very substantial strides” had been made in we'ight reduction. He added that “some compensation” in performance would be achieved in later USN models by addition of high-lift devices. The two-man, all-weather, supersonic aircraft was designed to fly at about 1,600 mph. (dod Release 285-65; Hudson, NYT, 5/12/65,18)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden reported on the status of NASA cooperation with the Soviet Union in testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Let me review where we stand. Of three projects agreed to in 1962, the only one completed is that which involved communications tests with Echo II. . . . “The second project—joint mapping of the geomagnetic field—is at the stage of exchanging ground-based magnetic observations ... we are now acquiring data that was not previously available in the United States. . . . “In the third project—for the coordination of meteorological satellite launchings and the establishment of a link for exchange of data— our prime purpose was and remains a sharing of the cost of providing weather satellite service and the exchange of satellite data. ... we are . . . exchanging conventional data over the link, which ... is financed on a 50-50 basis. I look forward for a meeting soon with Academician Blagonravov which will afford opportunity to review this exchange and the prospects of satellite data exchange. ... a recent check shows the U.S. sending surface data for more stations than it receives but receiving upper air data for more stations than it sends. In sum, the present exchange is considered by the Weather Bureau to improve the quality of forecasts by our national weather services since it makes more data available in time for such forecasts than was the case prior to establishment of the link.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 50-76)
NASA would stick with its Saturn launch vehicles for the Apollo program, Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo Program Director, reportedly said in Tulsa. Asked about the possibility of “leap-frogging” in the Apollo and making use of Titan m-c—because of its launch potential—instead of Saturn V, Phillips said “no,” and commented: “The Saturn vehicle will do what we want insofar as the Apollo program is concerned, and leapfrogging now probably would mean some setbacks rather than advancing the Apollo project.” He said launch vehicles such as Titan iii-C, which had a potential of 11 to 15 million lbs. of thrust, most certainly would have major roles in future space operations. “But NASA is committed to the Saturn for the Apollo and we plan to stick with this vehicle.” (Leslie, Tulsa Daily World, 6/24/65)
Summary report of NASA’s Future Programs Task Group, directed by Francis B. Smith of LaRC, was sent by NASA Administrator James E. Webb to the chairmen of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Report presented “the results of studies made during 1964 to answer inquiries made by President Johnson as to criteria and priorities for space missions to follow those now approved for the decade of the 1960’s. . . It examined (1) conditions and constraints for future planning, (2) major capabilities existing and under development, (3) intermediate missions, and (4) long-range aeronautical and space developments. Report concluded: “. . . The details of these new missions such as specific spacecraft designs and exact mission plans will, of course, be the subject of continued study. . . . Continued space exploration will be an evolutionary process in which the next step is based largely on what was learned from the experience of preceding research and flight missions. The pace at which these new programs will be carried out will necessarily depend upon many other factors, such as the allocation of budgetary and manpower resources and the changing National needs of the future. “This study has not revealed any single area of space development which appears to require an overriding emphasis or a crash effort. Rather, it appears that a continued balanced program, steadily pursuing continued advancement in aeronautics, space sciences, manned space flight, and lunar and planetary exploration, adequately supported by a broad basic research and technology development program, still represents the wisest course. Further, it is believed that such a balanced program will not impose unreasonably large demands upon the Nation’s resources and that such a program will lead to a preeminent role in aeronautics and space.” (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings [Part 3], Senate Comm, on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 1015-1102)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator since 1958, died of cancer at age 67. He was a former Director of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, a former Associate Director of the National Bureau of Standards, and—for forty-five years—an ordained minister in the Methodist Church. An internationally renowned scientist-engineer who once said he and the airplane grew up together, he was recognized for his leadership in the development of aeronautics and astronautics. He generally was regarded as the man who guided the United States into the space age. Dr. Dryden served the U.S. Government with distinction since 1918 in science and technology, as an administrator, and more recently as a skilled diplomat in negotiating international agreements for cooperative efforts in the peaceful exploration of space. The recipient of many awards and honors, Dr. Dryden was especially known for his scientific contributions to fluid mechanics and boundary-layer phenomena. At Johnson City, Tex., President Johnson said that the death of Dr. Dryden “is a deep personal loss and a reason for national sorrow. . . . No soldier ever performed his duty with more bravery and no statesman ever charted new courses with more dedication than Hugh Dryden. Whenever the first American space man sets foot on the moon or finds a new trail to a new star, he will know that Hugh Dryden was one of those who gave him knowledge and illumination.” From Great Falls, Mont., Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the nasc, said: “The death of Dr. Hugh Dryden is a sad loss to all of us, and especially to those of us who have been guided by his wisdom, experience, and great common sense in planning the nation’s space program. “We shall miss him sorely as we plot our course for the decade ahead. So much of what this nation has been able to do in aeronautics and space over the past 40 years we owe to the creative science and the confident, skillful leadership of this great public servant. I know of no finer example of modern man in all his versatility than Dr. Hugh Dryden, whose vision, courage, and lifetime of service have helped to lead the way into the Space Age. . . .” nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was a man of his time—of the air age, of the nuclear age, of the space age, with all the implications of modern science and technology for the accomplishments of his time. He was also a man for all times because his courage in undertaking the conquest of air and space, his scientific, engineering, and administrative competence and his qualities of humanity and leadership mark him as one of the truly great men who have contributed over the years to these fields. He will be sorely missed in nasa, in the nation and, indeed, in many nations.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “The country has lost one of its greatest scientists and one of its most dedicated citizens. The country will have to continue with its space and aeronautics programs without him —but will not be able to carry on as well without his inspiring leadership and ability.” (Texts)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff would not terminate his service with nasa September 1, 1965, to assume the presidency of Case Institute of Technology as NASA had previously announced, but would continue as Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology until a successor was selected and had assumed these duties. Dr. Bisplinghoff would then become Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb in the advanced research and technology field. (nasa Release 65-274)
A detailed report on the progress of the Mars-bound mariner IV spacecraft was presented at annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C.: mariner iv, launched Nov. 28, 1964, was on course to fly by Mars shortly after 9 p.m. edt on July 14. Four of mariner iv’s six experiments were still working well. The ionization experiment had ceased to function and data from the solar plasma probe were only partially interpretable. At 3 p.m., mariner iv was 58,176,037 mi. from the earth. It had traveled 221,330,000 mi. on its journey of 325 million miles. mariner iv had returned a considerable amount of scientific data. A cosmic ray telescope aboard the 575-lb. spacecraft had, for example, “observed” more solar protons than alpha particles from the sun. John A. Simpson of Univ. of Chicago said this indicated there was a “different kind of mechanism operating on the sun for accelerating these particles in space.” A report from a team of scientists from NASA GSFC and Temple Univ. indicated that mariner iv was encountering increasing amounts of cosmic dust as it moved further away from the sun. mariner iv’s cosmic dust detector had been hit 95 times. Dr. James A. Van Allen predicted that if Mars had a magnetic field no stronger than '/sod1 the intensity of the earth’s, MARINER iv would detect it in July. Richard Sloan of JPL said he and his colleagues planned to try to establish a radio lock with mariner iv in September 1967 after it had journeyed through space and come back to within 40-50 million miles of earth, (nasa Releases 65-117, 65-117-A, 65-117-B, 65-117-C, 65-117-D, 65-117-E, 65—117-F; Transcript)
The Soviet Union was considering sending weather observers into outer space in manned meteorological satellites, Prof. K. I. Kondratief, Univ. of Leningrad, said at a meeting in Geneva of the World Meteorological Organization’s Scientific Advisory Committee. (NYT, 2/21/65, 24) February 21: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks taped for the nbc-tv program, “The Sunday Show,” that the U.S. would extend its national strength into the space dimension. “We expect to explore the moon, not just to photograph it or visit it,” he said. “We plan to explore and chart the planets as well. We shall expand our earth laboratories into space laboratories.” Mr. Humphrey praised the Nation’s space effort, saying that such activities had encouraged economic development, stimulated new products and processes, and furthered the cause of peace. This was Mr. Humphrey’s first public statement on the space program as Vice President, (nbc-tv)
Dr. William W. Hagerty, president of Drexel Institute of Technology, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in university/industry relations, (nasa Release 65—291)
In a memorandum report to President Johnson on Gemini vi NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “This is to report to you that the Titan ii booster which we expected to use on October 25 to launch Gemini 6, carrying astronauts Schirra and Stafford, is now being removed from the launching pad. We have examined carefully the question of whether this booster could be used for the launching of Gemini 7 into a 14-day orbit, and our studies show that the Titan booster which we have especially prepared for Gemini 7 is more suitable. This is the reason for the change from the booster now on the pad to the one especially designed for the Gemini 7 launch. “Also, we have examined a number of ways to speed up the accumulation of the information which the Gemini 6 rendezvous flight was designed to give us. We find that it may be possible to take advantage of the work we have already done in mating the Gemini 6 to its booster and to the launching facility and thus save considerable time in its re-erection. If we can launch Gemini 7 without serious damage to the launching pad, there is some possibility that we could immediately re-erect the Gemini 6 spacecraft and booster and launch it in time to rendezvous with Gemini 7 before the 14-day flight comes to an end.” (Text; Pres. Doc., 11/1/65, 734)
Special NASA awards ceremony was held at MSC, with NASA Administrator James E. Webb making the presentations. Rep. Olin Teague, Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also was present for the occasion. NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest honor, was presented to Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, MSC, and to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Command Pilot for GEMINI VI mission. Slayton’s award was for “his outstanding performance in directing NASA flight operations and for his leadership of the continuous and rapid adaptation of NASA’s astronaut training activities to the experience gained from Mercury and Gemini flights. . . .” Schirra’s dsm cited “his courage and judgment in the face of great personal danger, his calm, precise and immediate perception of the situation that confronted him and his accurate and critical decisions that made possible the successful execution of the Gemini VI mission.” This ceremony marked the first time the top NASA medal was presented away from Washington. (With these two presentations, all seven original Mercury astronauts had received the Distinguished Service Medal.) nasa Exceptional Service Medal was presented to the crews of gemini VII (Astronauts Borman and Lovell) and VI (Astronauts Schirra and Stafford); William C. Schneider, Deputy Director of the Gemini Program for Mission Operations, omsf; and John T. Mengel, Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems Directorate, gsfc. Group Achievement Awards were presented to the following groups from the Cape: ksc Launch Operations; ksc Spacecraft Operations; Martin Co. Gemini program group; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Gemini program group; Gemini Launch Vehicle Div., afsc 6555th Aerospace Test Wing: and afetr Test Operations Div. (msc Gemini VII/ Gemini VI Fact Sheet; Exec. Secy., msc Awards Committee; nasa Proj. Off.)
President Lyndon B. Johnson is briefed on the Mariner mission at nasa Headquarters. Left to right, James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, President Johnson, Vice President Hubert 1L Humphrey, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. world were “deep in your debt.'’ (NASA Announcement 65-43; Simons, Wash, Post, 2'26 65; Seldstedt. Balt. Sun. 2* 26 65: Young. Chic. Trib., 2/26/65: Mohr, NYT, 2/26/65, 10) February 25; usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite pavload. I U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 190S, 135)	'	_	_
In season’s greetings to NASA employees, Administrator James E. Webb said: “During 1965 we have continued our effects to place and keep the United States in a position second to none in space and aeronautics. This is significant for many reasons, but the most important of these, perhaps, is the fact that our efforts constitute a very real and significant contribution toward the ultimate realization of the true meaning of Christmas—peace on earth.” (nasa Hq.)
Dr. John J. Brennan, Jr., Chairman of the Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industries, said he would take to Washington the committee’s fight to keep the NASA Electronic Research Center out of Cambridge. Dr. Brennan said the City of Cambridge’s claim that the renewal project would cost the Federal government $15 million was way off. He said costs would be between $40 million and $50 million. In a letter to the House and Senate Appropriations Committees and the House and Senate space committees, Brennan stated: “We are taking every proper course of action, legal and otherwise, to stop this senseless destruction. . . .We do not believe that the overall destruction will bear judicial scrutiny.” Paul Frank, director of the Cambridge Urban Redevelopment Authority, said Brennan’s figures were inaccurate and that the $40-$50 million figure was wrong. He claimed the overall cost would bring it down to $14,500,000. Of this figure, the Federal government cost would be $9,600,000 with the remaining $4,900,000 paid by the City of Cambridge, he asserted. (Boston Globe, 1/11/65) During the week of January 11: Titan ill program director Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) said at a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences that the launch of the Titan iii-a, on Dec. 10, 1964, may have gained the most accurate orbit ever achieved in the U.S. space program. The vehicle achieved an orbit with 102-n. mi. apogee and a 99-n. mi. perigee against a planned 100-n. mi. nominal orbital altitude. Deviation from a true circle was 0.00075 against a predicted value of 0.00050. Time for a single orbit was 88.2 min., within 0.04 min. of the time predicted. (M&R, 1/18/65, 10)
Subcommittee Chairman Albert Thomas (D-Tex.) and the House Independent Offices Appropriations Subcommittee were highly critical of Astronaut Virgil Grissom’s deviation from flight plan instructions during the GEMINI ill flight and eating a sandwich instead of fasting. According to published reports, one Subcommittee member referred to a “$30 million corned beef sandwich,” and another asked NASA Administrator James E. Webb how he could control a multi-million dollar budget if he could not control two astronauts. (Av. Wk., 4/12/ 65, 25; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/15/65)
Commencing on the visit to Washington, D.C., by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., the Washington Post wrote: “Colonel Cooper has been through all this before following his 22-orbit flight in May, 1963. The reception this time will be less spectacular. But this does not mean that the astronauts have become passe or that the American people are indifferent to their achievements. Rather it is a reflection of the public’s trust in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s space program. For if the people no longer gawk and shout, they still applaud vigorously, with their hearts as well as their hands, each monumental step in the great venture into space.” (Wash. Post, 9/14/65)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
Gen. Mark E. Bradley (usaf, Ret.), former commanding general of USAF Logistics Command, was appointed consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on management matters and evaluation of NASA’s contributions to supersonic transport development and aeronautical research programs, (nasa Release 65-330)
New York Times commented on the malfunction of the fuel cell in the GEMINI v spacecraft launched August 21: “Past manned space flights have gone so well in most respects that yesterday’s tension-filled hours were a shock and a surprise. It has all seemed too easy to the millions of television viewers who have observed previous man-in-space experiments. It was natural to assume that once Gemini 5 was so successfully launched, all would once again go more or less as planned. But those intimately involved with these efforts have known all along of the numerous possibilities of trouble. They were not greatly surprised that one of those possibilities for major difficulty—in this case a malfunction of the fuel cell on Gemini 5—turned into reality. “There will undoubtedly be future emergencies in space. Yesterday’s events are a sobering reminder that the effort to reach the moon during this decade is straining the limits of available technology, and that serious risks are being taken. These hazards are also faced, of course, by the Soviet manned space program. The brave men both countries are sending into space would be the prime beneficiaries of full Soviet-American cooperation that would pool both countries’ knowledge and experience to minimize the dangers inherent in these pioneering efforts.” (NYT, 8/22/65, 10E)
Stanford Univ. received a $2,080,000 facilities grant from NASA to assist in the construction of a space-engineering research building. After signing the NASA/Stanford agreement, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “Construction of these facilities will help Stanford provide the laboratory areas so urgently needed by scientists engaged in NASA-supported research and training activities. The national space effort will further benefit by thus increasing the capability of Stanford to train greater numbers of highly qualified young scientists, engineers and researchers.” (nasa Release 65-285)
Lowell Thomas, news commentator, explorer, and author, was named the fifth Honorary Chairman of the Robert Hutchings Goddard Library Program (Clark Univ.). The four other honorary chairmen were previously announced [see July 16]. Appointments to the Goddard Library’s International Sponsors Committee were announced:	Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director. (Goddard, 8/65)
“Our military space program is a wall decoration,” said James J. Hagerty, Jr., in an editorial in the Journal of the Armed Forces. He continued: “The technology is there, but we are not exploiting it. Our DOD civilian leadership is content to drift along with the idea that someday we’ll get around to it if we need it. This attitude seems to be based on the theory often advanced by Secretary McNamara and echoed by [NASA Administrator] Mr. Webb in his Hill testimony, that there is Tittle chance that the Russians can develop a surprise military [space] capability’ ... If there is any chance at all, we should be doing something more than we’re doing.” (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 4/3/65, 8)
Policy statement on participation by NASA employees in “widely-attended dinners honoring aerospace pioneers” was issued by Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden:	“nasa policy does not prevent acceptance of an invitation from a company to attend such affairs, provided the expense borne by the company is limited to the cost of tickets. Lodging or travel expenses may not be accepted.” (NASA Ann.)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator, succeeding Dr. Hugh L. Dryden who died Dec. 2. Dr. Seamans, who had been Associate Administrator, would also retain that position for an indefinite period, (nasa Release 65-388)
Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed nuclear-rocket technology in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The recent reactor test experience shows that nuclear rockets can be made available to furnish thrust at high specific impulse for many possible post-Apollo missions. Whatever direction the future space program may take—whether toward extensive manned lunar exploration, unmanned solar-system exploration, or manned planetary exploration—the performance advantages of nuclear rockets will be available, valuable, and, certainly for the latter mission, necessary. Through this program the country will have the options it must have in selecting future missions. For the manned planetary missions, which they can perform for all planetary opportunities, nuclear rockets offer such substantial spacecraft weight reductions, and associated savings in cost, that no less-efficient form of spacecraft propulsion could be seriously considered. . . .”	(A&A, 6/65, 34-35) During June: A decade of nuclear-rocket research at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory was described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Roderick W. Spence and Franklin P. Durham, both of LASL. The 10-yr. effort reached new levels of attainment in 1964—65, with successful tests of the Kiwi-B-4E and nrx-a2 reactors, and initial strides in the more advanced Phoebus reactor program. “The entire operations of both Kiwi-B-4E and nrx-a2 gave very close to the desired results and met or exceeded all of the test objectives. “. . . the past decade of experience has given us confidence that nuclear-rocket engines can be built and that they will prove to give good performance with high reliability.” (A&A, 6/65, 42-46)
In a telegram of congratulations to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on the rendezvous of GEMINI vi and GEMINI vii, President Johnson said: “You have all moved us one step higher on the stairway to the moon. By conducting this adventure for all the world to see, you have reaffirmed our faith in a free and open society. We invite those throughout the world who have shared our suspense and suffered with us during our temporary failures to share with us this triumph, for it belongs not just to the United States but to all mankind.” (Pres. Doc., 12/20/65, 593)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Princeton Univ. (Off. of Deputy Administrator)
In a White House ceremony, President Johnson conferred Exceptional Service Medals on GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Charles Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts. The President announced that military promotions for the astronauts would be submitted to the Senate immediately. (Richard, Wash. Post, 9/15/65, A3) Following the ceremony, Vice President Hubert Humphrey accompanied the astronauts, their families, and Dr. Berry to the National Academy of Sciences. Humphrey told the Academy: “The achievements of our astronauts are not just the achievements of two men. They are the achievements of family, country and of a society. . . . “This is the best example of cooperation between Government and industry, between public and private, that I know in this nation, and might I add, that it is an example that should be emulated by many others in many other endeavors in this country. “But our space program ... is more than national. It would be well enough if it were only national, but it is more than that. It is truly international. And I want ... to stress our space program’s potential as an arm of our foreign policy, of our international relations, and particularly of our peace policy, because this Government has but one objective in the world: a just, honorable and enduring peace. . . .” Astronaut Cooper summarized some of the things that man could do in space: “. . . we again showed that man can do a great deal of geological observations while in space. ... I think it is very significant that although you pass across some [geological formations] rather rapidly you still are able to . . . observe them and you are very capable of photographing them in great detail. “. . . man is very capable of doing oceanographic observations. We have noted that you can detect a great deal of detail as to the depths of water, as to the currents of running water, and even to wind patterns that run on the waters, the wave patterns caused by the wind. “. . . man could do a great deal of weather observations, both in real time and photographically. And we . . . were able to pinpoint one tropical storm in between some of the planned observations, and apparently that was very accurate pinpointing of its position. “We determined in our discussions later with the Weather Bureau people, that for future use ... we could get much greater accuracy even on pinpointing these by the use of our platform combination and taking angles to a great deal more accuracy, rather than just estimations of the angular distance and locations. “We found that you could do a great deal of visual observations of the phenomena around the earth ... we picked up ship wakes, several hundred miles away of . . . the contrast of the white wake against the blue background in very clear weather areas. . . .” Conrad revealed that photographs taken during the Gemini v mission at the request of the Mexican government, had located volcanoes in Mexico that “the Mexicans didn’t know they had. . . .” He also said: “I think a system that has been left out and nobody has talked about is our environmental control system, which performed in a most outstanding manner for eight days. We had probably the nicest, freshest air that anybody could want to breathe, and we had an unusual first in the space business: most environmental control systems had been loaded down and pilot after pilot came back and said they were too warm, and we fought and fought it, and at McDonnell, to have a little change made because of some of the problems of heat exchange between the inlet and outlet pipes. It turned out that we were too cold. “With two tubes running, we were probably the first ones to shut the cabin heat exchanger down and run everything as hot as we could get it in there. We were just right. And the thing that most surprised us on opening the hatch on landing, we couldn’t tell the difference between inside and out, and that is a monumental job for that small system.” Dr. Berry concluded the program by presenting a review of the medical data received from the gemini v mission. The astronauts’ party then proceeded to the Capitol where Vice President Humphrey presented them to the Senate and then to the House. Cooper told the House: “We set out with our prime objective on Gemini 5 to fly 8 days. We were to fly this 8 days primarily to show that man, with all the various equipment on board, and the machines, could safely and very functionally do this 8-day mission with no adverse effects. We were entirely successful in this. . . .” Conrad explained: “Gemini 5 was a significant advance in the whole program in that we flew the first all-out spacecraft. We would not have been able to go without the fuel cells for 8 days. This was the first time they were flown. We had the first radars from which we got some very excellent data to enable the GT-6 to continue with their present rendezvous plans. It was the first time that the cryogenic storage of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been run that long in space. . . .” Dr. Berry told the Senate: “We are conducting a program such as this [Gemini program] ... to make man a vital part of such a research effort and to show the facility that man has to gain scientific information using vehicles such as we are able to build in this country. . . . “I think I can report, so far as information has been obtained in this country to date and at the moment, that we are the only ones who have that sort of information for the duration of which we are speaking. We can confidently say that man has been able to perform very well up to 4 days in a weightless state earlier, and on this mission 8 days in a weightless state. He has then been able to re-adapt back to a 1-G environment. We have living proof of that.” (Texts; CR, 9/14/65, 22924-22927; nas-nrc News Report, 9/65, 1-2)
Announcement by Soviet Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov at the 16th International Astronautical Congress in Athens that the U.S.S.R. planned to orbit a permanent manned space station as the next major project in its space program received editorial comment in the Philadelphia Inquirer: “To be sure, Cosmonaut Leonov adds that after ‘many space laboratories’ have been established, ‘with crews being periodically changed,’ his country expects to give attention to ‘a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon.’ It has been understood all along, of course, that this was the method Russia would use in sending men to the moon. The emphasis on many permanent manned space stations orbiting close to earth, however, shows all too plainly that the real concern of the generals running the Communist space program is in the military advantages that lie in control of the space immediately beyond the atmosphere and over the heads of free nations around the world.” (Phil. Inq., 9/19/65)
United Airlines announced that fog-dispersal plans involving aerial seeding of clouds were being discussed in nine cities in addition to those where the technique had already been successful. United had conducted successful seeding operations last winter using light planes to drop ice pellets into the top layers of super-cooled fog. The airline estimated that the fog-abatement program had permitted 135 of its flights, carrying 3,200 passengers, to operate at airports that otherwise would have been closed, (ap, NYT, 8/21/65, 48) August 21-29; CE.MiNi v launch (left), and Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and L- Gordon Cooper, Jr., onboard U.S.S. Lake Champlain after eight-day mission and recovery (above). First stage of the booster burned for 156.8 sec. Second stage then separated, burned for 179.6 sec. Traveling at 17,605 mph. 7,947-lb. Gemini v was inserted into orbit: apogee. 215.4 mi. (347.4 km.); perigee, 100 mi. (161.3 km.); period, 89.58 min.; inclination to the equator, 32.6°. Fifty-six minutes after liftoff, astronauts fired thruster rockets to raise the perigee to 106 mi. (179.9 km.) in preparation for rendezvous with Rep, a practice maneuver to prepare for Gemini 6’s rendezvous in orbit with an Agena stage. At beginning of 2nd orbit, astronauts ejected Rep from the adapter section behind the spacecraft. Rep moved away at five miles per hour. About two hours after insertion of gemini v into orbit, oxygen pressure for the new fuel cell dropped from 800 to 60 lbs. psi because of a failure in the heater element circuitry. This pressure-drop severely reduced the fuel cell’s output of electrical power. The Rep experiment was abandoned and there was some apprehension as to whether the flight could continue. At 27 hrs, into the flight. Cooper and Conrad successfully locked their spacecraft radar on a spare Rep transponder mounted on a tower at NASA Merritt Island Launch Area during a six-minute pass. Oxygen pressure began building up in the fuel-cell system and hopes of completing the mission were raised. On Aug. 23, as gemini v made its 32nd revolution around the earth, the spacecraft began a series of maneuvers to rendezvous with a simulated Agena upper stage in lieu of the Rep experiment. By the 34th orbit Gemini v was only 16 mi. behind the simulated Agena, very close to the planned 15-mi. separation NASA hoped to have on GEMINI VI prior to final closing and docking maneuver. Last maneuver was not attempted because of the need to conserve fuel on GEMINI V. On Aug. 24, Astronauts Cooper and Conrad twice spotted objects on the ground; they observed a Minuteman icbm launch from Vanden-berg afb, and tracked and photographed it; they sighted a huge checkerboard design laid out on the ground near Laredo, Tex., and reported direction in the which arrows in the center of the blocks were pointed. During the flight, the astronauts both remained in good spirits. Sixteen of the planned seventeen experiments were conducted. Despite the heavy work schedule, Cooper and Conrad each slept about five hours a day. The astronauts ate about 2,000 calories of food a day, less than the 2,900 calories prescribed for the mission, and each drank six pounds of water daily. Aug. 27 saw problems with the steady accumulation of water in the fuel cell, which threatened to exceed water-storage capacity; faulty attitude and maneuvering thrusters; and the boiling off of hydrogen gas which caused the spacecraft to roll. On Aug. 28, the fuel cell and the left thruster were functioning well. Conrad reported seeing “a carrier and a destroyer steaming right into Jacksonville”; it was actually a tug pulling a large barge. On Aug. 29 Cooper and Conrad talked via radio with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), in Sealab II on the floor of the Pacific off La Jolla, Calif. Approach of Hurricane Betsy from the coast -of South America forced NASA officials to order GEMINI V to land one revolution early. Two more of gemini v’s thrusters froze, but there was still sufficient steering power to correct minor variations. To begin reentry, the astronauts fired four braking rockets as the spacecraft passed 700 mi. north of Hawaii. Reentry was normal. gemini v splashed down into the Atlantic at 8:56 a.m. edt, 600 mi. east of Jacksonville—90 mi. off target. A human error in computing the elapsed time of flight caused the target error. Assisted from the capsule by Navy frogmen 45 min. after splashdown, the astronauts were taken by helicopter to U.S.S. Lake Champlain for medical debriefing. (nasa Release 65-262; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 8/22/65, 1, 72, 73, El; 8/23/65, 1, 16; 8/24/65, 1, 16; 8/25/65, 1, 24; 8/26/65, 1, 15; 8/27/65, 1, 12; 8/29/65, 1, 68, 69 ; 8/30/65, 1, 16, 17; Wash. Post, 8/22/65, 1, 34; 8/23/65, 1, 3; 8/24/65, 1, 6; 8/25/65, 1, 10, 24; 8/26/65, 11; 8/27/65, 1, 6, 7; 8/28/65, 1, 7; 8/29/65, 1, 8, 10; 8/30/65, 1, 9, 11; WSJ, 8/23/65, 1; 8/24/65, 1; 8/27/65, 1; 8/30/65, 1; Av. Wk„ 8/30/65, 24^28)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Apollo Program manager at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, announced at a press conference at North American Aviation’s Tulsa facilities that the Tulsa plant would build 16 Apollo service modules. Apollo contract work there totaled more than $61 million. (Leslie, Tulsa Daily World, 4/15/65)
NASA had compromised the scientific value of the interplanetary research program by spending too little on the Deep Space Net communications system, according to Frank Drake, prof, at Cornell Univ., in Saturday Review article. Drake noted that mariner IV would only be able to relay 22 photos of Mars back to earth and that these would be of lesser quality—all because of communications limitations: “. . . one concludes that the space program could well use an array containing a hundred or more 85-ft. antennas. One array might cost $40,000,000, still only a few per cent of what will almost certainly be spent on planetary exploration in the next ten years.” (SR, 1/2/65)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, editor of Science, editorialized: “To date the purely scientific results from our manned space program have not been impressive. With good reason, the engineering and medical aspects have been given overriding priority. In effect, our manned space program has consisted of a series of great technological stunts. . . . “Will the Space Agency be able to devise a continuing series of spectaculars of ascending dramatic quality? I think not. The first successful landing on the moon will be a climax. Just as succeeding climbs of Mt. Everest, after the first ascent, have drawn diminishing attention, later lunar travel will lose its novelty. “As for Mars, how many popular songs have been written about it? . . . More fundamental is the question, ‘How many people know where Mars is, or even care?’ Perhaps man will one day go to the planet, but the psychological and emotional impact of the trip will be pale in comparison with that of the first successful landing on the moon.” (Science, 10/29/65, 557)
NASA Office of Technology Utilization issued a report on metal-forming techniques currently in use in the aerospace industry including those in the experimental stage; a survey, “Handling Hazardous Materials,” dealing with such oxidizers as liquid fluorine, chlorine trifluoride, nitrogen tetroxide, and ozone; a book containing 71 ideas for shop techniques and applications used successfully in space-related research at NASA centers; and a technical survey tracing significant recent progress in plasma jet technology, (nasa Releases)
Philip E. Culbertson became Director of Lunar Mission Studies, Advanced Manned Missions Program Office, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq. Culbertson would direct studies concerning manned exploration of the moon in the time period following Project Apollo. Before joining NASA, he had been associated with General Dynamics/Astronautics since 1958, where he was Chief Project Engineer for Atlas launch vehicle systems, manager of the Atlas launch vehicle systems engineering and reliability program, manager and director of manned space studies, and director of advanced development. (nasa Release 65-308)
Addressing the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “I would like to acknowledge the debt that NASA owes to the armed forces for early and continuing work that has contributed to some of our most successful space projects. As you know, NASA works closely with the Air Force in the development of launch vehicles and in the general technology of space flight. . . . “As an example—among many—of cooperative nasa-dod activities: on January 1, NASA transferred control of its operating SYNCOM II and syncom in communications satellites to the Department of Defense. . . . “When the great dod missile site construction program—which ran at one time to $2.8 billion a year—subsided, the Corps of Engineers brought its tremendous engineering capability to the construction of NASA facilities. As the Corps moved toward completion of its work for NASA, its abilities will have been enhanced by the experience of building these great new national resources. The Corps, with new skills, will be able to move to new national requirements with assurance that it has performed extraordinarily well in engineering fields never before attempted. “Today there are detailed to NASA 254 active duty military personnel. Five of our astronauts are graduates of this great Academy. Nothing could be more fitting. For the debt modern American science and technology owes to West Point is too large to be repaid. It can visibly be traced back to Sylvanus Thayer who not only is the father of this Academy but who had a tremendous influence for half a century in the field of technical and scientific education throughout the United States.” (Text)
The extent of the economic impact of the space program on a sevencounty Central Florida area around Cape Kennedy was disclosed in a report by the Univ. of Florida Bureau of Economic and Business Research. Total personal incomes in the seven counties had increased from $372,779,000 in 1950 to $572,375,000 in 1954, then more than tripled to $1,738,566,000 in 1963.	(Houston Post, 10/6/65; ksc Historian )
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced during a ceremony at Western Reserve Univ. honoring retiring Dr. T. Keitb Glennan, president of Case Institute of Technology, that Glennan had been asked to return to NASA as an adviser. Webb said Glennan would be asked to review NASA spending plans for the next ten years. Glennan, Webb’s predecessor as NASA Administrator, was appointed by President Eisenhower to head the agency when it was formed in 1958. (Ludwigson, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 5/15/65)
In commemoration of Goddard Day, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator and other Washington officials telephoned greetings via relay II to Dr. Goddard’s widow in Worcester, Mass. The call had been arranged by Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. Other events commemorating Goddard Day: At NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, a film on Dr. Goddard’s life and work was premiered; at NASA Manned Space Flight Center, Astronaut Scott Carpenter spoke to several hundred science students about Dr. Goddard and rocketry; at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, special recognition was shown, and at Smithsonian Air and Space Museum an original Goddard rocket was displayed. (NASA Release 65-87)
M/Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), director of the Apollo program in the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the American Bar Association’s Seminar of the Committee on the Law of Outer Space in Miami Beach: “In many respects, the Gemini iv flight of Jim Mc-Divitt and Ed White could well be viewed as a turning point in the American manned space program. The success of this mission has given us greatly increased confidence that we will be able to carry out our national goal of a manned landing on the moon in this decade. “It is a pleasure to report that the Apollo Program is also moving ahead very rapidly, and we are meeting our key milestones on schedule. The progress on Apollo is especially rewarding since it is the largest and most complex single research and development project ever undertaken. This is a crucial year for Apollo, but our prospects look good and we are becoming increasingly confident that the lunar landings will take place before the end of 1969.” (Text)
John G. Lee, pioneer aircraft designer and former director of research for United Aircraft Corp., had joined nasa as a part-time consultant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb on aeronautical research, (nasa Release 65-143)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the Washington Board of Trade, said: “In 1959, when NASA attempted 14 space flights, we had 37 percent success in missions and launch vehicles. Last year we attempted 30 missions, more than twice as many as in 1959, and the percentage of success in missions went up to 83, with 93 percent success in vehicles. So far this year, the percentages are holding close to those of 1964.” (Text)
At NASA Hq. Annual Honors Ceremony, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, said: “Mine was the relatively easy task of putting together an organization. Yours has been the much more difficult task of making good the promises we held out, at times so naively, to the Congress and the people of this Nation and the world. But handling these heavy responsibilities cannot be the duty of just one man, or a small group of men at the top. “This Agency’s success attests to the skill with which NASA employees have been and are carrying out their jobs. ... To all of you and to the thousands of NASA people working at their tasks at whatever location throughout this nation and the world, I am proud to say— well done! And I am confident that the hard won leadership position you have attained will be maintained throughout the years ahead.” (Text) NASA Administrator Webb presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards to H. Julian Allen, Ames Research Center; Leslie H. Meredith and William Nordberg, gsfc; Dan Schneiderman and Eber-hardt Rechtin, JPL. Smith J. DeFrance, Ames Research Center, and Bruce T. Lundin, lrc, received Outstanding Leadership Medals. Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Exceptional Service Medals to John R. Cassani, jpl; Seymour C. Himmel, lrc; and William Lilly, Hq. He presented Group Achievement Awards to the Agena Project, lrc; Florida Operations Team, ksc; Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., KSC; and Scout Project Office, LARC. Seventeen thirty-year service awards were presented by Earl D. Hil-burn, Deputy Associate Administrator, (nasa Release 65-315)
Reported that NASA Administrator James E. Webb had ruled against a protest by a group of nasa astronauts of the NASA decision to limit the first manned Gemini flight to three orbits. The astronauts had requested that the CT-3 flight should be “open-end,” leaving it to the astronauts as to whether they should go for three or even 30 orbits. (Macomber, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 1/13/65)
The vast accumulation of knowledge generated by the space program required a “new wave” of science reporters to challenge and stimulate “a new wave of readers and viewers who are seeking answers,” Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, told the Sigma Delta Chi National Convention in Los Angeles. He referred to a need to look “beyond the obvious and the glamorous to what is happening in space and science and what impact this will have socially, diplomatically, politically and economically.” (Text)
Stanley R. Reinartz, previously deputy manager of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Saturn i/ib Program Office, had been named program manager of the newly established Saturn IB/Centaur office, MSFC announced. The office would manage the program definition and design phase of the three-stage Saturn IB/Centaur space vehicle system, (msfc Release 65-124; Marshall Star, 5/26/65,1)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb appeared before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices, in support of the $5.26 billion NASA appropriation requested by President Johnson for fy 1966. He said:	“The budget submitted to the Congress by the President provides for activities that are essential to continuing the progress that we have made towards our goal of preeminence in space sciences, application satellites, manned space flight, and advanced research and technological development necessary for aircraft improvements and for future space activities. It does not provide for everything that we could do or would like to do. In fact, it has been necessary within the strict budget requirements imposed by the President that certain desirable project activities started in previous years be omitted from the 1966 budget. . . . “Within the confines of this limited budget, the President has provided the funds necessary to preserve the opportunity that we still believe we have to accomplish a manned lunar landing and exploration within this decade. The margin for insurance that had been built into our original program plan has largely disappeared. However, we now estimate this may be possible if we can maintain our current successful development efforts and make the all-up systems testing procedure work on the very large Saturn V-Apollo combination to launch men toward the Moon on earlier flights than we had originally planned. There is, therefore, still an opportunity to accomplish this national space objective within the time specified. Our work to date gives us somewhat more confidence than we had a year ago that we can still achieve the objectives that were planned in 1961 in spite of a limit on resources that will not fund all the flights planned at that time. It is important, however, to keep in mind that in Gemini we are just now in a position to find out by flight experiments how men can live, work, remain efficient, and make important contributions in space for extended periods. . . .” (Testimony; Incl. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 846-96)
Voice of NASA Administrator James E. Webb was relayed from Washington, D.C., to Tulsa, Okla., via relay ii for the dedication of Tulsa’s Central Library. Mr. Webb spoke briefly before triggering an electronic signal that turned on the lights in the new building, (afp; Tulsa Daily World, 6/10/65)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics:	“I feel that our record over the past calendar year is evidence of the success we have had in building a team that is dedicated to effective management. The space flight record for 1964 is impressive by several standards:	number of flights, percent of success, and variety of missions. The graph (spaceflight mission record) shows that, in terms of percentage, our 1964 success record is nearly the same as the high achieved in 1963; 83 percent compared with 85 percent in 1963. However, we more than doubled the number of successful missions from 1963 to 1964, from 11 to 25. . . . “Other significant measures of the pace and rate of change in our space program have been our performance in terms of spacecraft operations and data return. These performance indicators are at the heart of a successful space program. “For example, in 1964 an average of 54 experiments were functioning in space throughout the year; this is an improvement of over 35 percent from 1963, when we averaged 40 working experiments. “The volume of information brought back from space, measured in millions of data points per day, shows a tenfold increase over previous years:	in 1964 we were collecting about 57 million bits of information each day from our flight missions. . . .” Dr. Seamans listed NASA management accomplishments during the past year “to find new techniques and new methods to carry out our jobs.” Among them:	establishment of Mission Analysis Div. from the Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology at Ames Research Center; conducting the joint dod-nasa Launch Vehicle Cost Study; growth of incentive contract program (“over $1 billion are under active incentive contracts”) ; and application of phased project planning. “The budget presented here has already undergone critical review by NASA’s management, the Bureau of the Budget, and the President. It does not provide any contingency funds for the approved missions; it is predicated on a cost reduction program that will require us to operate more efficiently; it represents a carefully pared program priority list. In summary: “First, NASA is dedicated to the accomplishment of the present approved missions and projects in terms of cost, schedule, and technical performance. “Second, new effort is needed to maintain a position of leadership in aeronautics and space. This includes the definition of a new program for exploration of the planets commencing with Mars in 1971; the research and design necessary for effective extension of present Apollo and Saturn capabilities for manned flight; integration of the Centaur stage with the Saturn launch vehicle for planetary and other unmanned payloads; initiation of an advanced solar observatory satellite; and utilization of a prototype xb-70 aircraft for aeronautical research. “Third, an aggressive research and advanced development effort must be maintained in many fields, including chemical and nuclear propulsion, to assure the nation meaningful options and alternatives in the selection of future aeronautical and space goals and the ability to react decisively to external pressures and opportunities. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 37-51)
A briefing given by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to President Johnson and the Cabinet in session said that the success of the last two Gemini missions “has proved the design and confirmed the results of the ground tests, has increased our confidence in the reliability of the over-all Gemini systems, and has enabled the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to advance the Gemini program such that rendezvous and docking are now scheduled during calendar year 1965.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Harvard Business School Club of New York:	“The impact of the space program cannot be described just by a recital of the flow of technology to industry. The NASA system of management, for example, has efficiently mobilized for research and development in aeronautics and space some 400,000 men and women and is utilizing some 20,000 industrial companies under prime and subcontract arrangements. We are handling about 250,000 procurement actions a year, and over 150 universities are involved in the scientific, engineering, and training programs required for the rapid solutions and high standards the program requires.” He continued:	“It should be emphasized that our space program is not a crash effort. It is a planned, deliberate development over a ten-year period. “Through our programs at NASA, we are proving out important new mechanisms through which investments made in science and technology can pay substantial dividends. The social, economic, and political forces at work in our society today are dependent, as never before, on developments in science and technology.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in Subcommittee of the Senate ate Committee on Appropriations’ hearings on the requested $5.26 billion appropriation request for NASA in fy 1966, said: “Recent events have clearly demonstrated two important facts about space activities. First, the United States has shown that it can successfully build and launch complex spacecraft to measure the space environment over large regions of our solar system and to extend our knowledge of our neighboring space bodies. We have developed a capability to produce large launch vehicles, to test them, and to launch them successfully. We are producing the space hardware for environmental testing that will prove out our concepts and engineering for the large launch vehicles and spacecraft that will be required to operate out to and on the moon and meet all the demands of our other difficult undertakings. We have successfully developed space technology for improved communications and weather reporting and forecasting systems. The Ranger program, completed with Ranger IX, provided 17,000	closeup pictures of the moon that have not only given us a better understanding of its topography but may reveal totally unexpected processes taking place below the surface.- The first two manned flights of the Gemini program verified the system for using man in space, the capability of the Gemini spacecraft, the capability of an astronaut to operate outside of his spacecraft, and the utility of the ground net and mission control, and provided the first tests of some of the equipment designed to accomplish rendezvous and docking. They also served as an orbiting space laboratory with several experiments included on both flights. “The second major fact demonstrated by recent space events is that the Soviet Union continues to make a major commitment to its aeronautical and space activity. In late 1964, they launched the first multi-manned mission with the three-man Voskhod I satellite. So far in this calendar year, they have launched 17 Cosmos satellites; in the Voskhod II flight they achieved the first extravehicular activities of man in space; in April they placed in orbit Molniya I, their first active communications satellite; in May they launched a Lunik spacecraft to the moon with a successful midcourse correction but apparent terminal failure; and only a few days ago they launched another Lunik spacecraft to the moon with an apparent unsuccessful midcourse correction. They, too, are expanding upon a sound basis for both manned and unmanned activities in space. The growth of their space activity is quite apparent. The exhibition in Paris yesterday afternoon of a new very large air transport indicates the same kind of emphasis on equipment to use the earth’s envelope of air. “In aeronautics, it is important to note the increasing tempo of our research in not only the aerodynamics, loads and structures, propulsion, and operating problems of supersonic flight, but hypersonic flight as well. There is a resurgence of interest in airbreathing propulsion in the form of advanced turbojet and ramjet engines to meet the requirements of supersonic and hypersonic transports and to make them competitive with transports operating in the subsonic range. And of course, we are also engaged at the other end of the speed spectrum in our work with vertical takeoff and landing aircraft. . . .” In response to questioning, Mr. Webb said: “A substantial amount of time is now being put into aeronautics by our top people. Remember, we have to go through the air to get to space. The use of thin wall structures and the use of power delivered by engines all come out of the same research competence which we have. “. . . I have been asked once or twice to consider whether NASA should take on the management and development of prototypes and all other factors relating to the building of a supersonic transport. “Each time I have pointed out that we spend a large number of our dollars through the military services because they have the procurement capability. They are the only people in the U.S. Government today who know how to let a contract, monitor a contract, and take delivery on large airplanes and large numbers of airplanes. We use them for that purpose in boosters where they have already developed the competence; and in new boosters like SATURN V, we also use their contract administration and their Project 60 for engines. . . .” (Ind. Off. Approp. Hearings, 1095-1195)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late NASA Deputy Administrator, was among the 11 recipients of the 1965 National Medal of Science announced by President Johnson. Established by Congress in 1959 for scientists who had made outstanding contributions in their fields, the award never before had been made posthumously. President Johnson said: “Hugh Dryden’s recent death ended nearly 50 years of singleminded devotion and effort by one of the most distinguished civil servants this country has ever known. Beloved by all his associates and respected throughout the world, Dr. Dryden more than any other man led us into the age of jet aircraft and space exploration.” (Pres. Doc., 12/20/65, 585; Wask. Post, 12/12/65, A5; Pomfret, NYT, 12/12/65, 78)
Gemini V launch counted down to T-10 min. before it was canceled and reset for Aug. 21. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr., (Lcdr., usn) were disappointed, but took the delay in stride. Cooper commented: “. . . you promised a launch today and not a wet mock.” Five hours before the scheduled launch, computer studies suggested that the liquid hydrogen in the spacecraft’s fuel cells was boiling off too quickly. Engineers’ attempts to force additional liquid hydrogen into the fuel cells succeeded only in hastening the escape of hydrogen gas. Finally, a colder liquid hydrogen was used with success. Ten minutes before lift-off, apparent troubles with a telemetry programer caused another hold in the countdown. During a thunderstorm, a lightning-induced power surge affected the electrical instruments. At 5:00 p.m., edt, as NASA officials were opening a press conference, they were informed that a fire had broken out in a communications cable linking the Gemini v launch complex with mission control center. The officials said that there was a “very good possibility” that Gemini 5 could be launched on Aug. 21, but that no definite date could be set until a partial countdown was held the next day to determine the damage caused by the power surge and the cable fire. (Clark, NYT, 8/20/65, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 8/20/65; A1; WSJ, 8/20/65, 1)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the U.S. Naval Academy: “. . . we are on the verge of another major breakthrough—the capability to forecast weather at least five days in advance with better accuracy than we can now predict 24 to 36 hours ahead. Atmospheric systems such as weather balloons and ground and seabased instruments which are already developed, together with satellite systems and high speed computers, should make it practicable in the next few years to establish a global observation system. As distinguished from the satellites whose main mission is cloud cover photographs, the more advanced future system will be able to map the structure of the earth’s atmosphere in terms of wind, temperature, and pressure at various altitudes.” He continued: “We foresee the possibility of carrying sensors in satellites that will give us the thermal patterns of the ocean’s surface which, when compared with the atmospheric conditions in any area, may give us the ability to predict the formation of fog. Similarly, ocean currents can be mapped and studied to advance the science of oceanography. We can even measure sea state—roughness of the sea —from a satellite.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in dedicating Boeing’s new Space Simulation Facility at Kent, Wash., said NASA planned to increase its aeronautical research. Webb pointed out that while the industry-Government relationship sometimes appeared to be that of vender and buyer, it was actually a partnership	with all of its problems. Significant influences on this partnership in recent years had included: the demand on industry for faster rates of technical advance; the increased complexity and technical difficulty of major programs with consequent delays and cost overruns; the decreasing volume of production work and increasing volume of research and development contracts; the steady increase in the requirements for technical and program management personnel; the requirement for Government to better define its objectives and requirements; the emphasis in the procuring agencies on increasing competition at all stages, including research and development; changes in contracting methods which offered more incentives but imposed more risk on contractors; and necessary increases in Government controls on configuration, quality, and on financial data in multiple contract, large and long-lead-time projects. (Text)
French and Soviet scientists ended a one-week conference on possible cooperation in space programs, but did not issue a communique. Howard Simons in the Washington Post quoted “informed sources” as saying the subject of a French-Russian communications satellite had been raised by the Soviet Union and that the French were lukewarm to the idea but had not rejected it. (Wash. Daily News, 10/21/65, 22; Simons, Wash. Post, 10/29/65, A6)
At Austin, Tex., Administrator James E. Webb announced that Dr. Robert C. Seamans would become the Deputy Administrator of NASA, filling the position held by the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. Dr. Seamans joined NASA as Associate Administrator of NASA on September 1, 1960. In this post he was general manager of NASA’s operations, including field laboratories, research centers, rocket testing and launching facilities, and a world-wide network of tracking stations. (eph)
In conversations with West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard, President Johnson announced he would send a commission to Europe early in 1966 to consult with nations wishing to join the U.S. in “a major endeavor” in space exploration. The group would be headed by nasa Administrator James E. Webb. The President said: “. . . we would like to discuss with you—and others—an even more ambitious plan to permit us to do together what we cannot do so well alone. Examples would be two projects which stand high on the space agenda. Both are very demanding and complex. One would be a probe to the sun, and another a probe to Jupiter. To cooperate on such a major endeavor would contribute vastly to our mutual knowledge and our mutual skills.” (Marder, Wash. Post, 12/21/65, Al)
Article in Soviet Life by Academician Anatoli Blagonravov described the “three-directions of modern astronautics”: “The first is the study of the earth’s upper atmosphere and the portion of space adjoining our planet. . . . “The second is the study and exploration of . . . the moon. “The third is the study of solar space, including the nearest planets, Mars and Venus. “Soviet scientists are working in all three directions. “The first to be launched, always, are the automatic scouts, followed by men. “. . . The final stage in the solution of the first problem—exploration of near space—will probably be to set up a permanent manned space observatory-town, with bilateral contact maintained through rockets. Of course, long before this, reliable systems of meteorological sputniks, worldwide television sputniks, navigation sputniks, etc., will have been established. . . . “Several interesting moves have been taken in the second direction [lunar exploration]. . . . The automatic devices have not yet explored the moon’s surface in detail, have not yet determined the conditions prevailing there. Presumably, they will be followed by animals. Only after the safe return of the ship to earth has been assured will man go to the moon. “Manned landing will be preceded by numerous earth-moon flights. In the course of these flights the conditions along the entire route will be studied, detailed maps of the lunar surface made, and lunar space investigated. Need I add that all these flights will be made by teams of scientists only ? “The first stage in the exploration of the moon will be to set up a permanent research station on its surface. . . . “In the third direction—the exploration of near solar space and near planets—only the first steps have been taken, the first flights of automatic scouts. . . . The interplanetary routes will be explored again and again by automatic stations that will bring back much needed information on space and the nature of the planets to which they are sent. Only then will the first interplanetary expeditions take off. They will carry even larger teams than the lunar reconnaissance expeditions.” (Soviet Life, 5/65, 48) During May: Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President of Cal Tech, discussed objectives of the space program and what men hoped to learn through the space program about the moon, the planets, the sun, interplanetary space, and the earth itself. He concluded: “Man’s growing understanding of the nature and constitution of the universe had led to new advances in our knowledge of physics and of chemistry; and these in turn have led to applications of this knowledge to the development of things which men have found useful. We have never been able to predict in advance what the usefulness would be of new knowledge about the nature of the physical universe. All we know is that, by and large, new knowledge always has proved useful— and often it has proved useful in the most unexpected and unforeseeable ways. No one would have predicted that Newton’s enunciation of the laws of motion would lead to the age of machinery; that Faraday’s experiments would lead to the age of electricity; or that Einstein’s theory of relativity and Bohr’s theory of the atom would lead to the atomic bomb and atomic power. “We do know one thing: that scientific research which has been aimed at purely practical problems though it often has been of great value, has over a long run been of less value in producing wholly new things than has the research aimed solely at the extension of knowledge. The extension of man’s knowledge is the basic and the overriding purpose of the space exploration program.” (Text, JPL Lab-Oratory, 5/65, 10-12)
ComSatCorp met with representatives of aerospace companies it had invited to discuss specifications for 24 communications satellites for a proposed dod satellite system. Previously ComSatCorp had indicated it would contract with the Hughes Aircraft Co. to build the satellites. But when the Philco Corp. protested to the FCC, the FCC required ComSatCorp to give Philco and other competitors a chance to show their capabilities. (ComSatCorp; Weekley, Wash. Post, 2/17/65)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said during a recent interview that the next immediate step beyond the initial Apollo lunar landings was to extend the usefulness of both spacecraft and launch vehicle to permit longer stays in earth orbit and on the moon. “This fall we will have to make a definite recommendation to fund one or both,” he said. (M/S Daily, 7/26/65)
Operational control of U.S. weapons to intercept and destroy armed satellites had been assigned to the Space Defense Center at Colorado Springs, Denver Post reported. The Space Defense Center included the Space Detection and Tracking Systems (Spadats), which recorded the launches of all space vehicles, foreign and domestic, and logged precise orbital data until they decayed in the earth’s atmosphere. (Partner, Denver Post, 4/30/65) During April: More than 100 delegates from Eurospace toured U.S. aerospace installations, including NASA Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, and facilities of U.S. firms corresponding to Eurospace member companies. Purpose of the U.S. European Space Conference was to bring together top industrial leaders from European and American aerospace companies to review problems posed for the industry by evolution of space technology. (M&R, 4/26/65, 9)
NASA awarded $1,190,000 facilities grant to the Univ. of Florida for the construction of a Space Science Building on campus. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, said the new grant “will permit the expansion of theoretical and experimental research in aeronautical and space sciences and will enable the university to train an increased number of highly qualified young researchers.” (nasa Release 65-248)
A Gemini in experiment in which blood cells subjected to a known dosage of radiation were allowed to float around weightless in a container showed that weightlessness had no effect on irradiated human blood cells, according to Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager. He also explained why GEMINI ill landed about 60 mi. short of predicted spot: The pilots were instructed to fly a bank angle based on wind-tunnel data of Gemini spacecraft’s lift characteristics. But in actual reentry, the spacecraft’s “lift was only about % of what we had expected it to be.” Onboard instrumentation showed the discrepancy, but the command pilot followed ground instructions. When he ultimately changed the angle, based on the onboard display, it was too late to achieve the spacecraft target. (Transcript)
In a speech to the Interact Conference of First Rotary District 696 in Orlando, Fla., ksc’s Richard E. Dutton, said: “. . . NASA’s major launch facility for space vehicles and unmanned and manned spacecraft [is] the John E. Kennedy Space Center and its new Merritt Island Spaceport. I hope you noticed that I used the term Spaceport, instead of Moonport, as it is often referred to in the news media. We call it a Spaceport because its basic concept is not to exist as a research and development facility for any one mission only; it is being created to function as an actual port, with a space vehicle launch rate that may be some day as high as one manned launch per month. “However, just as important to consider is the spaceport’s capacity for growth. It can accommodate launch vehicles with up to 40 million pounds of thrust, 32.5 million pounds more than the Saturn V here can deliver. Because of this, the United States has not invested three quarters of a billion dollars in a facility which will serve only to launch a manned lunar mission. It has acquired a permanent installation which will serve the requirements of the National Space Program for years to come. “But these facilities, like the lunar landing mission, are themselves only a manifestation of a greater entity—people. At present, 2,500 NASA and 6,300 contractor employees work at the Center. By 1967, when the spaceport becomes operational, 3,000 government employees and 10,000 contractor employees will be employed.” (Text)
U.S. would withdraw in six months from the Warsaw Convention limiting the liability of international airlines to $8,300 for each passenger killed or injured in air accidents, unless a new agreement was reached substantially increasing carrier liability, the State Department reported. U.S. had refused to ratify a 1955 amendment to the Convention raising the limit to $16,000, was arguing for a $100,000-limit liability. (U.S. State Dept. Release 268) “. . . advancing our competence in nuclear technology is of critical importance to the future of the national space program. Nuclear power and nuclear propulsion are musts for the more complex and long duration missions of the future. . . . “We all know that the nuclear going in space won’t be easy. . . . Yet I am confident that the technical problems are resolvable and the investments warranted. . . .” Dr. Welsh delivered a warning to “space planners” to stop sitting on nuclear propulsion concepts and to expedite development programs. “We must not wait for clear-cut space requirements for these nuclear systems before moving forthrightly with their development. If we wait for precise mission definitions the technology will not be available when it’s needed. Moreover, we can be sure that our Soviet competitors will take positive actions, whether we do or not. For this country to sit back on its technological haunches and let someone else, bolder and more imaginative, show us the way is unthinkable to me.” (Text) and procedures. We hope that by 1971 ... we will have made three significant improvements in the international system. First, we hope to improve the ability of the system to observe the global atmosphere and to provide fuller data for weather forecasting. In part this improvement will rest on the Tiros Operational Satellite System . . . which the United States will launch into orbit next year. Second, we hope to extend the benefits of modern computer technology throughout the world—by utilizing the computer to prepare weather analyses and forecasts routinely for the entire globe. And third, we hope to develop an international communications network for the timely exchange of raw data and for the rapid dissemination of analyses and forecasts.” (Text) Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa LaRC, delivered a keynote address on “Advances in Aircraft Technology.” He discussed the importance of scientific research to the continued leadership of the U.S. in the field of air transportation with particular reference to the next decade. Representing NASA Flight Research Center at the technical sessions was Joseph Walker, Chief of Research Pilots, who spoke on the X-15 research airplane as a tool for progress in hypersonic flight. (LaRC Release)
Modest turnout of spectators at the Sept. 14 motorcade in Washington, D.C., for Astronauts Cooper and Conrad received editorial comment in the Washington Evening Star:	. . We think it is an encouraging trend. Just possibly the lack of hoopla and gapers suggests that America has accepted the space program as serious business instead of a circus of stunt men.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/16/65)
Reaction to the cancellation of the NASA Gemini VI mission October 25 indicated that the space program and its public acceptance had matured during the first eight years of the space age, wrote Robert Hotz in Aviation Week and Space Technology. He recalled the “abuse heaped on the Vanguard program, the demands for Ranger’s cancellation, and the timorous whimpering that tried to suppress the Mercury program and bury the Apollo plans,” and suggested that “the lesson we should learn as a nation from our space program is that no task is too difficult to achieve and no challenge too great ... to surmount if its top-level leadership points out the goals and sounds the charge.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 11/1/65, 11) During week of November 1: Two 16-in. guns welded-together end to end would serve as first stage of a three-stage launch device believed capable by its developers—USA Ballistic Research Laboratories and McGill Univ. Space Research Institute, Montreal—of orbiting a 50-lb. satellite. The gun had launched 185-lb. payloads to approximate 84-mi. altitudes last year. Components of the rocket assembly had been successfully tested separately, but not as a unit; test firing of the first stage would take place in Barbados within four months. Dr. Charles H. Murphy, Ballistic Research Laboratories, and Dr. Gerald V. Bull, McGill Univ., reported on the project at a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/9/65, 3)
At a House Science and Astronautics Committee budget hearing at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) said he thought U.S. had about a 50-50 chance of landing a man on the moon by 1970 “if we get the money for our space team.” Teague felt that America was ahead of Russia in development of scientific programs in space, but Russia was ahead in development of large boosters. Rep. Robert Casey (D-Tex.) stressed that the program would be considered a success even if 1970 schedules were not met. Rep. George Miller (D—Calif.), Chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee, said that in 50 to 100 years, “people won’t care if we made it in this decade, if the program itself is successful.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, said that the Apollo and Gemini spacecraft would not be limited to manned space program but also would be useful in other scientific programs. Teague expressed his disappointment at the military’s failure to make greater use of NASA-developed spacecraft and boosters. He predicted that both Gemini and Apollo would be used some day as weapon carriers. (Maloney, Houston Post, 3/6/65)
Six key appointments at NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility were announced by mtf Manager Jackson M. Balch: Henry F. Auter, Deputy Manager and Chief of Projects Control Office; L/Col. Frederic C. French (usa), Assistant Manager for Construction and Installation; Waldo H. Dear-ing, Chief of Management Support Office; Myron L. Myers and Robert A. Bush, project managers for s-ic and s-il operations, respectively; and Myrl E. Sanders, project manager for support activities, (msfc Release 65-278)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at the dedication of the Space Science Laboratory at Univ. of Chicago, said: “The space effort is really a research and development competition—a competition for technological pre-eminence, which demands and creates the quest for excellence. . . . Should we fall behind in the area of space technology, we would jeopardize our ability to progress, on earth as well as in space. At stake is the technological balance of power in the world. . . . “The influence of our technological progress and prowess is and has been the deciding factor in keeping the peace; technological and scientific capabilities constitute a basic source of national power. Preeminence in the field is an instrument in international relations, and influences our dealings with other nations involving peace and freedom in the world. . . . “By mastering the restrained but decisive use of the power that modern science and technology give us, we are providing the Nation with the capability to achieve greater cooperation toward a world consistent with the ideals we seek for others as well as ourselves. . . .” (Text) nasa still assumed that life on Mars was possible, Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, JPL, said at the dedication. Although photographs relayed by MARINER IV had indicated Mars was extremely cold and lacked oxygen and water vapor, some terrestrial organisms might live comfortably in this environment, he said. Horowitz felt that the unexplained seasonal color changes in the dark regions of Mars might indicate plant growth. (Kotulak, Chic. Trib., 10/14/65)
Approval by President Johnson of USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory received editorial comment in the New York Times: “The United States Air Force has been demanding orbiting laboratories for years. The reason is essentially defensive. Such space laboratories could have the capacity to intercept and destroy enemy satellites. Their value for surveillance is obvious. As President Johnson said, they will provide ‘new knowledge about what man is able to do in space’ and ‘will enable us to relate that ability to the defense of the nation.’ “The mol’s however, will naturally he capable of offense as well as defense. It was therefore significant that President Johnson should have taken the opportunity to couple his announcement with a new peaceful gesture toward Moscow for cooperation in the space program. . . .”	(NYT, 8/26/65, 30M)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at a press conference during the 23rd annual Hampton County (S.C.) Watermelon Festival that the Gemini V manned space flight would be an eight-day mission—the time required to fly to the moon, explore its surface, and return to earth. Webb also disclosed that NASA would announce next week the selection of six scientist astronauts. Speaking at “Mendel Rivers Day” ceremony, Webb pointed out that Congressman Mendel Rivers, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, “has steadily supported the Nation’s effort to build strength in space.” Webb also said: “Thoughtful students of national power and its uses are increasingly aware that America’s security as well as her leadership of the Free World, depends directly upon our progress in mastering and using space. “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration cooperates closely with the Department of Defense, to ensure that the technological progress we make in developing the peaceful uses of space will be drawn upon as needed to help keep the peace—in space and on earth. “As you can readily understand, the development of military space systems follows those basic research fields which provide the scientific understanding and technological capability to make such systems possible. It is NASA’s job, as the space research and development agency, to provide this basic knowledge and know-how.” Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young accompanied Webb to this festival, (nasa Release; Text; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 111-14)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said during a panel discussion at the Military Electronics Convention in Los Angeles: “I think I can report that our ten-year aeronautical and space effort [beginning in 1961] has been well organized, it has stabilized at the 51/^ billion level, and has retained a well-worked-out balance among its various components. At the end of this ten-year period, we will have received back from our operating spacecraft the basic measurements of the space environment which will give us a much better scientific understanding of this environment and our engineers will have proved out the developmental concepts and engineering designs for effective operations of all kinds in space. Further, we will have a launch capability of six Saturn ib’s and six Saturn V’s per year, meaning that we could put almost two million pounds into orbit per year, if required. We will have logged more than five thousand hours of astronaut spaceflight time and learned a great deal about the relationship between man, equipment, the task assigned, and performance in the space environment. . . .” (Text)
All major goals of the Gemini program except actual docking of two spacecraft had been achieved with the flights of GEMINI VI and vii, msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth said at an msc news conference. Gemini program director Charles Mathews said the remaining five Gemini launchings, all scheduled for 1966, would attempt to demonstrate some complex rendezvous techniques useful for Project Apollo, (ap, NYT, 12/19/65, 69; ap, Wash. Post, 12/19/65, A17; msc Roundup, 12/23/65, 6)
A projection of the U.S. space program was outlined by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, at the Building Products Executives Conference in Washington, D.C.: “1. After we have made initial landings on the moon, we will, if conditions warrant, make many other trips to explore the various parts of the lunar surface and possibly to establish one or more bases there. “2. Not only will unmanned probes be sent throughout the solar system, but manned expeditions will visit the planets whenever that becomes scientifically promising and practicable. “3. We will develop a family of useful manned earth-orbiting stations, growing from relatively small orbiting laboratories to large multi-manned permanent stations. Regular ferry service will transfer personnel and supplies to and from such spacecraft. “4. Global communications via satellites will become a fact in the very near future and will be followed by direct broadcast of both voice and TV by satellite to home receivers throughout large sections of the world. “5. Orbiting spacecraft will increase annually in numbers, in size, and in sophistication. Through such activity we will greatly increase our knowledge about the earth as well as about the heavens. “6. We can expect a marriage of the major features of both aeronautics and astronautics . . . lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry ability will be launched into near and distant space by means of recoverable and re-usable launch vehicles. Drastic reduction in the mileage cost of space travel will result. “7. Spaceports for the coming and going of spacecraft will be built in a number of parts of this country as well as elsewhere. “8. Improved propulsion—faster, more powerful rockets using nuclear as well as chemical energy—will characterize space transportation. Planetary trips which today would take many months will be done in perhaps a week’s time or less, while carrying substantial payloads of passengers, equipment, and supplies. And, “9. As competence in space increases ... we can expect to see greater economic progress and international cooperation. Then we can truly say that our space efforts have made major contributions to world peace. . . .” (Text)
Russian Cosmonaut Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, first man to walk in space, was quoted as calling the Gemini iv flight of Majors James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Edward H. White n (usaf) “a very interesting one.” During an interview with the Bulgarian news agency, he congratulated the Gemini crew, wished them “a happy landing back on earth,” and said “no doubt the experience from our flight must have helped the U.S. space program very much in preparing and executing the flight.” (Reuters, NYT, 6/7/65)
General Bernard A. Schriever, AFSC Commander, said in an address to the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association Conference in Albuquerque: “The Air Force responsibility for our nation’s military developments in space is clearly established. This morning I would like to review our current progress in the areas of unmanned space programs, boosters and propulsion, and finally, manned space programs. . . . “In the late 1950s, a small group of Air Force officers began a program to develop a space-based missile detection and warning system. To obtain information on the background as observed from space and on the signature of ballistic missile rocket motors, the Air Force initiated a series of measurement programs. Instrumented aircraft were used to obtain data on our missile target, from many aspects and in various weather conditions. Concurrently, a spacecraft ‘piggyback’ program for background measurements was instituted. This program has resulted in information of great value and is still collecting valuable data. . . . “The second area of interest is anti-satellite defense. Last September, President Johnson announced the existence of operational U.S. anti-satellite defense systems. . . . “The third area of interest is the detection of nuclear detonations in space. The original effort was formerly known as ‘Vela Hotel,’ and has now emerged as the present Vela Satellite Program. . . . “In 1963 the first pair of Vela Satellites was launched from Cape Kennedy; the second launch occurred in 1964. Both launches were completely successful, and the four satellites are still functioning. . . . “The last area that I would like to consider in unmanned military space systems is communication satellites—commonly called comsat. Our current philosophy of controlled response has placed an additional emphasis upon communications between field commanders and the highest level of our nation. . . . “In summary, space is a new environment of activity. We need to exploit it effectively for our own purposes to prevent it from being used against us. We are aware of the many problems confronting us and do not pretend to have all the solutions. But much has been done, and we are building a broad technological base to meet the even greater challenges of the future.” (Text)
Donald E. Crabhill of the Bureau of the Budget discussed “Space Programs and the Federal Budget” before the National Space Club: “What are some of the significant factors to be pointed out in the relationship between the space program and the budget? “The first is, of course, the matter of growth in the funding for space and the current absolute amount of funds allocated to space programs, including not only NASA, but also dod, aec, and activities in this area by other agencies. In FY 1957, approximately $150 million was expended by the Federal Government on space programs. In FY 1960, the total was still below $900 million. In FY 1966, the tenth year of the space age, the President’s budget provides for space expenditures of $6.9 billion. “Where does this amount stand in relation to amounts in the administrative budget for other programs? It is less than the total amounts to be spent in 1966 on national defense; on health, labor, and welfare programs; and on interest on the national debt. But it is greater than that to be spent for any other function of Government. Space expenditures of all agencies will be greater in 1966 than those for international affairs and finance, for agriculture, for natural resources, for commerce and transportation, for housing and community development, for veterans benefits and services, or for other general Government. “The space program has not been, since it was initiated, and is not today, a budgetary underdog. “The second specific point to be made is that the budget process by its very nature is an exercise in priorities. ... A great many merely desirable projects get deferred throughout the Government every year under the press of the budgetary process. “In the past, this pressure has not been felt as severely in the space area as it has in most others because of the emphasis that has been given to creating in a hurry a vast capability to operate in space. The space program has been very successful in meeting this aim. In fact, it has been so successful that space is now coming of age with other Government programs. We will soon have a technical capability to do a great many more space missions than we as a nation will probably want to pay for. . . . “There is one other point that, as a budget examiner, I feel I must mention. Funding and schedule estimates for space programs have been historically quite unreliable. Cost estimates have tended not so much merely to grow, but to multiply! At the same time, schedules have tended to slip, slip, slip. “This was an understandable situation while the space program was new, but we have had enough experience that there will be considerable resistance from now on to escalation in price and radical slips in schedule of the next generation of space projects. The more detailed planning we are doing now, the phased project procurement processes, and the experience we have gained in the technology and the techniques of Space operations must be expected to show returns in better ability to make good cost and schedule estimates in the first place, and then to meet the cost and schedule targets that are approved.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the American Society of Photogrammetry and the American Congress on Surveying and Mapping, convening in Washington: “. . . since the dawn of the Space Age—in less than eight years—one of our most important tasks has been that of mapping—mapping the surface of the world and its geodetic figure; mapping the world’s weather, as revealed in its cloud patterns as seen from above; mapping the earth’s outermost atmosphere in three dimensions, and exploring its interaction with the newly-discovered solar wind; seeing and mapping astronomical sources for the first time in ultraviolet and X-radiation from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and mapping areas of our moon to an accuracy 2,000 times better than that now achievable from earth, and preparing to map areas of Mars to an accuracy as much as 100 times better than that attainable from earth. . . .” (Text)
President Johnson, asked during a press conference, “where does our space program stand in relation to the Soviets’ in the wake of their latest feat?” replied: “The Soviet accomplishment and our own scheduled efforts demonstrate, I think dramatically and convincingly, the important role that man himself will play in the exploration of the space frontier. The continuing efforts of both our program and the Russian program will steadily produce capability and new space activity. This capability, in my judgment, will help each nation achieve broader confidence to do what they consider they ought to do in space. “I have felt since the days when I introduced the Space Act and sat studying Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2 that it was really a mistake to regard space exploration as a contest which can be tallied on any box score. “Judgments can be made only by considering all the objectives of the two national programs, and they will vary and they will differ. Our own program is very broadly based. We believe very confidently in the United States that we will produce contributions that we need at the time we need them. For that reason, I gave Mr. Webb and his group every dollar in the Budget that they asked for a manned space flight. “Now the progress of our program is very satisfactory to me in every respect. We are committed to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind. We stressed that in our hearings and our legislation when we passed the bill, and while the Soviet is ahead of us in some aspects of space, U.S. leadership is clear and decisive and we are ahead of them in other realms on which we have particularly concentrated.” (Transcript; Wash. Post, 3/21/65)
Dr. Charles C. Price, president of the American Chemical Society, told the annual meeting of the Society in Atlantic City that the synthesis of life should be made a national goal: “We have been making fantastic strides in uncovering the basic chemistry of the life process and the structure of many of the key components of living systems. “. . . The political, social, biological and economic consequences of such a breakthrough would dwarf those of either atomic energy or the space program. Success could lead to modified plants and algae for synthesis of foods, fibers, and antibiotics, to improved growth or properties of plants and animals, or even to improved characteristics for man himself. . . .” (Text)
A Cairo newspaper revealed that the United Arab Republic was training men for space flight. No date for a possible launching was given. (upi, Milwaukee ]., 4/16/65) Noting areas of disagreement among scientists, theoretical astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. tried to explain why the Ranger pictures resolved so little: “The Ranger pictures are like a mirror. Everyone sees his own theories reflected in them.” Prof. Gold saw a moon covered with dust; young craters composed of solid rock while older craters had somehow gone soft; and vast sheets of ice locked under compacted sediment beneath much of the lunar surface. Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist from the Univ. of California, referred to evidence of widespread collapse of the lunar surface, probably due to underground movement: “The ranger ix’s pictures scared me more than anything. There’s all sorts of evidence that some of these craters are sinking.” Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey said that chances that the moon’s surface was too soft for the 15-ton Lem were “almost vanishingly remote.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Clark, NYT, 4/16/65) Dr. Ewan A. Whitaker agreed with findings in the paper he presented for his colleague, Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper of the Univ. of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. Dr. Kuiper concluded that the lunar surface had a bearing strength of between one and two tons per square foot. His calculations, made from data extracted from RANGER IX photographs, was based on the size of rocks ejected from a given impact crater and the distance they traveled. Other tentative findings were that the dark portions of the maria were due to some unknown fluid flows and not lava or ash flows; that the maria were not completely covered with lunar dust; and that the moon’s surface exhibited a remarkable series of fracture patterns which could be due to polar contraction, tidal effects, or some other force. (Clark, NYT, 4/16/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Boris J. Levin, section chief of the Institute of Earth Physics, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, said studies based on radioactive emissions from meteorites and on lunar data indicated that the interior of the moon partially melted some two million years after the formation of that body began: “If you assume the moon is of the same material as meteorites, it is necessary to assume that the interior at one time was partly molten.” Prof. Levin said the moon was formed simultaneously with the earth and was not originally part of it. It was about 10 earth-radii distant and later shifted to the present position. He added: “We believe that there is a lava flow not covered by dust.” (Wash. Post, 4/17/65: Milwaukee /.. 4/17/65: CSM, 4/26/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Dr. John Clark, NASA Director of Space Sciences, said that a year ago nasa officials had hoped that Ranger would tell something about the topography of the moon: “That in turn would tell something about the geometry needed for the landing vehicle. Ranger has done this and now we look to the Surveyor spacecraft to tell us the bearing strength of the moon’s surface.” (ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Clark, NYT, 4/17/65) Dr. Fred Whipple of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory said the moon’s surface might be lower than had been calculated: “The data indicates that ranger vii and vih, and maybe ranger ix, landed one second late because the moon was one mile small. The moon’s surface at the point of landing was lower by two kilometers fa mile and a quarter) than the average lunar radius.” ( ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Milwaukee /., 4 17 65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb received an honorary doctorate from Wayne State Univ., Detroit, Mich. During a speech there he said: “Our goal is 100 per cent assurance of [space booster] success. This is difficult to achieve, but until we are certain in our own minds that we can count on success we do not go [on] with a manned shot. My directive on this is very clear. It came first from President Kennedy and has been restated by President Johnson. It is ‘Go when ready and don’t go until ready.’ ” (Text)
A plastic dust cover carelessly left in a fuel line would have blocked the Gemini vi launch even if an electrical plug had not dropped out of the tail and shut down the Titan n engines, nasa officials revealed at a press conference. The device apparently had been installed at the Baltimore Martin Co. plant and was not removed due to “human error.” The Martin Co., makers of the Titan II booster for Gemini spacecraft, could lose a $15,000 bonus because of the launch failure, (ap, Balt. Sun, 12/14/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/14/65, A1)
Commenting on the U.S. need for a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in the San Antonio Express: “The nearly simultaneous launch of NASA’s Gemini and Air Force’s Titan ill—c caused some commentators to suggest that there is competition and rivalry in the space effort. Investigation convinces me that there is complete collaboration and accord between NASA and the military in the space program. “There is now little reason to doubt that NASA will succeed with Apollo, the Moon mission. Our continued leadership in the exploration of the peaceful uses of space seems assured. “It is now time to survey where we stand in the military implications and dangers from space. . . . “The first step in a needed military space program, which the Air Force earnestly and urgently proposes, is a manned orbiting laboratory (mol). It is visualized as an experimental space station in low orbit to determine what man can profitably do in space. “The anti-MOL advocates have suggested that the fall-out from the NASA space program will provide all the building blocks to produce military space vehicles quickly when the need is more clearly evident. Fall-out from the automobile industry did not provide the Patton tank. It was necessary to cut and try, build and test many experimental tanks over a period of 25 years. “Building blocks from civil air transports did not produce the b-52 bomber. We had to build and test 51 earlier bomber models. Effective space weapons will never come solely from the fall-out from the NASA program. “mol is said to be held up until the Air Force can precisely define and defend a military mission which MOL can be certain to accomplish. To require anyone to visualize and indicate definitely and in detail now, all that man may ultimately do in space, would be like having asked the Wright brothers in 1910 to lay down the specifications for a supersonic transport.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 7/14/65, 18)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee’s Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights, said: “Fundamental to NASA’s approach to the patent policy question and to technology utilization is our belief that active effort must be expended, and meaningful incentives provided, if the byproducts of the space efforts are to flow to the general public through entrepreneurs willing to risk investment capital. . . . “If NASA’s experience has served to establish one principal, it is . . . that ‘a single presumption of ownership does not provide a satisfactory basis for Government wide policy on the allocation of rights to inventions.’ NASA’s experience further establishes . . . that the ‘Government has a responsibility to foster the fullest exploitation of the inventions for the public benefit.’ ” (Transcript)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) urged the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to consider priorities in the U.S. space program. He noted that the Agena Target Vehicle failure which postponed the Oct. 25 Gemini vi mission might have been avoided if the modified Agena had undergone flight-testing before the Gemini mission attempt. Reiterating his view that “the last two Pegasus [satellites] shots were not clearly necessary,” he suggested: “. . . this modified Agena rocket could have been test fired by means of utilizing the last two Saturn I rockets, which carried the additional Pegasus satellites instead. Such a test might have avoided the failure. . . .” (CR, 11/2/65, A6259)
Jean Delorme, president of France’s L’Aire Liquide and head of Eurospace, said he believed there could be no large-scale European space program without formation of a European equivalent to the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. He called for establishment of a central coordinating body that would be the supranational European NASA, with the power to make financial decisions. Delorme was addressing opening of 12-day U.S.-Eurospace conference in Philadelphia, (ap, NYT, 2/27/65, 17)
Alternate methods for re-establishing communications with mariner IV on its next closest approach to earth around Sept. 4, 1967, were being considered by Mariner project planners at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported: (1) attempted reacquisition beginning in early February 1967, making use of the spacecraft’s high-gain directional antenna to obtain data from the spacecraft for up to 10 mo.; (2) reliance solely on mariner iv’s low-gain antenna for transmission, permitting two-way communications for four to six weeks around September 1967. In the 10-mo. plan, reacquisition would be initiated when the spacecraft was about 135 million mi. from earth. Due to relative sun-earth positions in February 1967, the angle at which the high-gain directional antenna would be permanently fixed would enable it to' be aimed at the earth by having mariner iv roll about its longitudinal axis, which would be pointed at the sun. The 100-kw. transmitter at Goldstone tracking station would send the necessary commands to mariner iv. In the latter plan, use of the 210-ft. antenna, expected to become operational at Goldstone in January 1966, could extend reception of intelligible telemetry signals to as long as six weeks, compared with four using the standard 85-ft. dishes of the Deep Space Network. W. A. Collier, assistant Mariner project manager at jpl, told Aviation Week that mariner iv would be of particular scientific interest in 1967. First, there were no other interplanetary probes being sent away from the sun at that period. Second, when mariner iv passed within 6,000 mi. of Mars July 14, the gravitational pull of the planet had tilted the plane of the spacecraft out of the plane of the ecliptic. mariner iv, 5.3 million mi. above the ecliptic in September 1967, would give scientists their first chance to compare interplanetary findings outside this plane with those obtained in it. Preliminary estimates were that the 10-mo. plan would cost between $5 million and $15 million, while the four-to-six-week project would cost less than $1 million. mariner iv, launched Nov. 28, 1964, was in solar orbit with a period of 567.11 days, perihelion of 103.1 million mi., and aphelion of 146.2 million mi. (Watkins, Av. Wk., 8/2/65, 32)
ogo n Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo-C) was launched by NASA from Vandenberg afb with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster. Because of a slight malfunction in the launch vehicle’s primary guidance system, orbit achieved had the following parameters: apogee, 939 mi. (1,511 km.); perigee, 250 mi. (403.1 km.); period, one hour 45 min.; inclination, 87°. Planned orbit had been somewhat lower: 575-mi. (925-km.) apogee, 207-mi. (333.3-km.) perigee, one-hour 37-min. period, and 86° inclination. Most of the 20 onboard experiments were not expected to be affected by the malfunction; OGO n’s solar panels and instrumented booms deployed as planned and the spacecraft achieved three-axis stabilization. Second of the seven spacecraft programed for NASA’s Ogo program, OGO II weighed 1,150 lb. and contained more than 100,000 parts, including a communications system capable of transmitting 64,000 bits per second in real time and 128,000 bits of information per second from tape playback. Its mission was to concentrate on near-earth space phenomena with emphasis on global mapping of the geomagnetic field, measurements of the neutral, ionic, and electronic composition of the earth’s atmosphere. Data would be correlated with solar ultraviolet and x-ray emissions, and such events as particle dumping in the auroral zones and airglow. Although it returned good experiment data, OGO II was to be considered a failure (see Oct. 24). (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Releases 65-314, 65-368; ap; NYT, 10/15/65, 14; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/15/65, A8; ap, Wash. Post, 10/15/65, A4)
usaf Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell, speaking at a meeting of the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., said: “. . . As airmen, all of us in the Air Force look at space with real concern. Will it someday become an area of military operation? If so, what will be the U.S. posture? In military language, what is our readiness? . . . “Space exploration is the responsibility of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. . . . The act which created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration gave NASA broad responsibilities for meeting many of the broad needs of the nation. It also stated that the Department of Defense should be responsible for and direct those space activities peculiar to or primarily associated with the development of weapon systems, military operations or the defense of the United States. “So we have both NASA and Air Force assigned specific responsibilities. We have the basis of a partnership. And a partnership it is in carrying out the national program as recommended by the President and authorized and funded by Congress. The intent of Congress is very clear. The members wanted the broad space capabilities of the nation to be built up as rapidly as possible without unnecessary duplication of effort or of waste. This we are attempting to do. And while I would not ordinarily try to speak for Jim Webb, the NASA Administrator, I think I can speak for him today on this subject, in saying, that it is a very well understood mutual objective between the Air Force and NASA.” Asked his opinion about spending of $20 billion to reach the moon, McConnell said: “I think it is necessary for us to get everything we can out of space. And I think we should get it as rapidly as we can at as reasonable cost as we can. But you can’t get it rapidly and at the same time cheaply . . . going to the moon is just the end product of what we are getting out of it. If we were just going to the moon, I wouldn’t think it would be worth 20 billion dollars to go to the moon. But I don’t hesitate to say that all of the other things which we have to do, the preliminaries, and the things that we’re going to learn in the process of achieving that goal is well worth the expenditure of whatever money is required to attain the knowledge which we will attain as a result of this project.” (Text)
Vice President (and nasc Chairman) Hubert H. Humphrey, visiting Cape Kennedy for the day, congratulated Astronauts Grissom and Young and commended all participants throughout the world for “this tremendous flight of three orbits. . . this step forward commits us to the next project. Once we have completed the Gemini series, we move on to the Apollo Project and we move on even beyond that. . . . Let me say that the American economy is better because of the space program. American education is better because of the space program. American industry is better because of the space program and Americans are better because of the space program. We are emphasizing here one great character of American life—excellence, performance, achievement. . . . These are efforts well made and money well spent. . . .” (Transcript)
KSC technicians began to repair Pad 19 for the Gemini vi launch immediately after gemini vii had lifted off. Damage was minimal, NASA officials reported, and they were optimistic about being able to launch Gemini vi Dec. 13. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/5/65, 1)
Joint plans for higher wage and improved fringe benefits negotiations in 29 agreements with major aerospace companies were formulated at a conference in Washington, D.C., between leaders of the United Automobile Workers and the International Association of Machinists. Contracts discussed would expire within the next six months, (ap, NYT, 6/24/65, 21)
NASA Assistant Deputy Administrator Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., was named Chancellor of the University System of Georgia and would assume the duties of the new post July 15. Simpson, who had joined NASA in 1962 as Assistant Administrator of Public Affairs, later became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning. In July 1964 he assumed the additional duties of Assistant Deputy Administrator. A native of North Carolina, he had been a professor at the Univ. of North Carolina and a planner of the Research Triangle, cooperative endeavor of the Univ. of North Carolina, Duke Univ., and North Carolina State College, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/5/65)
The U.S. showing at Le Bourget was discussed by Robert Hotz in an Aviation Week and Space Technology editorial: “The United States is presenting a sorry spectacle at the 26th Paris Air Show [June 11-21] that does grave injustice to its genuine aerospace capability in relation to its principal competitors, including the Soviet Union. As the show draws to a close, only a bold stroke of public relations, such as jetting Astronauts White and McDivitt with their Gemini capsule to Le Bourget for a weekend finale would offer any chance for the U.S. to recoup the prestige lost last week through the combination of top-level government indifference, official naivete and the stifling channels of interagency bureaucracy between the various government departments involved in the U.S. show effort. . . . “For the past two Paris air shows, the NASA exhibit has been a major sensation, convincing Europeans of U.S. technological leadership. This year, nasa was conspicuously absent. Even frantic pleas from the French to have Astronaut John Glenn appear to match the Soviets’ Yuri Gagarin were strangled in the maze of interdepartmental coordination. . . . “The net result of this sad combination of government bungling at Le Bourget has been to spend large sums of the taxpayers’ dollar to create the impression that the United States is resting smugly on its technical oars, complacently relying on rapidly obsolescing military hardware for the present and craftily confident this aging equipment can be foisted on its European allies in the near future.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 6/21/65, 13) June 21-July 16: Space Research Summer Study—1965, convened at Woods Hole, Mass., by nas-nrc Space Science Board, reviewed the National space program. Various working panels were formed to examine in detail the three topics of particular focus: planetary exploration, astronomy requirements, and the role of man in space research. About 200 invited scientists participated in the multi-disciplinary review, which was under general chairmanship of George P. Woollard, Director, Hawaii Institute of Geophysics. NASA provided financial support-(nas—nrc, News Report, 9/65, 5)
Senate confirmed the nominations of Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) as Federal Aviation Agency Administrator and David D. Thomas as his deputy administrator. President Johnson formally accepted the resignation of McKee’s predecessor, Najeeb E. Halaby, with a “Dear Jeeb” letter praising Halaby’s “vigorous and dynamic leadership,” particularly in supersonic transport development. (CR, 6/30/65, 14824; upi, Wash. Post, 7/1/65)	_ _
President’s message sending budget for Fiscal Year 1966 included the following remarks: “Space research and technology: This Nation has embarked on a bold program of space exploration and research which holds promise of rich rewards in many fields of American life. Our boldness is clearly indicated by the broad scope of our program and by our intent to send men to the moon within this decade. “The costs are high—as we knew they would be when we launched this effort. We have seen a rise in annual expenditures for the space program from less than one-half billion dollars in 1960 to over $4 billion in 1964. “Expenditures are continuing to increase. However, we have built up momentum and are concentrating on our highest priority goals. Therefore, we will no longer need to increase space out-lays by huge sums each year in order to meet our present objectives. “This budget proposes that expenditures increase by $22 million in 1966 over 1965. This is the smallest annual increase since 1959. The new obligational authority requested is about the same as enacted for 1965.” (nasa lar iv/16)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb sent a letter to the House and Senate space committees outlining major reprograming of funds planned by NASA during the remainder of fy 1965. Webb said $13 million had been allocated to large solid rockets in fy 1965 and nothing in the following year “due to the President’s decision not to include funds in the NASA ’66 budget.” Close-out costs for the large solids would amount to $8.5 million in addition to the $13 million already earmarked “and would yield no technical confirmation of the planned objectives.” By adding another $5.3 million, “bringing the fy ’65 funding to $26.8 million,” NASA would “carry the Phase I program through to completion.” Phase I called for the manufacture and firing of two “half-length” rockets 78 ft. long and 260 in. in diameter. Additional close-out funds were also granted to the other programs not included in the fy ’66 budget: $2.15 million for Snap-8; $3 million for the M-l engine. (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings [Part 4], 279-88)
m/g 0. J. Ritland (usaf), retiring Nov. 30, was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. General Ritland who, as Deputy Commander for Space of the Air Force Systems Command, had been closely associated since 1962 with NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, was cited for his contributions to the Mercury and Gemini manned space flight programs, (nasa Release 65-369)
NASA Kennedy Space Center awarded a $41 million cost-plus-award-fee supplement to the Chrysler Corp. for support services on the Saturn I and Saturn IB space programs. Chrysler would provide prelaunch, launch, and post-launch services at Complexes 34 and 37 through June 30, 1968. (ksc Release 43-650)
Funeral in Washington for late Deputy Administrator of NASA, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, attended by hundreds of friends and high Federal officials. Pallbearers were Gen. James H. Doolittle (Chairman of the naca, 1956-58), Dr. T. Keith Glennan (nasa Administrator, 1958-1961), and Astronauts Scott Carpenter, Gordon Cooper, James McDivitt, and John Glenn, (eph)
It was too early to set a realistic date for man’s landing on the moon, Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said during a Moscow press conference devoted to the zond iii mission. He explained: “. . . we have . . . learned quite a lot about the surface of the moon. Yet this does not seem to be a great deal . . . where the choice of a landing spot is concerned. . . . Our knowledge of the soil of the moon is still somewhat contradictory, and I think it is much too early to start looking for a future landing site . . .” Yuri Khodarev, engineer in the Soviet space program, revealed that zond ill had used photographic film instead of magnetic film to record pictures for later playback on earth command. The mission had been essentially a test in which the spacecraft would continue to play back the moon pictures repeatedly at increasingly greater distances up to “hundreds of millions of kilometers,” Khodarev said, adding, “we have created a new, compact photo television system intended for photographing and transmission of images of planets under conditions of prolonged space flight.” The wide-angle camera lens had a 106.4mm. focal length at a relative aperture of 1:8. A 25-mm. film was used with exposures of l/100th and l/300th of a second. Describing the zond ill television system, Khodarev said zond III had taken 25 photos of the far side of the moon in little more than an hour. Only one command had been given from earth—to start taking the photographs. All remaining operations occurred automatically. The zond III photographs confirmed earlier conclusions concerning the scarcity of dark depressions on the moon’s reverse side, but also revealed sea-like formations up to 500 km. (310.5 mi.) across and about as long as the maria. These formations differed structurally from the maria and lacked their characteristic dark color. The northern part of the side of the moon was occupied by a bright elevation pitted with craters. Concentration of craters throughout the reverse side of the moon was high. Soviet astronomer Alla Masevich said the moon photographs were as good as those taken of the visible side from earth-based observatories: “They show beautiful half-tone transitions, reflecting the character of detailed surface relief.” Alexander A. Mikhailov, director of the Pulkovo Observatory, attributed the observed difference between the moon’s visible side and its reverse side to geological rather than astronomical factors. He noted the appearance on Zond photographs of chains of craters along elongated fracture lines which he attributed to volcanic activity. Prof. Keldysh noted that the trajectory of zond ill had passed far from the planets but said that “the experience we gained in launching this probe into remote space will be used in subsequent launchings to photograph the planets.” He said the U.S.S.R. had already begun preparations to achieve a soft lunar landing. Experiments aboard the spacecraft were for study of magnetic fields, solar wind, low-frequency radio emission of the galaxy, micrometeors, cosmic rays, and the infrared and ultraviolet spectra of the lunar surface. (Tass, 8/23/65; Shabad, NYT, 8/24/65, 1)
Dan Schneiderman, Mariner project manager at JPL, had invented “Conrad,” a self-contained radio navigation aid for amateur sailors. The device would sell for less than $100 and function as an entertainment radio when not in use. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/24/65)
In testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on “the status, management, and prospects of the aeronautical and space program,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “The progress during this period in the space program has been made possible by the cooperative efforts of many organizations and people. Ninety-four per cent of our work during Fiscal Year 1964 was conducted by American industry and involved a total of about 380,000 people in industry, universities, research institutes, and government installations. Almost 250,000 separate procurement transactions were initiated during this time. “. . . the past year saw the continued strengthening of the coordination and the mutual support between NASA and the dod in space and aeronautics. The Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board has continued to be an effective medium for formal coordination. During 1964 NASA and the DOD developed procedures for the coordination of the space science programs; a national program in satellite geodesy was established by the dod, NASA, and the Department of Commerce: a standardized basis for reporting space and aeronautical sciences research and technology information has been adopted; a joint NASA-DOD study was conducted to determine the launch vehicles needed to meet projected requirements during the next decade; a joint study was conducted of the current and planned lifting reentry vehicle research and development programs; the needs of NASA, the Air Force, and the Federal Aviation Agency were incorporated into an expanded flight research program utilizing the xb-70 aircraft to confirm theoretical and wind tunnel data on supersonic flight vehicles. “All of this, Mr. Chairman, of course, is under an umbrella of policy followed closely by the [National Aeronautics and] Space Council. ...”	' Commenting on the Soviet space program, Webb said: “Our rapid rate of advance and the success we have achieved already has, we believe, denied the USSR many of the benefits and many of the options which the Soviets expected their space program to provide as a part of their forward thrust toward world domination. However, there is every evidence, on the basis of their activity during the past three years, that the Russians intend to maintain a vigorous effort in space, and, in fact, that their activities may be further increased. During 1963 and 1964 more Soviet spacecraft were put in earth orbit or deep space than in the six previous years combined. The number placed in orbit last year was double that of the year before. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 13-50)
Dr. Smith J. DeFrance, Director of nasa Ames Research Center, would retire Oct. 15 after 45 yrs. of service, announced NASA Administrator James E. Webb. “Dr. DeFrance’s leadership at Ames has brought about many engineering and scientific achievements in our country’s aviation and space programs,” Webb said, “and we all owe him a great debt of gratitude.” Following distinguished service as a combat pilot in France during World War I, DeFrance served for 18 yrs. at Langley Research Center. He became director of arc, when it was created in 1940. In 1947 he received the Presidential Medal of Merit for designing and building the Center. H. Julian Allen, present Assistant Director at ARC, would succeed Dr. DeFrance. Allen was recognized as an international authority on reentry physics, having conceived a solution to the reentry heating problem. In 1957, he received naca’s Distinguished Service Medal for this work. Allen received the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award in 1955 from the Institute of Aerospace Sciences “for contributions and leadership in solving problems in the design of supersonic airplanes and missiles, especially thermal problems at hypersonic speeds.” John F. Parsons, Associate Director of Ames, would remain in this post, (nasa Release 65-298)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to President Johnson and the Cabinet on both the two-man gt—3 flight and the ranger IX photographic mission. Mr. Webb made these points:	“The most significant accomplishment of the GT-3 flight was that ... it provided verification of the basic design, development, test and operations procedures NASA is using to develop manned spacecraft, man-rated launch vehicles and a world-wide operational network. . . . “We now know that at least two spots, and perhaps three, when we look more carefully at the ranger ix pictures, are at least smooth enough for the Lem [manned moon landing], . . .” An American astronaut probably would be able to open his spacecraft and partly emerge from the cabin during the gt-5 flight. Mr. Webb said under questioning that there might be some possibility of achieving this in the next Gemini flight, but that gt-5 was more likely. He regarded a Russian cosmonaut’s leaving a space vehicle briefly as spectacular but said the U.S. was more intent on developing a space suit that would enable American astronauts to work outside on space vehicles and develop or put together space centers. (Text; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/26/65)
Tracking and telemetry station to support Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) would he established by NASA at Toowoomba in eastern Australia near Brisbane at an approximate cost of $6 million. Plans for the new station were jointly announced by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Australian Minister for Supply Allen Fairhall. (nasa Release 65—357)
Environmental Science Services Administration (essa) asked that NASA temporarily assign Dr. Joachim P. Kuettner, deputy director of the Technical Staff (Saturn/Apollo Systems Office) of the Research and Development Operations, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, as Chief Space Scientist of the National Weather Satellite Center. Dr. Kuettner, expected to leave for Washington, D.C., about Sept. 1, would administer ESSA’s space program, specifically, manned and unmanned advanced systems, (mfsc Release 65-207)
Univ. of Miami, Coral Gables, Fla., bestowed an honorary dectorate upon NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Mr. Webb said in a speech there: “. . . space science and technology are not remote and esoteric pursuits but rather are deeply woven into the fabric of our society. The space scientist does not practice a new art. He is an astronomer, a physicist, a chemist, a geologist, rooted in our university system of vigorous effort to expand our knowledge of the universe in which we live. The space technologist is an engineer of materials, structures, fuels, power sources, electronics, rooted in our industrial and government laboratory systems. Both, however, are directing their interests and talents to the newest and most exciting frontiers—where the most rapid progress is made and the breakthroughs scored. The knowledge they gain feeds back into our scientific and technical communities and into our industrial laboratories. . . . Thus, the talents, the skills, and the funds for space exploration are all drawn broadly from our society and continue to feed back into it, in the forefront of scientific and technical progress—the unique hallmark of the American way.” (Text)
Charles A. Wilson, an expert in management and development of space and other advanced systems, had been named Project Manager for NASA’s Project Biosatellite at the Ames Research Center. He succeeded Carlton Bioletti, who had retired, (arc Release 65-9)
President Johnson visited nasa Headquarters, accompanied by Vice President Humphrey, for a briefing on the mariner iv project and to congratulate and express appreciation to NASA officials and members of the Mariner and Ranger project team. The President recalled that he had sponsored legislation in 1958 that had created NASA: “I think it is really incredible that we have come so far. It was only seven years ago this month that we were deliberating and debating and still seeking to come to grips with the realities of the space age.” Mr. Johnson told NASA officials that the people of America and the whole
NASA Administrator James E. Webb swore in R. Walter Riehlman, former Republican member of the House of Representatives from New York’s 34th District (Syracuse) as a consultant on policy matters. (NASA Release 65-9)
By a 45%-to-42% margin, the American people believed the space program was worth an annual $4-billion expenditure, according to a Harris poll. By a 50%-to-38% margin, the public would oppose continuing the program at the present rate of expenditure if it were not for Russian exploits in space. (Harris, Wash. Post, 11/1/65, A2)
Editorializing in the Washington Evening Star about “lean years” beginning for the aerospace industry, William Hines said: “. . . Since the ’50s, aerospace companies have become accustomed to a diet of caviar, filet and champagne. The government has poured something like 100 billion into rockets, missiles and spacecraft since the Soviet Union’s Sputnik went up in October, 1957. The torrent of funds is now being reduced, if not precisely to a trickle, certainly to a more moderate flow. . . . “The aerospace crisis is serious enough that the management-consultant firm of Arthur D. Little, Inc., has just published a study, ‘Strategies for Survival in the Aerospace Industry.’ It makes the following revealing point:
Lt. Frank K. Ellis (usn), double-amputee pilot whose name was among astronaut candidates submitted to NASA by Chief of Naval Operations Adm. David L. McDonald, had been nominated for “special capacity” work in the space program, unidentified nasa sources revealed. While not nominated to become an actual astronaut, Ellis would be considered for work that would use his aeronautical knowledge. He lost both legs in a jet crash in July 1962. (cns, San Diego Eve. Trib., 12/3/65)
German Space Research Commission (dkfw) recommended $460million West German space program between. 1966 and 1970: $250-$280 million would be spent on broad-based “vital-point” program; the balance would be used for West German participation in the European Space Research Organization (esro) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo). The Commission’s report emphasized three programs from its list of “vital points”: development of satellites, development of a recoverable sounding rocket, and construction of research installations. The report deplored the previous neglect of space research in Germany, emphasized that the funds recommended were minimal and that Germany’s late start in the space field would entail a high rate of annual increases in cost. At the end of the building stage, costs could “be adjusted to fairly fixed share of the gross national product.” (Wetmore, Av. Wk., 9/6/65, 51)
Gifford K. Johnson, former president of the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, was sworn in hy NASA Administrator James E. Webb as a nasa consultant. He would provide advice and guidance in the areas of technology utilization and technology reporting programs. (NASA Release 65-268)
Commenting on Dr. Warren Weaver’s Nov. 29 statement to U.S. News and World Report questioning the wisdom of spending $30 billion to get an American to the moon by 1970, the Wall Street Journal said: “Now Dr. Weaver is not against going to the moon . . . what he is against is the hell-for-leather way the moon program is being whipped along . . . where the emphasis rightly should fall is on Dr. Weaver’s assertion that ‘the great ideas that develop within the body of science —strange and improbable as this sounds—arise from curiosity and not from urgency,’ and that the moon program has caused a massive diversion of scientists and engineers from possibly more productive fields. . . .” (WSJ, 12/8/65, 16) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Conference, warned of the possible consequences of reduction in the NASA budget request for FY 1967:	. . history should have taught us that new space capabilities, in which we have made a considerable investment, must be used or their benefits will be lost.” Webb said history should have taught us also “that plans for the future should not be drawn by a timid hand.” He quoted the late Dr. Hugh Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, as saying “the present gap in manned flight activity [between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.] is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960 until May 1961.” (Text; LRC Release 65-88)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a statement to Pat Houtz of the Huntsville Times: “. . . it is extremely important that both the Legislature and the Governor fully understand the importance of the George C. Marshall Space Flight Center operation to the success of the current United States effort in space and, also, the importance of our ability to work in that state in an environment conducive to the most effective utilization of our ablest scientists, engineers, technicians, and industrial contractors.” (Text; Huntsville Times, 5/28/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking on statistical standards at the National Governors’ Conference in Minneapolis, said: “. . . the timely availability of accurate, comprehensive data—based on valid and accepted concepts and definitions—will become increasingly important to the effective conduct of state government. The need for compatibility between federal and state data systems is recognized at the top levels of government. . . . “It is clear that the goals of complete uniformity, perfect comparability and total integration of statistical and management information systems will not soon be accomplished. But it is equally clear that urgent efforts toward these goals are being made and are necessary if state and local governments are to keep pace with the needs of modern society.” Webb recommended that each state: “1. Establish a state statistical standards unit ... 2. Sponsor a National Conference on the Comparability of Statistics Among the States . . . and 3. Examine applicability of modern information technology at the state and local levels. . . .” (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden told the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C., that NASA planned to select 10 to 20 scientists to begin astronaut flight training this summer from over 900 applicants. Dr. Dryden said the Mercury astronauts had demonstrated man’s ability as a sensor and manipulator, and to some extent as an evaluator, in orbit. “Early Gemini and Apollo flights will further examine these capabilities so that, in the future, man’s full potential can be exploited.” (ap, NYT, 3/19/65)
An escalation of the war in Vietnam might consume the military men and equipment currently at NASA’s disposal for spaceflight recovery operations, suggested William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He said that L/Gen. Leighton I. Davis (usaf), head of spaceflight recovery operations, had commented on the possibility: “I’m sure if there were (a diversion from Viet Nam to support space flights) the NASA officials would be the first to relieve us of the requirement for support.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/23/65, 27)
Facility grants in the amount of $2,226,000 to the Case Institute of Technology and $1 million to the Univ. of Rochester, had been approved by NASA. The grant to Case, together with funds from Institute sources, would permit construction, on land owned by Case, of the Case Laboratory for Space Engineering Research. The Univ. of Rochester grant would be used to build a five-story addition to be used for space-related research in optics, geology, exobiology, physiology, and cosmic ray physics. NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “The new facilities will permit expansion of NASA-supported research directly related to the national space effort and will enable both institutions to train greater numbers of highly qualified young researchers.” (NASA Release 65-270)
NASA announced four major personnel changes: Willis H. Shapley, Deputy Chief of the Military Div. of the Bureau of the Budget, would become Associate Deputy Administrator effective September 1, 1965; Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, would become Special Assistant to Administrator James E. Webb, effective immediately; Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Sciences in the NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, would become Acting Director, Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. John W. Townsend, Assistant Director, Goddard Office of Space Science and Applications, would become Deputy Director of gsfc —a new post. When Shapley’s appointment became effective, the present Policy Planning Board would be discontinued; the office of Policy Planning would aid him in preparing policy matters for the Administrator, Deputy Administrator, and Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 65243)
NASA Hq. reorganization plan, effective Jan. 2, 1966, was disseminated throughout NASA. Two main effects of the changes: establishment of Office of the Administrator, in which the Administrator and Deputy Administrator would be supported by the Associate Deputy Administrator with a strong Secretariat; and, establishment of operating pattern within this office delegating authority and responsibility to the Deputy Administrator, who would serve as general manager as well as Acting Administrator in the Administrator’s absence. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Deputy Administrator, retained the additional title of Associate Administrator. Other changes included: Director of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition would be made Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; heads of functional staff offices except General Counsel would have the title Assistant Administrator. Heads of all functional staff offices as well as the four program offices would be responsible to the Deputy Administrator. (NASA Memo)
The 1965 International Space Electronics Symposium was held in Miami Beach. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council, told the Symposium that electronics would continue to play a prime role in the U.S. space program. Emphasizing the difficulty and complexity of the electronic problems which would be encountered in manned planetary exploration, Dr. Welsh noted that for manned Mars travel “we’ll need reliability for at least 400 days contrasted with more immediate goals of 14 to 30 days; we’ll need electrical ‘on board’ power measured in kilowatts instead of today’s tens of watts; we’ll need the data rates of 5 million bits per second instead of the current capability of 8 bits per second; and there is a still debatable possibility that we will need laser beam pointing accuracy several magnitudes better than what we now have. In components, we shall require new or improved concepts such as self-healing, self-checking, and accurate failure prediction to give the greatly increased reliability required. . . .” (Text) Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the Future Space Programs panel that the use of satellites for scientific research and the development of practical applications in meteorology, communications, navigation, and geodesy were important components of the total progress of the space program. He said science had been the prime beneficiary of skills developed for using satellites and space probes as scientific tools: “The vitality of space science has been its close association with various disciplines of science, and its ability to offer those disciplines new ways of solving old problems, while at the same time opening up new horizons.” (Text) The military space program had established the feasibility of using space as a medium for military support missions and now had the initial techniques to exploit the military usefulness of space, M/G Jerry D. Page, AFSC, told the panel on Future Space Programs. Application of these capabilities involved: (1) programs to provide near-term applications such as the Nuclear Detection Satellite program, a research-oriented effort which, at the same time, provided a global nuclear detection capability; and (2) consideration of multi-mission satellites for the future, (afsc Release)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich. The presentation was made by the Swiss ambassador, Dr. Alfred Zehnder, at the Embassy residence in Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 65-47)
Discovery of a malfunction in the computer on Gemini 6 spacecraft might prevent a December 13 launch, nasa officials speculated. The computer, whose “memory” had been altered, was removed from the spacecraft to have new information fed into it. (Wilford, NYT, 12/8/65, IOC)
Gemini GT-3 Astronauts Grissom and Young were feted as heroes in Chicago, where they motorcaded from O’Hara International Airport through the city to City Hall. An estimated one million thronged the streets shouting joyous ovations and flinging a deluge of tickertape and confetti. At luncheon with city officials the astronauts were given honorary Chicago citizenship medallions, and later a reception was given in their honor. Accompanying the astronauts were members of their families and NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Mrs. Dryden. (Wiedrich, Chic. Trib., 3/31/65)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc Ret.), speaking at a National Space Club luncheon, said: “Looking back over the 3 years since the flight of Friendship 7, I am impressed most of all by the tremendous progress the United States has made in space science and technology. “I am proud of the determination the American people have shown to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation. . . . “Three years ago, Mercury spacecraft were limited in weight to about 3,000 pounds. Today, the Saturn I booster is operational and can put 22,500 pounds into Earth orbit, or seven times the weight of Mercury. Saturn i-b, which will begin flying next year, will be able to orbit a payload equal to 11 Mercury spacecraft. Saturn V, which will fly in 1967, will be able to orbit a payload equal to more than 80 Mercuries. That’s some jump—but it is no more than typical of the great gains we are making in national space capabilities. “The accuracy requirements for all these missions are almost incomprehensible and are one of the least understood parts of the space program. A good case in point was the launch of Friendship 7 3 years ago. The speed at insertion into orbit was over 25,000 feet per second or 5 miles per second, and the booster and spacecraft were accelerating at approximately 240 feet per second at a steadily increasing rate. At booster cutoff, each error of 1.4 feet per second resulted in a difference of approximately 1 mile in apogee on the far side of the Earth. When you consider that before the onboard signal for cutoff was received, information had to be obtained by radar at the Cape, transmitted by landline to Goddard, run through the computers, returned by landline to the Cape, checked against Cape data and then transmitted 350 miles down range to the spacecraft, still allowing time for onboard delays in operation of relays, valves, and thrust termination, it looks like an almost impossibly accurate requirement. “Those accuracies, however, are rather crude compared with some now being obtained on the deep space probes. “Now we have Mariner IV which at 6 o’clock tonight will be 20,194,023 miles out from Earth on an extremely difficult and significant mission. As you know, there was a checkout of equipment aboard the spacecraft last week that indicates the chances are still good that we will get revealing pictures of Mars next July, when Mariner IV will be 134 million miles from Earth, so far it will take 12)/> seconds to get a radio signal back. “To wax philosophical for a moment, we might liken our space program to one of Plttto?s ollsgories. fie told of prisoners ciisined in s cave for so long they had lost touch with reality and felt that their whole existence was wrapped up in the shadows they could see on the wall ahead of them. He goes on to say that if one escaped to the outside world and returned to tell the others of what really lay outside the dark cave, they would probably think him completely crazy. “Even though we have seen such tremendous break-throughs in scientific knowledge in recent years, our knowledge has necessarily been limited to such a cave, for practically all we know has been limited to this one tiny speck of earth in a much larger environment. But that is in the process of becoming changed and with a rapidity no one can forecast.” (Text, CR, 2/22/65, A751-531 February 19: Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D-Okla.) said in an interview that if commercial airlines would voluntarily join the Federal Government in subsidizing helicopter lines, these services might be saved. Commercial helicopter lines operating in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco had received Federal subsidies since 1947, but President Johnson proposed in his budget message that they be cut off after Dec. 31. Sen. Monroney said: “Congress isn’t going to appropriate any more money. We haven’t a chance of selling them or continuing the subsidy without added help from the airlines.” His plan involved artificially lowering helicopter fares so that a greater portion of the flying public would use them. This higher load factor, combined with the use of larger, more economical aircraft and hoped-for improvements in helicopter technology might lead to self-sustaining helicopter service in a few years, the Senator said.	(NYT, 2/19/65, 69)
Report to industrial and defense management on the technical and economic status of magnesium-lithium alloys had been published by NASA’s Technology Utilization Div. The report was prepared for NASA by the Battelle Memorial Institute. A NASA technology utilization report based on cryogenic research directed toward evaluation of the stress distribution near abrupt changes in wall thickness of pressure vessels also became available, (nasa Releases T-65-12 and T-65-10)
MARINER IV set a distance record for communications from American spacecraft. The Mars probe transmitted data from 54 million miles out, exceeding the record of 53.9 million miles set by mariner ii in 1963. (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 4/14/65; nasa Releases 65-111, 65-117)
NASA was seeking buyers for rocket launches, and the improved Delta, incorporated into the launch package, might prove most economical, William S. Beller reported in Missiles and Rockets. Cost of launching the Delta, either to low-earth orbit or into interplanetary space, would be the same. Cost to send a package to the moon would be $16,000/ lb.; on a Mars flyby, $21,000/lb. Beller’s article continued: “It is ironic that the fabulously successful series of Delta rockets is based on much of the hardware and concepts used in the presumed failure called Vanguard. In 1959, the Air Force took the upper two Vanguard stages, mounted them on Thor, and called the combination Thor-Able. NASA then made minor modifications in the vehicle’s coast attitude-control system and put in a new auto-pilot control system; but the basic Thor-Able shell was used. This was the Delta that failed in its first firing in 1960 with an Echo satellite payload. The subsequent Deltas orbited their payloads in 22 successive launchings. “The Vanguard program, too, besides giving birth to Delta was probably one of the most economical buys of the U.S. space program. Originally budgeted for a total cost of $20 million, Vanguard ended up costing $105 million, which was paid not only for development of the Vanguard hardware and several launchings but also for setting up the worldwide Minitrack network used in Project Mercury. “Improvements in Delta from 1960 to the present involved using more energetic propellants, lengthening the second-stage tanks, replacing the third-stage motor for a more active one, adding solid strap-ons to the first stage, and again enlarging the second stage. “The result is an inexpensive and reliable bus whose launch can be bought for less than $3.5 million.” (Beller, M&R, 8/16/65, 24)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said before the New York Academy of Sciences that “scientists should not set themselves up to judge the overall value” of the national space program. Past advice from scientists had not always been sound advice, he noted. “. . . Organized science has not always been outstanding for its courage, its vision, or its optimism regarding goals for human efforts. Elements of conservatism, parochialism, and even reactionary thinking do appear among scientists just as they do among many other groups in our society.” Dr. Welsh was also critical of the practice of criticizing the space program “by narrowly comparing” the dollars spent for space with what those same dollars might accomplish “if devoted to other endeavors, scientific or otherwise.” He said that often such dollars were not transferable; that space dollars might change the general climate to one favoring broader aid to the whole spectrum of science; and that since space expenditures sought broader goals than those of science, “the comparison may well be invalid on the face of it.” He continued: “The visionaries, whether primarily scientists or policy makers, must be given the opportunity to point out the many benefits which can flow from the manned and unmanned uses of aerospace. But, given such opportunity, they should use it effectively and affirmatively. Regardless of their motivations, the pessimists who cry out against aerospace research and technological endeavors have clearly set themselves against progress. The United States can no longer relax and rest on its past industrial laurels. The race for survival, literally and philosophically, is on. Of course, we would all like to believe in the solely non-aggressive uses of aerospace by all countries which have the needed technology. However, the realities of life dictate adequate preparation to preserve our national and Free World security. We should follow the axiom that a pound of prevention is worth mega-tons of cure.” Howard Simons commented in the Washington Post that these remarks were probably precipitated by a report from a committee of the American Association for the Advancement of Science which had charged that social, economic, military, and political pressures were distorting the traditional values and effectiveness of science. The report was highly critical of Project Apollo: “The Apollo program, in its present form, does not appear to be based on the orderly, systematic extension of basic scientific investigation.” (Text, CR, 1/28/65, A36T-65; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/12/65)
Pocomoke City, Md., radio station wdmv proposed that Wallops Island, Va., be renamed Dryden Island in memory of Dr. Hugh Dryden, late NASA Deputy Administrator, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/ 27/65, Bl)
In a Cabinet report for President Johnson, NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden said: “The primary objective of the Gemini V mission to demonstrate man’s ability to function in the space environment for 8 days and to qualify the spacecraft systems under these conditions was met. This milestone duplicated the period required for the manned lunar exploration mission. “Gemini V also demonstrated the capability of man to withstand prolonged periods of weightlessness. The adaptability of the human body was indicated by the performance of the astronauts. For example, their heartbeat rates gradually dropped to a level significantly lower than their preflight normal rates, but by the fourth day, adapted to the weightless condition and leveled off. Upon return to Earth, the heartbeat rates were slightly higher than normal, as expected, but returned to normal rates during the second day. This has assured us of man’s capability to travel to the Moon and return.” (Pres. Doc., 9/20/65, 258)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, spoke at the dedication ceremonies for Martin Co.’s new Research Institute for Advanced Studies in Relay, Md., about some of the progress that had been made in space science: “Because of the space program, geophysics is experiencing a tremendous broadening of its horizons. . . . Moreover, geophysics is being carried forward to new domains, as instruments reach the moon and the planets, giving to the discipline a perspective it could never achieve as long as geophysics was confined to a single body of the solar system. “Similarly, the space program is giving a new dimension to astronomy. The ability to observe above the filtering distorting atmosphere in wavelengths not hitherto observable promises exciting new discoveries. . . . “The field of physics finds in the regions of outer space a laboratory of challenging opportunity. In interplanetary space, matter and fields exist under conditions unobtainable in the laboratory on the ground. . . . “It is, indeed, interesting to observe that one of the impacts of space efforts on physics, geophysics, and astronomy has been to draw the three disciplines together more closely than they have been drawn together in the past. In the investigation of sun-earth relationships, a most complex and challenging area of investigation, all three of these disciplines find themselves in partnership on problems of common interest. . . . “The impact of the space program on bioscience is still developing ... of particular importance is the area of exobiology. . . . “The satellite, space probe, and manned spacecraft give the scientist a new approach to the solution of many important problems. They serve to strengthen his hand—if used effectively. . . .” (Text)
Present-day Americans are thinking, working, and risking to find ways, first to explore, and then to use, the new environment of outer space,” said NASA Administrator James E. Webb in an address to the New Mexico Chapter of the American Institute of Industrial Engineers in Albuquerque. He continued:	. . the exploration of space has brought a new force into the affairs and life of this Nation. Once more the American people confront a new environment—harsher, more demanding, more inspiring than any man has ever tried to enter before. ... We cannot yet foresee all the consequences of man’s entry into space. But the record of history is clear, that the mastery by one nation of a new environment, or of a major new technology, or the combination of the two as we now see in space, has always in the past had the most profound effects on all nations and on all the peoples of the earth.” (Text)
Application to “Spudnik 1” — a potato in orbit — of his theory of biological rhythms was explained by Prof. Frank A. Brown, Jr., biologist at Northwestern Univ., in an interview with the New York Times. About two thirds of the way to the moon, the earth’s magnetic field and other earth-related forces that might help run the biological clock, including gravity, electrostatic fields, and barometric pressure, would be absent, he said. Suggesting that NASA orbit a potato, he added, “If the potato dies, it [the space program] better be checked before a man is sent out there.” (Wehrein, NYT, 10/31/65, 73)
U.S. would install new equipment costing an estimated $5 million at one of its three satellite tracking stations in the Pretoria area of South Africa. Arrival of the expensive new equipment was taken by observers as a sign that NASA officials were determined to hold on to the stations. Possibility that they might be closed had been raised last summer when Prime Minister Hendrik F. Verwoerd had said American Negroes could not be assigned to the stations. American officials insisted they had accepted no racial restriction on their personnel in South Africa. (NYT, 10/31/65, 12)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, vice president and assistant general manager for space systems at Avco Corp., would succeed Dr. Raymond L. Bispling-hoff as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. Dr. Adams, a consultant to NASA and NACA, was expected to assume his new duties in October. Dr. Bisplinghoff would become Special Assistant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 65-276)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, Voyager project manager at jpl, told the Christian Science Monitor in an interview that NASA had decided to launch the Voyager spacecraft with the Saturn V booster instead of the Saturn IB. “This,” Dr. Burcham said, “means we can put a heavier retro-rocket pack on the spacecraft. It will enable us to release the lander after the spacecraft has gone into orbit around Mars instead of 10 days before reaching the planet, as planned earlier, and that will give us a better chance of putting a lander on the surface.” (Cowen, CSM, 12/1/65)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed the national space program in address before the Hartford Rotary Club, Hartford, Conn. Looking toward the future, he said: “The Gemini and Apollo-Saturn programs are providing this country with a broad base of technological, managerial, and resources capability which makes feasible a wide spectrum of space missions beyond the first lunar landings. This capability can be exploited in a wide range of earth orbital, lunar orbital, and lunar surface missions. . . . “Over 90 percent of the Apollo program is directly applicable to our earth orbital capability. Many interesting ideas are under consideration on how to use this extended earth orbit capability to yield great benefits to mankind in his daily life on earth, and to conduct much significant scientific research. “We are also studying the use of modified Apollo vehicles for missions both in orbit about the moon and for exploration of the moon’s surface. In lunar orbit, we can do mapping, surveying, and exploration of the moon. On the moon, we can conduct detailed exploration of the surface environment and the moon’s overall properties. We are also looking at the moon as a base for astronomical and for biological studies. “All of these applications will capitalize on the presence of men in space. There is no substitute for having man’s abilities available right on the spot during a mission, with his human intellect to cope with the unexpected and operate in an unplanned or unprogramed manner. . . .” (Text, CR, 4/7/65, A5656-58)
Soviet Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov was quoted by Zolnierz Wolnosci on the future Soviet space program: spacecraft would remain in orbit much longer and their crews would be larger; highly trained teams would assemble permanent orbital space stations, orbital laboratories, and interplanetary spacecraft while the remainder of the crews would work inside the craft. Spacecraft participating in these flights would rendezvous and dock, using a flexible concertina-like passageway. Leonov said problems still to be solved included transfer of crews for interplanetary flights, accomplishment of engineering work in space, and return of spacecraft to earth. (Badowski, Zolnierz Wolnosci, 9/7/65,1)
GSFC announced management changes “designed to meet the increasing demands of advanced space programs by strengthening lines of authority and responsibility at the Center.” Dr. John F. Clark was Acting Director and John W. Townsend, Deputy Director! Three additional Assistant Directorships and a Chief of Advanced Plans Staff were created. GSFC personnel were appointed to fill these posts: Herman E. LaGow, Assistant Director for Systems Reliability; Daniel G. Mazur, Assistant Director for Technology; George F. Pieper, Jr., Assistant Director for Space Sciences; Robert E. Bourdeau, Acting Assistant Director for Projects; and William G. Stroud, Chief, Advanced Plans Staff. Dr. Michael J. Vaccaro and John T. Mengel continued as Assistant Directors. Dr. Vaccaro’s responsibilities were expanded to include Technical Services as well as Administration. Mengel’s position as Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems was unchanged. (gsfc Release G-22-65)
Management of the Voyager landing capsule system had been assigned to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA announced. Harris M. Schur-meier, former Ranger Project Manager at Jpl, had been named Voyager System Manager. Currently in a design study phase, Voyager was planned for unmanned planetary explorations beginning with a Mars mission in 1971. (nasa Release 65-242; jpl Release 346)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Rose Polytechnic Institute, Terre Haute, Ind.: “Indeed, the success of the national space program depends to a very large degree on the quality and the extent of involvement by the universities. Their most important contribution would naturally be in doing the jobs they are uniquely qualified to do, that is, in research and in educating and training at both the undergraduate and graduate levels the scientists, engineers, and other professional personnel required by the space program. . . . “With its university program, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is approaching a goal established early in its history. That goal, when achieved, will provide a substantial increment to those trained men who are capable of guiding this country’s undertakings in science and technology confidently toward future needs that are only partially visible to us now. That goal is being pursued in institutions of higher learning where men teach and practice their specialties in the context of other highly refined fields of interest. Surely, this concept is broader than the space program itself.” (Text) * n—i^A, Usaf s twin-jet, delta-winged interceptor prototype, established four speed and altitude records at Edwards afb: (1) 2,062 mph straight-away speed record, breaking the 1,655.9 mph previous record held by the Soviet Union’s e-166; (2 ) 80,000-ft. record for sustained altitude in horizontal flight, exceeding the E—166’s 74,376-ft. record; (3) 1,688 mph record for 1,000-km. closed-course event with 2000-kg. (4,409-lb.) cargo, surpassing the 1,441 mph record set by the e-166 in April 1965; and (4) 1,642 mph record for 500-km. closed-course event, topping Soviet performance of 1,452 mph. usaf pilots Col. Robert L. Stephens and Lt. Col. Daniel Andre set the first two records; Maj. Walter F. Daniel and Capt. James Cooney, the others. yf-12a performed under requirements of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale, world authority for verification of flight records, (dod Release 281-65; NYT, 5/9/65, 88)
President Johnson approved the following policy on the promotion and decoration of astronauts: “1. Each military astronaut will receive a one grade promotion as a direct result of the first successful space flight, but not beyond the grade of colonel in the Air Force and Marine Corps or captain in the Navy. Promotions to general officer rank will be accomplished through usual military selection board process. “2. Each Gemini astronaut will be awarded the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service (or Cluster) after completion of a successful space flight. The NASA Medal for Distinguished Service, the highest award which can be given by that agency, will be awarded for exceptional accomplishments in the Gemini program, including but not limited to accomplishments in actual flight. “3. Military decorations associated with space flights, such as awards for exceptional heroism or other distinguished service, will be determined on an individual basis consistent with general policy governing the award of traditional military decorations.” (Text, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 183-84) During August: Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn., wrote in Aerospace: “Almost every aspect of our national life has begun to show a positive and beneficial impact of this nation’s decision to be a major participant in man’s greatest adventure. “There has been the direct economic impact on the communities and regions where the major parts of this large national event are centered. There has been introduced into our national economy a wide variety of radically new industrial techniques. There have evolved new standards of excellence in engineering, testing, design, reliability, environment, control, and the skill and dedication of personnel . . . “In space research, development and exploration, the identity becomes . . . more imperative. Aerospace companies go many routes attempting to achieve that goal. Leading aerospace companies, for example, developed a ‘Zero Defects’ program aimed at reminding, rewinding, and emphasizing to the worker that rejects are expensive and, if undetected, would contribute to tragedy. Other companies have instituted variations of the zero defects promotional program. “A second motivation campaign called ‘The Critical Parts Program,’ to insure that all 98 subsystem assemblies that go into a major space booster system will work, precisely in sequence, has been sold as an industry wide concept. “Another company reports that employes were amused and, more importantly, impressed, when a sign was tacked above the door of its main assembly room that reads: ‘In NASA we trust. Everything else we check . . .’” (Aerospace, Summer 1965, 25)
Decision to narrow the choice of type of broadcast satellite it would consider from three to two was announced by ComSatCorp president Joseph* V. Charyk at a stockholder’s meeting in Washington, D.C. Two of the approaches under consideration involved satellites that would operate about 6,000 mi. above the earth: one would have 18 satellites, orbiting in random positions; the other would have 12 satellites, orbiting at “phased” or controlled positions. The third approach, being tested in early bird I, had satellites placed at an altitude of 22,000 mi. in synchronous orbit. In his speech, Charyk revealed that the corporation had decided to drop from consideration the 6.000-	mi. random version. It had been discovered, he reported, that a 6.000-	mi.-high satellite could be controlled more easily than ComSatCorp had believed when it first started studying random satellites as one alternative approach. Moreover, Charyk said, it now appeared that a satellite could be designed that would operate either at 6,000 mi. in controlled positions or at the 22,000-mi.-high, synchronous position. LiOinSatCorp therefore wo: :Id invite satellite designers to offer bids to build this type of satellite. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/11/65, 12) . held in Mar del Plata, Argentina, where it was moved from Buenos Aires because of student demonstrations. A new working group was formed, with Morris Tepper (Chief of Meteorological Programs, nasa) as chairman. Called Working Group VI, for Scientific Space Experiments Concerned with Properties and Dynamics of the Troposphere and Stratosphere, it was formed to “further international understanding of, and cooperation in, the use of rocket and satellite systems and techniques for meteorological research, and to promote international discussions involving meteorologists with scientists of other disciplines in order to provide a good climate for the development of imaginative new approaches to the use of rockets and satellites for meteorological research.” (nas-nrc News Report, Vol. xv, 5/6/65, 6) Dr. 0. Z. Gazenko, physiologist and member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that cosmonauts had no difficulty knowing the orientation of their bodies and experienced no nervous disorders if they were given visual cues. He based his remarks on experiences of Soviet cosmonauts, especially those of Lt. Col. Aleksei Leonov in VOSKHOD ii: “When he saw the spacecraft, he had no problem knowing his orientation, but it was different when he didn’t see the spacecraft.” During the launch phase, the cosmonauts’ pulse and breathing rates were greater than noted during centrifugal tests in ground laboratories. In voskhod II, it took a comparatively long time for the normal levels to be reached, according to Gazenko. Comparison of the data of the Voskhod flights with other space flights showed fewer cardiovascular variations and better responses to stress. He recommended crews of several people since “the feeling of togetherness of cosmonauts is very important.” (Text) Success of the fully stabilized British Skylark rocket in obtaining new astrophysical data was described. Skylark was a single-stage, solid-fuel vehicle designed to carry 150-200-lb. payload to 200 km. (124 mi.) altitude. Using the sun as a reference, Skylark could achieve pointing accuracy of between two and three minutes of arc in pitch and yaw, reported Kenneth Pounds, lecturer at Leicester College, England, and one of its users: “The new Skylark has revolutionized the whole field of rocket research as far as we’re concerned.” He pointed out that many scientific experiments, such as taking x-ray photographs of the sun, could not be done by an unstabilized rocket: “You need 100 sec. or more exposure time, plus roll stabilization, or the photographs will be blurred.” (cospar Rpt.) M.	S. V. Rao, reporting on the Thumba, India, experiments conducted on World Days during the 1964—1965 iqsy, said east northeasterly winds with speeds of 60-90 knots were observed in the stratosphere during the monsoon. In the mesosphere, data revealed a region of unusually strong winds with high shear. Rao reported that radar observations of the rate of dispersion of chaff confirmed existence of complex pattern of high shears and pronounced turbulence in the equatorial mesosphere in the monsoon season. (Text) NASA scientists at Wallops Station, Va., had made a similar rocket launching during the Thumba experiments to get a synoptic picture. Arnold Frutkin, NASA Director of International Programs, said at the cospar meeting that “these data were the first relating to the monsoon problem on a global scale. It shows what very important work less advanced countries can do.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17) Activities in the 1964 U.S. space program were summarized by Dr. Richard W. Porter, National Academy of Sciences delegate to COSPAR:	“. . . Satellite storm warnings, intercontinental television, voice and data transmissions via satellite, all-weather navigational ‘fixes’ for ships at sea, and precise map making by means of satellite observations have become almost commonplace events. Space launchings at frequent intervals are providing a continuous stream of new information of value to science and mankind. ... In total, the various agencies of the United States carried out sixty-one successful satellite and space probe launchings; however, because of the occasional practice of launching several satellites at a time . . . the total number of useful discrete payloads in Earth orbit or escape trajectory was seventy-seven. . . . “In addition, the United States launched seven large high-altitude rocket probes, in the range from 700 to 1100 km., and well over one hundred other scientific sounding rockets, most of which reached altitudes between 110 and 250 km. Twelve hundred twenty-three small meteorological rockets, having a payload of about 5 kg. and a maximum altitude of about 60 km. were fired on regular schedules by the meteorological rocket network and more than one hundred scientifically instrumented large balloon flights were made during the period. “Technological advances made during this period which will contribute significantly to the space-research capability of the United States include the launching of three SATURN I booster rockets, capable of putting about 7500 kg. of useful weight into Earth orbit, one titan IIIA booster, and successful tests of the CENTAUR liquid hydrogen rocket. Electrostatic ion accelerator rocket propulsion devices were tested in space during 1964, and more recently a nuclear reactor with thermoelectric energy conversion devices successfully began an endurance run in space which is still continuing. Passive gravity-gradient stabilization techniques have been perfected by means of additional satellite tests to the point where this technique is ready for useful employment in a variety of space applications. The highly directional properties of a lasar beam were successfully used in tracking a satellite. Significant improvements were also made in sounding rocket, high altitude balloon design and in data conversion facilities.” (Text) K.	Maeda, chief Japanese delegate to the sixth international space symposium of cospar, told Missiles and Rockets Japan would launch its own satellite with its own launch vehicle within the next three years. A four-stage, solid-fueled rocket would be used, with the Mu rocket as first stage. The satellite, to be used solely for scientific research, would weigh between 50-100 kgs. and be sent into a 500-1,000-km. (311-621-mi.) orbit. (M&R, 5/17/65, 9) At a news conference during the cospar meeting, A. A. Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate, said that in view of the difficulties of soft landing on the moon, the Soviet Union would probably try to soft land another Lunik before attempting to land cosmonauts. He said the lunar surface must be known in detail and “should be examined by automatic stations.” Because of the problems involved, he added, “it is not possible to set any date for a lunar landing.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the Boy Scout Launch-O-Ree in New York City that the “future will be determined in large measure by the kind of talented and dedicated youth found in the Boy Scouts. Science and technology, which form the basis for the national space program, are pioneering areas within which many of you can find opportunities for satisfaction and service.” (Text)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, delivering the annual Robert Thurston Lecture of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in Chicago, said that man woud probably never explore the stars since a round trip to the nearest would take 160,000 yrs. Dr. Dryden spoke on the impact of man-in-space on engineering. This was to be his last public appearance. (Manly, Chic. Trib., 11/ 11/65)
U.S. would make the first lunar landing because the “Saturn 5 booster ... is the only one anywhere powerful enough to do that,” predicted NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the International Radio and Television Society in New York. He believed the U.S. was ahead of Russia in cumulative knowledge of manned spaceflight, but conceded that Russia was probably 18 mo. ahead in other areas—specifically, multimanned spacecraft and the building and use of big boosters. Webb refused to classify Russia’s LUNA VII mission as unsuccessful, explaining: “They’re practicing how to do these things. They must have gained a good deal of information from it.” (San Diego Union, 10/10/65)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
The United States . . . has gone into space for many compelling reasons,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the National Association of Retail Druggists meeting in Washington, D.C. “It is . . . imperative that the U.S. be first in space for reasons of national achievement, for the pride that goes with such achievement, and for the international prestige that accompanies both. “We must go into space to reap the benefits of scientific discovery, to stimulate our economic and social progress, to advance our technological advancement, including the civilian application and use of the products of space-oriented research, and to fulfill what has been called the compelling urge to explore and discover. . . .” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told newsmen at Manned Spacecraft Center that the U.S. might land a man on the moon as early as late 1968. He expressed great confidence' in the space program, but cautioned: “Pm not going to say we’re ahead of schedule. We’ve had a remarkable set of flights, and we’re now entering a period of intensive testing.” (Freelander, Houston Post, 8/22/65)
Rep. Joseph Karth (D-Minn.) told the House that the flight of GEMINI V had successfully tested not only the high qualities of Astronauts Gordon Cooper, Jr., and Charles Conrad, but the reliability and suitability of many items involved in America’s space program, including food. He inserted into the Congressional Record: “The Pillsbury items scheduled by NASA for the Cooper-Conrad mission—each ready to eat and requiring no reconstitution—were brownies, gingerbread, pineapple fruitcake, date fruitcake, apricot cereal bars, strawberry cereal bars, toasted bread cubes and cinnamon toast. “Cooper and Conrad were programed to eat 4 meals each day, providing a daily average of approximately 2,500 calories. The selected menu . . . was designed to maintain body weight at zero gravity under light physical activity. The 8 Pillsbury items were designed to provide a high energy source that supplemented the rehydratable foods in the menu for each meal. They required no preparation time and provided solid food consistency. . . .” {CR, 9/9/65, A5095)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb was asked by Rep. Charles R. Jonas (R-N.C.) in NASA appropriations hearing of the Subcommittee on Independent Offices, House Committee on Appropriations, to “set to rest” the rumor that NASA was planning to phase out msfc in Huntsville, Ala. Mr. Webb explained that during his recent visit to Alabama leading Alabama businessmen had asked “questions about the future and whether the budget was going to be larger, and whether more would come to Alabama. Perhaps injudiciously, I said, ‘Unless we can recruit better and more able people for the new phase of our program, you are not going to keep what you have.’ . . . “We have a real problem in recruiting the kind of people needed to manage these contracts with American industry to go and live in Alabama, and the image of the State has been one of the problems that we have had. I pointed this out to the businessmen, and pointed out to them also that not only the problem of our recruitment was involved, that the State itself, in my opinion, was missing a valuable opportunity to use these kinds of people to build up its own economy, because the very existence of them there in the various areas could be of great benefit to the State. . . .” I Ind. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 1264-65)
Gen. Charles P. Cabell (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in as consultant on organization and management development activities to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Military assignments during his career included that of directing the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff. He was deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1962. (NASA Release 65-226)
At the Spring Meeting of the American Physical Society, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, attempted to answer the question “What can the space program do for experimental sciences like physics”:	. . the impact that space techniques are having and have already had on geophysics ... is three-fold in character. First, the geophysicist finds in the space program powerful tools to use in a new approach to solving old problems. Secondly, the application of space techniques to geophysics has already turned up a number of exciting new problems, greatly broadening the scope of the discipline. Thirdly, as space probes, and eventually men. reach other bodies of the solar system such as the moon and planets, the domain of geophysics grows beyond the confines of a single body of the solar system. Let us consider each of these extensions to geophysics a little further. “. . . space techniques have provided new tools for studying old problems of geophysics. Geodesy, meteorology, upper atmospheric physics, ionospheric research, and sun-earth relationships have all benefited from the application of space techniques. In the case of geodesy, the influence of the earth upon the orbits of various artificial satellites has been measured by careful radio, radar, and optical tracking and used to obtain quantitative measures of the various harmonics in the expansion of the earth’s gravitational potential. As a consequence of such measurements it has been found that the earth’s equatorial bulge is some 70 meters greater than one would expect. . . . Other departures of the geoid from the figure of hydrostatic equilibrium have also been determined from these satellite measurements. . . . These measurements in turn have important implications for the distribution of matter within the earth, and for the internal strength of the earth’s mantle.” (Text)
Washington Post contended in an editorial that long-range achievements of oceanographic research might have a greater impact than the space program on the lives of Americans: The reactions of the aquanauts “to prolonged periods in Sealab’s artificial environment and in the ocean depths will provide vital information on man’s ability to explore and work on the world’s continental shelves. Difficulties that have already occurred indicate that undersea exploration, heretofore granted only limited funds for research and development, is not likely to advance as spectacularly as the space program . . .” (Wash. Post, 9/12/65)
The aiaa Unmanned Spacecraft Meeting was held in Los Angeles. Maj. Gen. 0. J. Ritland, afsc’s Deputy Commander for Space, said in address that focus on manned space events often caused us to lose sight of the numerous space missions adequately performed by unmanned spacecraft. Although much of unmanned spacecraft activity had directly supported manned missions, “unmanned space technology has benefitted only indirectly from manned space effort.” He predicted that future manned missions might reverse this relationship and cited the objectives of the USAF Mol program as an effort to strengthen and expand technology for all space programs. Mol program would develop technology to improve manned space capability; demonstrate servicing by man of large structures in space; conduct basic scientific and general technological manned experimentation; determine biological response of man in space for extended periods. General Ritland said: “With a laboratory in space, astronaut-scientists or engineers can assemble, test, and observe the operation of many subsystems or components in the actual space environment. They can observe equipment failures on the spot and will be able to make necessary replacements or repairs. I have spent many hours . . . looking over space flight data—attempting to determine exactly what failed and why it failed. The time is near when we can overcome many of these frustrations and uncertainties by use of the astronaut to answer such questions or to relay data to the ground for detailed analysis.” (afsc Release) Discussing future requirements for military satellite communications systems, Samuel P. Brown, Technical Director, U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency, said: “The feasibility of gaining significant improvements in this area appears very good based on the lessons learned from the SYNCOM spin stabilized satellite and the approaches planned for the DOD’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project and NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite Program. From these and other programs is expected to evolve techniques for spacecraft stabilization which will permit the increase of satellite antenna gains by an order of magnitude.” (Text) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Edgar M. Cortright said the reason for a civilian and a military space program lay in fundamental differences in the respective roles of NASA and dod: “nasa’s role is to explore and exploit space for peaceful purposes. The DOD’s role is to.stay prepared to defend the United States and its allies, operating in any medium that furthers this end. The present space program with its great breadth would never have evolved under the DOD, which must necessarily devote its full attention to its awesome military responsibilities. . . . “Fortunately, the two space programs are mutually supporting and blend together quite well. They use common equipment . , . and draw on the same scientific and industrial base . . . numerous projects are of great mutual interest. Top management in both agencies devotes substantial effort to insure close cooperation and to minimize duplication.” (Text) JPl’s Dan Schneiderman, project manager for NASA’s Mariner program, told aiaa delegates that data from MARINER iv’s solar plasma probe, which ceased normal functioning ten days after the Nov. 28, 1964, launching, had become understandable to scientists through analysis of a component failure in the plasma probe. Telemetry from a second instrument indicated that a portion of the ionization chamber experiment, which measured radiation in space, was not operating properly. Schneiderman said the new failure was in the Geiger-Mueller tube. Schneiderman estimated that based on nitrogen consumption to date, there was enough gas available to keep mariner IV stablized for about six years. He said there had been no loss of lock with Canopus since a special command was transmitted to the probe Dec. 17,1964. (nasa Release 65-73)
Emergency landing of voskhod ii was the third such failure in the Soviet space program, according to an unidentified Czechoslovak scientist, member of the Astronautic Commission of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, during a panel discussion on Radio Prague. He said there had been two earlier failures in the unmanned Vostoks. The disclosure was made in reply to a listener’s letter. {NYT, 4/1/65, 6)
The possible implications of President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory were discussed by Raymond Senter in The New Republic: “President Johnson’s decision to allow the Air Force to build and launch five manned orbital laboratories (mol), at a cost of $1.5 billion or more, is likely to increase tensions between the US and the USSR and to spark a similar military space program by the Russians. If so, the Air Force will certainly urge further escalation of its own military space program, raising the specter that space will become a fantastically expensive battlefield of the future. . . . “It is, however, possible that mol will demonstrate the feasibility of a few American and Soviet spacemen in their respective spacecraft operating a continuous space watch. If it does, and if both nations exercise restraint, it could have a stabilizing effect, as have our mutual unmanned reconnaissance satellites. If man can be an efficient ob; server in orbit for extended periods, the time may come when the U.S. should invite the United Nations to maintain a continuous space patrol, with a multi-national crew, to warn of any impending or surprise attack.” (Senter, The New Republic, 9/11/65, 9)
NASA terminated its contract with the Thiokol Chemical Corp., and its subcontractor, Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Co., for development of a 260-in.-dia. solid rocket motor. Reason for the decision was the difficulty encountered by the contractors in processing and welding special steel required for the rocket case and the time which would be required to develop an alternate method. During a hydrostatic pressure test April 11 of the first rocket case produced under the Thiokol contract, failure had occurred at a pressure considerably below the normal operating firing pressure with the consequent destruction of the case. A second case, presently about 60% complete, had been constructed by the same method and was subject to the kinds of faults that resulted in destruction of the first case. Aerojet-General Corp., a second contractor undertaking development of a 260-in. solid rocket motor, was not affected by termination of Thiokol contract, (nasa Release 65-187; Marshall Star, 6/16/65, 6) June 6: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, told the graduating class of Clark University: “Your country has wisely although belatedly made a firm decision to conduct a vigorous national space program. It is a clear responsibility of each of us to learn what he can about that program, find out what it means to the country as a whole and to the individuals who live here.” He continued: “As we attempt to carry out our responsibilities in educating the general public about space, there are a few concepts which need particular emphasis: “1. Education. The space program has been a catalyst, a stimulus to education at all levels, with particular attention to science and engineering. . . . “2. National Security. . . . How much more secure are we, due to improved communications, more accurate navigation, and more complete weather information? How much is it worth to be better informed about potential sources of danger? How can we assess the advantage of developing competence to detect and offset possible aggression from space? How important is it to know that we intend to keep peace and freedom in space so that all who would go there with peaceful intentions are free to do so? I cannot judge the worth of this national security. . . . “3. Innovations. The space program stimulates the development of new materials, new products, new productive processes, and new managerial techniques. . . . “4. International Status. A substantial difference in influence in world affairs evolves from whether a country is in a first position or a second position in power. In many respects, a nation’s relative position depends on how it stands in advanced technology. Power and influence in world affairs depend to a great degree upon the technological capability of a nation. . . . The ideal picture is that of a nation strong in ideas, in technology, in freedom, in standard of living, and in military power to protect the viability of the other prestige ingredients. The space program, effectively and imaginatively conducted, contributes positively to all of those ingredients. Of even greater importance is the potential impact the space program can have on world peace through substituting competence in space exploration for competence in building implements of aggression. ... “5. Economics. Combining the best talents in management, in engineering, and in science, with the most modern facilities available, the net result of the space program is the production of progress. . . .” (Text)
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, addressed meeting of Eurospace in Washington, D.C. “Launch vehicle and propulsion requirements for more distant applications have led us to establish the feasibility of nuclear reactors for space propulsion purposes, and continuing attention will be given to this field. Data obtained in 10 years of extensive technical effort have now experimentally verified the analytical predictions of performance for this type of propulsion. And, of course, the supporting technologies which would be necessary for difficult and distant future missions must also be considered, the power sources, including fuel cells, radio isotope sources, reactor power plants, vastly improved communications technology, pointing and orientation technology, highly reliable and long-lived componentry, and life support systems, including closed ecological systems. In this wide range of prospects for the more distant future, we are not committed to a particular line of development nor to given systems. We are too early in the space age to make such commitments. . . .” (Text)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
Charles R. Able, group vice president, Missile and Space Systems, Douglas Aircraft Co., defined for the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., the reasons the U.S. must have an on-going space program. He concluded: “The most important single factor in deciding what space programs we will implement in the future ... is going to be, simply, how well we perform in the programs now going and those just getting started. “The extent to which this Nation will be willing to commit itself to new ventures in space in the years ahead depends entirely on how well we stay on schedule and within the budget set for us. “The most important task we have in preparing for the future is to do a good job now.” (Text, CR, 9/22/65, A5370-71)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb presented NASA Exceptional Service Award to Dr. George F. Simpson, Assistant Administrator for Policy Planning, in an informal Headquarters ceremony. Having joined NASA in 1961, Dr. Simpson resigned to become Chancellor of the State of Georgia University System, (eph)
faa announced that Gordon Bain, Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, had resigned for personal reasons effective Sept. 15, and that M/Gen. M.S. White, Federal Air Surgeon, was returning to the Air Force. B/Gen. Jewell C. Maxwell, commander of the usaf Western Test Range, had been assigned to faa on active duty to replace Bain and Dr. Peter Siegel, Chief, Aeromedical Certification Div., Office of Aviation Medicine, would replace Dr. White, (faa Release 65-65)
Joint Congressional Atomic Energy Committee, in hearing on aec’s fy 1966 authorization, asked NASA Administrator James E. Webb why NASA was dropping funds for the Snap-8 spacecraft nuclear auxiliary power project. In the joint nasa-aec project, aEC was working on the reactor and NASA was working on the power conversion machinery. Snap-8 was one of three projects that had been deleted from the nasa fy 1966 budget request. Mr. Webb said:	“	... in the over-all budgeting . . . the President has a hard problem of adjusting resources to the needs of the Government. In this case, it was decided that these systems, these three systems, could not be financed within the resources available for allocation to NASA and therefore they were eliminated in the final decision relating to the President’s budget, but not on our recommendation. . . . “Because we are on the verge of significant technical milestones with our power conversion equipment, we believe we should phase out the program in an orderly way and provide the maximum amount of experience and data for future use. “Therefore, we plan to continue current testing of components combined in the test loop to achieve at least 1,000 hours of operating time on each of the major components, by reprogramming our remaining fiscal year 1965 funds into these specific task areas. “. . . we expect to present to you and the committees, if you will permit us to do so, an orderly plan for using the resources we now have. This gives the Congressional Committees an opportunity to look at and plan and decide whether it does really fit what they believe is in the national interest rather than to take a sudden action. . . .” Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, expressed his belief “that it is too bad that the Bureau of the Budget trimmed you down on this work. I wish you had gone ahead with it through the test period, we would have learned some very significant things. I disassociate it from the other two [canceled projects] but Snap-8 should have gone on priority.” (Transcript)
Three members of the nas-nrc Space Science Board, Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, Dr. Harry H. Hess, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, appeared before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in its hearings on post-Apollo goals of the U.S. space program. They repeated the recommendation of NAS in its 1964 National Goals in Space 1971-1985 that emphasis be placed on unmanned exploration of the planets, especially Mars, and added that supplementary data would be forthcoming with the release of reports on the Space Research Summer Study—1965 (June 21-July 16). Dr. Hess noted that the 1964 study recommended highest priority be given to search for life on a neighboring planet. He said the only difference in the 1965 recommendation was to “give a somewhat higher priority to Venus but leaving Mars the number one objective.” (nas-nrc News Report, 9/65, 5)	_
The six scientist-astronauts selected for the Apollo program were announced in the Nation’s press: Owen K. Garriott, 34, associate professor of physics, Stanford Univ.; Edward G. Gibson, 29, senior research scientist, Applied Research Labs., Aeronutronic Div., Philco Corp.; Duane E. Graveline, 34, flight surgeon, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Lt. Cdr. Joseph P. Kerwin (usn), 33, staff flight surgeon, Air Wing, 4, Cecil Field Naval Air Sta., Pa.; Frank Curtis Michel, 31, assistant professor of space sciences, Rice Univ.; Harrison Schmitt, 29, astrogeologist, U.S. Geological Survey. They W'ere chosen from a group of 16 nominees submitted to NASA by the National Academy of Sciences. NAS had screened about 400 applications forwarded by NASA earlier this year. The six new scientist-astronauts were to have been announced officially by NASA June 29 but NASA officials confirmed the six named on June 28, the day after the press stories. (Schefter, Houston Chron., 6/27/65; upi, Wash. Post, 6/27/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb and DOD Secretary Robert S. McNamara announced NASA—dod agreement on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), released in conjunction with fy 1966 budget: . . Planning for the Defense manned orbiting laboratory program will also consider, in cooperation with NASA, broader objectives of scientific and general technological significance. “To determine the essential characteristics of the vehicle that will be required, the DOD will continue intensive studies and design of experiments and systems aimed at the primary military objectives. “Cooperative studies, by NASA and Defense, will identify and define scientific and general technological experiments which might be carried out, with NASA participation, in conjunction with the military program. “dod, with assistance from NASA, will compare configurations of Apollo which may be suitable for military experiments with the Gemini b-mol configuration to determine the complete system that can meet the primary military objectives in a more efficient, less costly, or more timely fashion. “On the basis of these studies, a decision will be made whether to proceed with full-scale development by Defense of a manned orbiting laboratory system and what the specific developments and vehicle configurations are to be. The Defense budget includes $150 million in fy 1966 for the program. . . . “Depending upon the manned orbiting laboratory decision, upon the progress in the Gemini and Apollo programs, and upon the results of NASA studies, a decision will be made whether to proceed with modifications to the Apollo system and the nature and timing of necessary specific developments. The NASA 1966 budget includes about $50 million for proceeding with design and pacing developments. . . (nasa Budget Briefing fy 1966)
The number of women earning more than $10,000 annually in scientific government jobs had increased dramatically from 1959 because of interest in space programs, Mrs. Catherine Dryden Hock, NASA systems engineer, informed the New York Section of Society of Women Engineers. Between 1959 and 1963, number of women in Government grades of GS-12 and above in computer fields rose 790% ; in mathematics and mathematical statistics, 137% ; and in physical sciences, 122%. NASA’s engineering force was 3% women, (nasa Release 65-60)
