nasa’s contributions to multidisciplinary research in support of development were discussed by NASA Administrator James E. Webb at a meeting of the West Point Society of the District of Columbia. Webb described how NASA programs fulfilled need pointed out by the late NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden in 1949 for cooperative research channeled "into directions permitting early application.” (Text)
Adm. William F. Boone (usn, Ret.), Assistant NASA Administrator for Defense Affairs, told Missiles and Rockets that under new agreement between dod and NASA—expected to be signed in about two months— lrc would modify a liquid hydrogen J-85 jet engine with 200,000500,000	lbs. thrust for use in air-breathing technology development. As its contribution to the joint program, usaf would provide F-106 aircraft for flight tests of engine. (M&R, 5/30/66, 31)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said at NASA FY 1967 budget briefing that the "extremely stringent budget” ($5,012 billion) approved by President Johnson and the bob was the result of pressing needs of the Vietnam war and the Great Society. Major loser in the nasa budget reduction was the Apollo Applications (Aa) program: "The option to go ahead or not [on the Aa program] will be made in 1968 [budget],” he said. Although nasa had wanted $5.58 billion to carry out its FY 1967 program, Seamans said, the $5,012 billion would make it possible to continue "a good space program” with most of the projects intact. Yet, nasa did "not have the funds we would like to see” for Apollo. He said the approved FY 1967 Apollo budget of $2,974 billion (compared to $2,967 billion in FY 1966) would give the U.S. "a chance of lunar landing in this decade,” but there were no funds "for major difficulties that might occur.” (Transcript)
nasa officials accepted Gemini 8 spacecraft from McDonnell Aircraft Corp., St. Louis, after studying data supplied by nearly 6,000 subcontractors involving close inspection of over 6,000 test points. The spacecraft, scheduled for launch in March, would be encased in a plastic shroud and flown to ksc in usaf C-124 cargo plane Jan. 7. (Wilford, NYT, 1/7/66)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller, speaking at meeting of Texas Radiation Advisory Board and Texas Atomic Energy Commission in Freeport, Texas, cited reasons that it was vital the U.S. be pre-eminent in space: "First, consider the national security, or peace-keeping, aspects. "Although our space program is a peaceful endeavor, it cannot help but have a profound effect on our future military position. Although there is no military space force in being in any nation’s arsenal, it would be disastrous for the United States to lack the basic understanding, the basic technology, and the basic engineering which would be required if an aggressor should choose to make space a battlefield. . . . "In the international arena, our space program—and Manned Space Flight in particular—may be considered as a measure of our ability to compete with a formidable rival, and as a criterion of our ability to maintain technological eminence. "The influence of our scientific and technological progress and prowess is and has been one of the deciding factors in keeping the Cold War peace over the past 20 years. . . . Should we fall behind in the area of space technology, we would jeopardize our national interests, on earth as well as in space.” (Text)
Research and development in essential space programs would not be seriously affected By demands of the Vietnam conflict, usaf Under Secretary Norman S. Paul told a National Space Club meeting in Washington, D.C. Asked during question and answer period for rough estimate of military manned spaceflight expenditures in the 1970s, Paul said that currently dod was spending $1.3 billion of its $7-billion R&D budget on space and that it was "a safe guess this amount will go up.” Asked if there might be NASA programs competitive with USAf’s Mol, Paul said there was "not the slightest possibility.” (Text; M/S Daily, 10/19/66, 20)
Two space cooperation agreements were confirmed by Spanish Foreign Minister Fernando Castiella and Secretary of State Dean Rusk in a State Dept, ceremony attended by NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr. First agreement provided that NASA and Spain’s Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial (inta) would share in the operation of nasa space tracking and data acquisition station near Madrid which maintains radio contact with unmanned lunar and interplanetary probes and would support manned Apollo mission. Effective from May 1, 1966, to Jan. 28, 1974, and in accordance with government-to-government agreement between Spain and U.S. of Jan. 29, 1964, contract provided that Spanish engineers and technicians would be trained and assigned to tracking, telemetry, communications, and support. Some of inta’s key personnel had already begun special training at Deep Space Facilities, Goldstone, Calif. Second agreement, part of a continuing Spanish-U.S. program of cooperation in space investigation, provided for joint project to launch four sounding rockets in Spain to study winds and temperatures at high altitudes. Agreement was in form of a memorandum of understanding between inta and NASA: inta would establish sounding rocket range, construct grenade-type payloads, provide two Nike-booster rockets, conduct launchings, and analyze and publish the data; NASA would lend range tracking and telemetry equipment and a launcher, provide two Nike-booster rockets, provide prototype payload, and train Spanish personnel as needed. Both agencies would bear the cost of discharging their respective responsibilities. Results of the experiments would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 66-83)
NASA’s lunar ORBITER I (Lunar Orbiter A) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in first U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Aug. 14-31]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 28-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft into 90-hr. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule, lunar orbiter i deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s startracker failed to lock on Canopus and flight engineers were forced to lock it on the moon—-a weaker navigational reference point. Assistant Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC was "still quite confident” about achieving lunar orbit, but noted it might be more difficult to obtain desired precision and exact positions required for optimum photos of lunar surface. At approximately 00:28 GMT Aug. 11 planned midcourse maneuver was successfully executed, and JPL scientists predicted spacecraft would miss original aiming point by only 50 mi. Primary objectives of NASA’s lunar orbiter i mission, first in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) obtain high-resolution photos of various types of lunar surface to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft and improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 3,000mi. strip along moon’s equator, concentrating on nine potential landing areas. Spacecraft would also attempt to photograph surveyor i landing sites; provide precision trajectory information; and monitor meteoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Release 66-195; Wilford, NYT, 8/8/66, 3; 8/11/66, 1, 12; 8/12/66, 51; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 8/11/66, Al; 8/12/66, Al; 8/13/66, Al; 8/14/66, Al, A6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/11/66, A3)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in interview with Look, rejected report that U.S.S.R. had lost men in space: "Every bit of information we have shows that they have been as careful with the lives of cosmonauts as we have been with astronauts. As far as I know, they have not lost a single man in flight. They have lost them on the ground, they have lost them in airplanes, just like we have.” {Look, 10/18/66)
Prime goal of space exploration was the development of scientific capabilities, but it was important to recognize the many other benefits accrued from the space program, NASA Administrator James E. Webb told ymca meeting in Oklahoma City: "We are developing, in government, in industry, in our universities, the sinews and nerves our Nation needs for healthy growth. Scientific discovery is no longer the sole province of the lone inventor. It requires an all-systems endeavor that calls on all the resources of a nation. . . . "NASA reaches across all industry. About 90 per cent of NASA’s budget goes out under contract to American industry—to pay for work by almost 400,000 men and women in the factories and laboratories of 20,000	prime and subcontractors. . . .” (Text)
Technology and automation derived from U.S. space effort could not raise social, educational, moral, or religious values, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, told Churchman’s Club in Baltimore, but "science and technology do increase the opportunity to make improvements. Where there is more leisure, more accumulated knowledge, and greater understanding, there is also increased opportunity to improve character and raise human values. Certainly, the opportunity which such progress gives toward the elimination of war is an impressive justification for the entire space program.” (Text)
The Washington Post commented on criticism of NASA spending: "What an uproar there was in 1957 when Sputnik showed us we were second in space! The Eisenhower Administration was roundly condemned. Congressmen and Senators clamored for a stepped-up space program and promised all the money needed. President Kennedy, in his 1960 campaign . . . said repeatedly: 'I am not satisfied to be second in space.’ "Well, we are no longer second in space. And the critics of the Johnson Administration are now not satisfied to be first in space—■ unless it can be done cheap. As a result of the space program we are not only going to be first on the moon and first in space. We are going to be first in a thousand fields of science, education, and industry. "This country does not have to choose between a space program that will keep it in first place and a poverty program that will keep it first ... in national exertion for the disadvantaged. It can be and ought to be first in both.” (Wash. Post, 12/2/66, A16)
Project managers for the Mariner series deep-space exploration missions to Venus and Mars were announced by Alvin R. Luedecke (M/G, USAF-Ret.), Deputy Director of jpl: (1) Dan Schneiderman would manage the Venus project involving a single spacecraft to be launched in 1967, in addition to continuing his duties as mariner iv project manager through 1967; (2) H. M. Schurmeier, former Ranger project manager, would manage the Mars project involving two new Mariner spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1969. Effective Feb. 1, Geoffrey Robillard would replace Schurmeier as Voyager capsule system manager in addition to continuing his present duties as deputy Voyager project manager, (jpl Release 372)
President Johnson transmitted his annual Report to the Congress on United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, calling 1965 "the most successful year in our history.” He said in the transmittal letter: "As our space program continues, the impact of its developments on everyday life becomes daily more evident. It continues to stimulate our education, improve our material well being, and broaden the horizons of knowledge. It is also a powerful force for peace.” He cited U.S. accomplishments in the Gemini, Ranger, Mariner, and Early Bird programs. "Research and development in our space program continued to speed progress in medicine, in weather prediction, in electronics—and, indeed, in virtually every aspect of American science and technology.” Among chief aeronautical developments report cited "design refinement and wind-tunnel testing” of Sst and decision to build C-5A jet transport. Among successful U.S. launches during 1965, DOD had 67 satellites, 34 of which were unidentified. Military space programs were discussed, including Project West Ford; Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol); Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project; and the geodetic Secor satellites. Research was under way on the best means of determining physical characteristics of "uncooperating objects in earth orbit” through observation by ground-based radar. The section on aec said that a third pair of Vela radiation-detection satellites launched in July 1965 was watching for nuclear explosions in space and measuring x-ray emissions from the sun. In a separate chapter of the report, the nasc said: "This Nation’s space achievements during the year were so distinctive in quality and quantity as to cause people, at home and abroad, to conclude the United States had attained the space leadership of the world.” The Council said that in many respects this conclusion was correct "but it would be incorrect and unwise to minimize the vitality and size of the space program of the U.S.S.R.” (Text; CR, 1/31/66, A419; Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 149)
During White House meeting with President Johnson, NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed current status of national space program and showed President two previously unreleased color photographs—one of southern Texas, the other of Baja California— taken from 180-mi. altitude during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Following meeting, Webb announced that Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong would leave Oct. 7 for three-week tour of 10 Latin American nations: Venezuela, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/66, A4)
Eight photoelectric photometer-telescopes were flown from NASA Wallops Sta. on Aerobee 150A sounding rocket to 131-mi. (211-km.) altitude to measure stellar ultraviolet radiation which did not penetrate earth’s atmosphere and could not be observed from the ground. Readings on light in four spectral bands were telemetered to ground stations during the 73^-min. flight conducted for Univ. of Wisconsin’s Space Astronomy Lab. (nasa Releases 66-30, 66-123; nasa Rpt. srl)
Commentary in the Washington Sunday Star: "One of the saddest lessons of Gemini 8 is that bureaucrats will be bureaucrats. . . . NASA officials suppressed for about 18 hours tape recordings of ground-to-orbit conversations under circumstances that strongly suggest their only reason for the suppression was to make sure nothing embarrassing was on the tapes. "For as long as the United States has been active in space, it has cultivated an image of openness in contrast to the Russians’ obsession with secrecy. The overnight gag on tape recordings—which turned out to be legitimate items of news interest—only served to tarnish this image of candor.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/20/66, Gl)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, attended dinner in Rangoon, Burma, given in his honor by Burma’s Foreign Minister U Thi Han. In Burma on a good-will tour, Glenn earlier had given an illustrated lecture on U.S. space program. (AP, NYT, 2/22/66, 4)
Senate confirmed appointment of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as nasa Deputy Administrator. (CR, 1/29/66, 1469)
Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott received Exceptional Service Medals from NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in ceremonies at msc. Armstrong received a quality step increase in his Civil Service pay, and Major Scott (usaf), promotion to lieutenant colonel by President Johnson. At a televised msc news conference, Armstrong said he and Scott developed some "anxiety” but that they never for a moment thought they could not return the spacecraft tc earth. Both Scott and msc Director Robert R. Gilruth said that if the trouble had occurred over a ground tracking station, mission might have been salvaged. Malfunction would have been localized immediately and the information relayed to the astronauts. As it was, they had had no idea what was wrong or even whether the trouble was with the gatv/gemini viii or the spacecraft alone. (Waldron, NYT, 3/27/66, 64L; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/21/66, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/27/66, Al)
Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator (1958-1961), was elected a director of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., producer of industrial gases and chemicals. Dr. Glennan was currently president of Associated Universities which operated Brookhaven National Laboratory for aec and National Radio Astronomy Observatory under nsf sponsorship. (,NYT, 8/3/66, 50)
Proposed further reduction in NASA FY 1967 appropriation because of Vietnam war would amount to "national disaster,” Ira C. Eaker wrote in San Antonio Express: "Such desertion of our present space program would give the Soviets an advantage they are now striving mightily to achieve. The U.S.S.R. is now spending about twice what the U.S. is spending for space research.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 10/24/66) October 25: Propellant tank rupture occurred on Apollo spacecraft 017 service module during proof pressure test at 240 psi conducted by naa at Downey, Calif.; inflight operating pressure would be 180 psi. No test personnel were injured. NASA had established board of inquiry to investigate, (nasa Release 66-285; naa s&id Skywriter, 10/28/66, 4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/28/66, D18)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Interavia that in addition to possible "definite and direct” economic and technological benefits, the "greatest impact the continuing exploration of space will have upon man will be upon his own philosophy: that is, his view of himself in relation to the universe as he imagines it.” (Interavia, 10/66, 1479)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) said in a speech before the American Society of Tool & Manufacturing Engineers in Westbury, N.Y.: "Two years ago I asked Administrator Webb for nasa’s future space plans and was told that none existed. I pointed out then that such plans were essential. Last year, we received assurance that the presentations of the fiscal year 1967 budget would reveal such plans. But none has been issued. Instead, nasa Administrator Webb has told us 'the future of the nasa program lies largely in the decision for fiscal year 1968.’ . . . "Our space program began in an atmosphere of perplexity and fear. Our adversaries in Russia had chosen a new arena for the struggle of international power and prestige. They threatened to achieve impressive capabilities which we would be unable to match. But, characteristically, the United States rose to the occasion in one of the biggest sustained technological efforts ever seen. Today, the U.S.S.R. is denied many of the options for surprising space spectaculars which they once had. From month to month, one country or the other may seem to be leading the so-called space race, but our proven capability shows that we are not to be placed at any military or strategic disadvantage. "Therefore it is time again for public opinion to assert itself. What do we want to do with this hard won space capability?” (Text)
Astronaut Frank Borman returned to Gary, Ind., to help the city celebrate Frank Borman Day and start a year-long observance of its 60th anniversary. He said at a news conference that "it is inevitable” that the U.S. would lose a crew in its space program and that he hoped the public was "mature enough to accept the sacrifice.” (upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/15/66; AP, NYT, 1/15/66, 22; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/66, A2) January 15: Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, U.K., announced that Soviet space tracking station in the Crimea would send signals to Jodrell Bank via Venus for an entire 225-day Venusian year. Sir Bernard said that by following Venus during one complete solar revolution, scientists hoped to gain further information on exact distances of planets from each other and the sun; nature of the hidden surface of Venus; changes in the very slow rotation of Venus; and conditions in space between earth and Venus. (NYT, 1/16/66, 24)
gsfc Nimbus Project Manager Harry Press told Aviation Week that Nimbus B would move nasa’s weather satellite program into a second generation research and development effort by starting the measurement of fundamental quantities in the atmosphere necessary in new analytical weather-forecasting formulas. Nimbus B, third and largest in nasa’s meteorological satellite series, would carry seven major experiments: infrared interferometer spectrometer; satellite infrared spectrometer; image dissector camera system; high-resolution infrared radiometer; monitor for ultraviolet solar energy; medium-resolution infrared radiometer; and interrogation, recording, locating system. In addition, Nimbus B would carry Snap-19 radioisotope thermal generators capable of producing 60 w of power to supplement solar panels and determine feasibility of radioisotope generators for ultimate operational weather satellite system. Scheduled for launch in 1967 with Extended Thrust Augmented Thor-Agena D launch vehicle, Nimbus B would use basic Nimbus spacecraft configuration, but would require strengthened structural elements because of its additional weight. Press said the two major control difficulties which had shortened the August 1964 nimbus i mission had been analyzed and corrected on Nimbus C, scheduled for launch in 1966. A larger solar array drive motor, equipped with heat-conducting strap that would lower operating temperature of motor almost 100°C and with improved grease, would be substituted on Nimbus C for smaller motor whose failure had left NIMBUS i’s solar panels locked in near-vertical position when it apparently overheated and its grease failed to lubricate. Also, attempts would be made during Nimbus C mission to rely on the flywheels to dampen spacecraft oscillations and to use the gas thruster system as little as possible, Press said, nimbus i had spun about its roll axis when its depreciating power supply had caused its batteries to feed lower voltages to the attitude control electronics system and the thrusters had fired excessive amounts of cold freon gas. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66, 52, 53)
U.S. would land a man on the moon before 1970 and before the Russians, predicted Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., at a news conference held with Astronaut Frank Borman in Sydney, Australia. Schirra said U.S. space program had completed three basic requirements for a manned lunar landing: 14-day spaceflight, ability to rendezvous in space, and controlled reentry into earth’s atmosphere. Astronauts Schirra and Borman were visiting Australia on their eight-nation good-will tour of Asia. (Reuters, NYT, 3/14/66, 6)
Daniel J. Haughton, president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., suggested at American Petroleum Institute meeting in New York that aerospace and petroleum industries combine their technical strengths for joint exploration of earth’s continental shelves. He said that within 35 yrs. the world’s population would have doubled and a large segment of this population would be hungry: "The oceans represent the last great source for feeding them and providing the chemicals and minerals and water to meet all the future needs of man.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/16/66, C12) NASA Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), in report on "Management Scheme for Apollo,” concluded: "There is no single approach to program management that will guarantee success. The development of and experience with various management systems, techniques and tools in the past several years have contributed extensively to a more scientific approach. The 'art’ element remains, however. The integrated implementation of those concepts and their associated procedures and disciplines is sometimes confronted with considerable resistance within an organization. This has merit, for it forces management to thoroughly screen new concepts as to validity, feasibility and salability. Once a new management system is approved, however, it deserves and requires the personal support of the program director through line channels to stimulate its overall implementation and acceptance at the grass roots level. . . (Text) DeMarquis D. Wyatt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Programming, said that NASA’s cost model had "significantly facilitated management decision making in complex on-going programs by providing an overnight computational capability of great capacity. The computer program is capable of handling the interrelated cost influences of up to 60 different hardware configurations at an unlimited number of plants and an unlimited number of production fines within each plant. It can . . . summarize program costs for as many as 24 fiscal years and can subdivide and allocate these costs to up to 8 different funding sources or users.. . .” (Text) . Franklin P. Dixon, Director, Planetary Mission Studies, NASA omsf, outlined manned Mars landing program for consideration as U.S. national space goal. Proposal called for seven-step program based principally on extension of mission-duration capability and including earth-orbital "Space Station/Mission Module,” Mars and Venus flybys, and Mars landing. Discussing long-range NASA planning, he noted: "At the present time planning for the Saturn Apollo Applications Program includes subsystem developments for long duration manned flights. . . . This provides a logical growth pattern toward manned planetary travel with the easier flyby missions within technological reach by the 1975 to 1980 time period for actual operational flights.” (Text)
Main battery system of oao i Orbiting Astronomical Observatory had failed, NASA officials at KSC announced: "Overheating of the OAO. primary battery, a problem which became critical late yesterday, has resulted in complications leading to degradation of the power supply from all three batteries aboard the spacecraft, and telemetry signals no longer are being received. "Efforts to overcome the problem have been unsuccessful and the OAO mission appears to have been lost.” Officials added, however, that before satellite had failed it had demonstrated a key maneuver of the OAO program by successfully locking into a series of stars for precise aiming. OAO I had been launched from etr April 8. (AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 71; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, BIO; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/11/66)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb and the late NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden were awarded the 1966 Robert J. Collier Trophy for "representing all of the Gemini program teams which significantly advance human experience in space flight,” at special ceremony in Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Trophy was presented annually by Look and National Aeronautic Assn, "for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, efficiency, or safety of air or space vehicles.” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, presenting the trophy, said: "I can think of no more fitting choice for this distinguished award than Project Gemini and all those who made it such a success.” He noted that Gemini manned spacecraft had spent 875 hrs. in space; Gemini was first spacecraft to rendezvous and first to dock with another spacecraft; and four Gemini astronauts had walked in space for total 5 hrs. 52 min. Administrator Webb, accepting trophy, said: "Gemini has broadened our vision, validated our concepts, proved out our technology, and has provided a much sounder structure of knowledge as to the importance of not accepting a position of second best in space.” Attributing Gemini program’s success to "the application of our scheduling principles,” Webb noted "milestones”: beginning of unmanned flights in 1963; first manned flight in 1S64; rendezvous, docking, and first extravehicular activity in 1965; first use of Agena for orbit change and first closed-loop guidance in 1966; completion of program in 1967. "We missed the first two milestones. From then on, with the exception of docking, we have accomplished each milestone ahead of or on schedule and we do expect to complete the Gemini program ahead of schedule next month.” (Text; NASA Ann.; naa News, 10/16/66; Wash. Post, 10/20/66, B7)
Sen. Karl Mundt (R-S.D.) informed Senate that Subcommittee on Government Research expected to make specific recommendations to improve Federally-financed research and development program, for which almost $16 billion was being expended during FY 1966. Sen. Mundt, ranking minority member of the subcommittee, said primary task of group was to determine and enunciate a more definitive, longer-ranging science policy. He said U.S. had reached the crossroads, where "it has become painfully obvious that we cannot continue to support all who demand support, but must be selective in the allocation of research funds.” This indicated that one of the most pressing questions was how to direct NASA efforts, with Apollo program reaching its goal and no follow-on approved: "nasa now is on the threshold of placing a man on the Moon within this decade. After this what? This question concerns the leaders of this fine NASA organization as well as its highly trained, scientific and technical staff. Where do we turn? Shall the space program continue on its present course, or shall it be broadened to better serve the everyday needs of the American people? This is a priority crossroads. . . .” (CR, 5/16/66, 10212)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara signed a Memorandum of Understanding establishing Manned Space Flight Policy Committee, joint nasa-dod committee which would meet regularly to determine top-level policy, ensure coordinated planning, and resolve matters concerning mutual participation in and support of manned spaceflight programs which could not be resolved at lower levels. Co-chairmen of the committee would be Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, and Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering. Memorandum superseded Jan. 21, 1963, agreement between the two agencies on Gemini program, (nasa Release 66-26)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
faa Administrator William F. McKee announced that Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff would serve as a consultant on faa research and development efforts—particularly in supersonic transport (Sst) program— while continuing to serve as Special Assistant to NASA Administrator. (faa Release 66-30)
Formation of Science Advisory Committee, composed of astronomers, biologists, physicists, and geologists from eight universities, to advise nasa on conduct of future space projects was announced by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Chaired by Dr. Norman F. Ramsey, Harvard Univ. physicist, committee would work directly with Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, but would study future space activities on NASA-wide basis, including manned and unmanned flight programs. In particular, it would review how best to conduct such programs as Voyager planetary spacecraft, including automated biological laboratory, post-Apollo lunar exploration program, and National Space Astronomy Observations— projects recommended by nas Space Science Board, (nasa Release 66-55)
B/G J. C. Maxwell, director of faa Sst development, discussed supersonic air travel in Aerospace: . . The national sst program, though small (from a dollar point of view) when compared to the national space program, nevertheless may well have a more immediate impact. The challenge inherent in producing an economically attractive supersonic aircraft has already identified and created demands for improved manufacturing techniques, simple yet reliable electronic and communications equipment, advancements in extrusion and machine tooling techniques, more efficient (and less costly) fuels and lubricants ana many other needs. "The economic aspects are more easily definable. "Concerning the potential market for the SST, varying estimates have been made based on the expected growth of air transportation over the next 20 years and beyond. . . . "Conservatively speaking, we now look for a three-fold increase in long-haul revenue passenger miles flown by the airlines of the world by 1980 and a five-fold increase by 1990. ssts could carry almost half of this traffic. . . . "Obviously, the sst program will have a significant impact on the U.S. balance-of-trade position. Based upon past experience along with current encouraging signs, we expect that the export market for a U.S.-made sst will be about half of the total production rate. Over a 20-year period, this could result in a gold inflow approaching $10 billion.” (Aerospace, 5/66) During May: Space research programs of the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. were opening the way for solving earth’s future overpopulation problem and mankind’s future raw material needs, Soviet Prof. E. Kolman wrote in Mirovaya Ekonomika i Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniye, a publication of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. He referred to estimates that in 400 yrs. the earth would have a population of about 900 billion people, equivalent to about 10,000 people per square mile. In such a situation, this planet would not be able to give all its people even elementary living space, let alone food. Therefore, he said, "escape into cosmic space . . . will become inevitable.” Professor Kolman mentioned the stimulating impact of the space program on progress in science and technology and the likelihood of developments useful in more mundane areas of human activity. He cited the use of meteorological and communications satellites as examples of terrestrially useful byproducts of space research. (NYT, 5/22/66, 85)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying on the nasa FY 1967 budget request before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that the gap between the U.S. and Soviet space programs still remained and "this budget will not close it. We are as much as 2 years behind the Soviet Union in certain important aspects of space power. In . . . 1965, they launched 52 Cosmos satellites; successfully orbited a 3-man spacecraft; demonstrated a communications satellite capability with 2 Molniya spacecraft; and orbited the heaviest payload by anyone in the world to date, indicating they have developed a new launch vehicle with some WA to 3 million pounds of thrust. Since the beginning of 1966 they have achieved a successful soft landing on the moon and they have reached Venus with two probes. "The Soviet program shows every evidence of a continuing major commitment to long-term, large-scale operations in space. . . . The massive Soviet commitment to a rapid buildup and a long-term program underlines the importance they attached to advancing their space capabilities. It will require a strong and increasing effort initiated no later than fiscal year 1968 and vigorously pushed in the years after the United States has achieved a manned lunar landing to prevent them from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 5)
President Johnson announced he would send Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman, command pilots of the Dec. 4-18 GEMINI vii/vi mission, on a three-week, eight-country tour of the Far East to demonstrate scientific, technological, and educational values of U.S. space program and to visit Far Eastern countries which had cooperated with U.S. in space programs. Astronauts would leave Feb. 21, and visit Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand. The President had sent Gemini iv Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White II, to the Paris Air Show in June 1965; gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on an African tour in September 1965; and John Glenn, first American to achieve orbit, on a European tour in October 1965. (Pres. Doc., 2/21/66, 221; NYT, 2/16/66, 54)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Univ. of New Mexico, urged establishment of a seminar where experts could exchange scientific and industrial knowledge to bridge "the tremendous gap between physical development and social inventions.” Mr. Webb also recommended a national rocket foundation to provide facilities for amateur rocket enthusiasts. (AP, NYT, 12/28/66, 4)
NASA announced that nimbus ii meteorological satellite had taken nearly 1 million photos since its launch from wtr May 15. "It has been working better than a finely tuned engine,” said gsfc project manager Harry Press. "Its performance has exceeded everyone’s expectation.” (gsfc Release G-19-66)
Gemini 9 spacecraft was mechanically mated to top of Titan II booster at ETR in preparation for May 17 launch after 48-hr. delay because of tiny leak in jet-powered maneuvering unit stored behind spacecraft. NASA officials said delay would not change launch date. (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 5/4/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/3/66, A4)
Addressing the aas in Hampton, Va., NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said: ". . . as a science, space astronomy simply cannot thrive in separation from ground-based astronomy. In fact, the phrase 'space astronomy’ is a disquieting one. The discipline is astronomy, the objective of which, broadly speaking, is to advance our understanding of the universe in which we live. The word 'space’ in space astronomy refers simply to the fact that sounding rockets, satellites, and space probes are new tools that the astronomer can use in wrestling with the difficult problems of astronomical observation. In perspective, the astronomical community has before it the task of using these new tools in effective combination with ground-based observing so as to best advance the science of astronomy.” Dr. Nancy G. Roman, NASA Chief of Astronomy Programs, ossa, said: "So far, all space astronomy has been automated. However, as the manned space program matures, plans are being made to incorporate the flexibility of manned operation to the program to an increasing extent. ... We recognize that even simple operations by man could greatly extend both the lifetime and the versatility of an oao, and therefore have been looking into the possibilities of using man in such maintenance activities. Looking further ahead, we also realize that eventually astronomers will want larger telescopes in space than are possible with the current series of oao’s. Therefore we have had a study conducted on the possibility of building, mounting, and using a telescope of approximately 120 inches in space. The problems are far from trivial, but they also do not appear insurmountable, given the resources necessary for the job.” (Texts)
Inactivity in Soviet manned space program could be explained by "strict economy” and preparations for ambitious new manned missions, Radio Prague’s Moscow correspondent reported. The new missions—"flights of much higher standards”—would include "a flight of man to the moon and the creation of a large orbiting laboratory.” Correspondent also predicted that the U.S.S.R. would launch a "group of rockets”— presumably unmanned ones—toward Mars about Jan. 4. (NYT, 12/23/66, 12) New York Times later editorialized: ". . . The possibility is raised that the Soviet strategy for a manned lunar landing may be based on a direct earth-moon trip. In that case there would be no need for the rendezvous and docking maneuvers. . . . Enormously powerful rockets would be required . . . but if Moscow has them they might make possible the spectacular achievement of a goal the Kremlin must want very much: a manned lunar landing on the moon by the fiftieth anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution next Nov. 7.” (NYT, 12/26/66, 20)
Roll D. Ginter, nasa Centaur Program Manager, became Director of oart’s newly established Space Flight Programs Div. He would be responsible for mission planning, management, and coordination of technology space flight projects and experiments within OART. (nasa Release 66-276)
"In the last analysis, the only reason for having a space program is to satisfy the needs of society,” editorialized aiaa President Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff in Astronautics & Aeronautics. "Unless the space program serves people in a useful way, it will be transitory and fade into history as a curiosity. It will not even be enough for the program to serve people by measuring interesting scientific data. It must eventually serve the masses of people of the Earth, if it is to command substantial resources.” Communications, geodetic, navigation, and meteorological satellites, and other satellites designed to study and manage the world’s natural resources could, in Bisplinghoff’s estimation, contribute to meeting man’s needs, but international cooperation would be essential. (A&A, 11/66, 54-55) During November: Viewing space program in "historical perspective,” Solomon W. Golomb wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "The Manhattan Project established that we could run a program for three years and two billion dollars. This was the size limit for maj or technological projects until Apollo escalated the level to ten years and thirty billion dollars. The next major goal will be the establishment of permanent colonies on other planets. This may mean a commitment of 50 to 90 years and a price tag measured in Terabucks.” (A&A, 11/66, 14)
U.S. had reaped many unexpected benefits from NASA’s manned spaceflight program, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Federal Executive Board in Seattle, Wash. Specifically, nasa was (1) "making a definite effort to stimulate the development of technology generally . . . [and had] set up what may well be a unique, formal endeavor to transfer technology which has been developed in the space program to more general usage in the industrial community ... (2) striving to promote a rising educational level among the people . . . (3) developing industrial skills, management techniques, and a high degree of quality control that are of immense benefit to the Nation in such mundane things as washing machines, television sets, transistor radios, and other household items ... (4) helping to assure the country of a hard core of engineers and scientists, technicians and managers, laboratories and industrial facilities, which have responded to the challenge of working on important projects in aeronautics and astronautics. . . .” (Text)
nasa successfully launched explorer xxxii (ae-b) aeronomy satellite from ETR with three-stage Delta booster. The 2nd stage burned 8 sec. longer than planned—failing to cut off and running to propellant depletion—and boosted the satellite into a higher orbit than planned. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,688 mi. (2,717.7 km.), as opposed to planned 750 mi.; perigee, 180 mi. (289.8 km.); period, 116 min.; inclination to equator, 65°. Launch was third time Delta 2nd stage had failed to shut down on time and sent 3rd stage and payload to higher altitudes. Built by Gsfc, and the last of the original satellites outlined by nasa when it was established in 1958, the 495-lb., 35-in.- dia. explorer xxxii was designed to investigate temperatures, composition, densities, and pressure in the upper atmosphere and their diurnal, seasonal, and annual variations on a global basis, nasa later announced that adjustment of onboard programing of spacecraft’s sensors had compensated for higher apogee and useful scientific measurements would be taken that were not planned originally. All eight experiments onboard were functioning "as expected” and spacecraft was spin stabilized at the required 30 rpm. First aeronomy satellite, explorer xvii, was launched April 3, 1S63. Results included first direct measurement of neutral helium; first in situ measurements of concentrations of neutral atmospheric constituents at satellite altitudes as a function of time and solar activity; first data revealing difference by a factor of two (approx.) in value for atmospheric density as determined from onboard sensors and from changes in satellite’s orbit; first detailed description of diurnal and latitudinal behavior of summer ionosphere near altitude of F2 maximum over eastern U.S. at time of solar maximum. Results had indicated more specialized measurements were needed to reveal basic atmospheric processes, explorer xxxii incorporated many improvements aimed at achieving this objective, (nasa Releases 66-96, 66-139; AP, Wash. Post, 5/26/66, E17; WSJ, 5/26/66, 1)	_
Charles W. Mathews, msc Gemini Program Manager, was named Director of Saturn-Apollo Applications in NASA Hq. Office of Manned Space Flight. He would replace M/G David M. Jones (usaf), Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Programs, who had been Acting Director, (nasa Release 66-310)
Commenting on national space goals in the post-Apollo period, Henry Simmons said in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "NASA over the past year quietly shifted its emphasis from an aap exploiting already financed Apollo hardware for alternate missions to a much vaster aap involving outlays on the scale of the Apollo lunar effort itself to support an intensive follow-on effort extending perhaps to 1975. Some NASA Centers engaged in the Apollo program, and particularly the Marshall Space Flight Center, are already confronted with the prospect of unemployment among their most skilled and valuable design personnel. 'We are right now in the position where over the next six months the engineers who did the original design on the Saturn and probably a year from now those who did it on the Apollo will be out of work,’ NASA Administrator James Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during its hearings last August on post-Apollo goals. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 5)	...
Editorial comment on May 17 scrubbing of Gemini IX mission: New York Times: "For the third time in the past few months, a space experiment involving the Atlas-Agena rocket Has run into trouble. Late last year a sequence of events similar to yesterday’s led to a postponement of the original Gemini rendezvous experiment, while in March of this year, Gemini 8 nearly met catastrophe when it was docked with an Agena target vehicle. There may well be no connection between these three separate incidents; but since the Atlas-Agena has been a highly reliable and successful instrument in other aspects of the nation’s space program, its emergence as the weak link in the Gemini series poses something of a mystery. The setback caused by last year’s failure to orbit an Agena target vehicle was made up for by the brilliant improvisation that permitted Geminis 6 and 7 to rendezvous last December. Warned by that earlier experience, space officials were better prepared for this latest setback. The substitute target rocket they have on hand may permit much of the originally planned Gemini 9 experiment to take place early next month. But for the moment at least, a shadow has again been thrown over this country’s lunar program.” (NYT, 5/18/66) Washington Post: "We shall do well to prepare for many more disappointments before man reaches the moon, including the possibility of serious accident. What remains essential in the competition is that considerations of human safety not be sacrificed to too feverish a schedule.” (Wash. Post, 5/18/66) Washington Evening Star: "The simple fact is that the United States has been incredibly lucky that no catastrophic accident has yet taken place during a manned space flight. The further fact is that the nation cannot logically expect this luck to last forever. Progress in space, as with nearly all human progress, will come at the cost of men’s lives. And the nation should be prepared for the day when our luck runs out; prepared to accept tragedy as the inevitable concomitant of so ambitious a voyage of discovery.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A18)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) inserted into the Congressional Record a tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator: "Dr. Dryden was highly respected by his colleagues both as an administrator and as a scientist-engineer. He will hold an eminent place when the history of man’s accomplishments in space is written. Although the country mourns his passing he wi]l be long remembered for his many contributions to the good of his country.” (CR, 1/10/66, 29)
Summing up the effect of May 17 loss of Gemini IX mission’s Agena Target Vehicle, William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is obvious that at the very least the American space effort has lost three weeks of precious time and possibly $25 million in money— the cost of the lost Hardware plus overhead. . . . "One thing should be clear from the experience of Gemini 9. "There was nothing of omission or commission that can be charged against NASA in the failure of the Agena’s Atlas launching rocket. If the hackneyed phrase 'random failure’ ever was properly used, it was in describing yesterday’s trouble. "The Atlas, as a standard space launching vehicle, has had 49 successes in 52 attempts over the last three years—a better success record than the over-all American space program has enjoyed in any year since its inception in 1957.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A8)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb expressed appreciation to usaf, on its 19th anniversary, in a letter to Air Force Assn. President Jess Larson: "The technology developed by the Air Force for its needs in the period before 1958 has served as the foundation for the manned and unmanned missions which NASA is carrying out. . . . "An. . .important aspect of the growing aerospace strength of the United States is the close cooperation between the Air Force and NASA in planning for future projects. . . .” (Text; AF/SD, 11/66, 85)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster was static-fired successfully at msfc for 145 sec. First stage performed as expected, developing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-288) November 29-December 2: aiaa’s Third Annual Meeting and Technical Display was held in Boston. In keynote address, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh described the manned spaceflight program as the most successful technological feat ever undertaken by the Nation. Panel discussion followed on future of U.S. space program. Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Institute for Defense Analyses, predicted that man would be needed in space primarily as a "repairman” for scientific instruments. "The science . . . will be carried out on the ground where enormous facilities for computing, analysis, and discussion are available.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) said emphasis on space activities should not be only on peaceful purposes but also on preservation of peace; this would inevitably require sending military men into space. With advances in technology, U.S. must convert from "throwaway” hardware concept to use of maneuverable reentry vehicles and recoverable boosters, he added. This idea was echoed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, who said: ". . . all of the hardware developed for future projects would reflect our concern over . . . greater cost effectiveness, through the development of reusable launch vehicles and reusable spacecraft.” Mueller said there would be manned space stations that could stay in orbit a year or longer but said there was no need for crews to stay aloft for such periods. A ferry vehicle would be used for resupply of both equipment and crew. He listed potential benefits of space technology in the next decade, describing air traffic control towers in space, direct-to-home international TV broadcasting systems, and possibilities for predicting and controlling the weather. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said one of the problems of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics—of which he was chairman—was educating the people of the Nation to the benefits of the space program. It was a difficult task, he said, to justify space expenditures against the costs of Vietnam, foreign aid, and Great Society projects. But, he insisted, "it is the translation of space technologies into useful benefits that is the overall value of the space program.” (Texts; aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 3; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/66, A7) Results from NASA’s EXPLOBER xxxm had shown for first time that tail of earth’s magnetosphere "extends more than 75,000 miles beyond the orbit of the moon,” reported gsfc scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness. Findings were contrary to those of Soviet scientist Dolginov and colleagues who had reported they were unable to detect magnetospheric tail at lunar distances on basis of data obtained from luna x between April 3 and May 4, 1966. Ness suggested as reason for this that luna x data were probably obtained when spacecraft was near or within neutral sheet region of magnetosphere where very low magnetic fields would be expected, (gsfc Release 20-66) In session on Future Large Subsonic Transports, John Borger of paa said problems in air transport industry "are being created by the phenomenal growth rate of our business.” Since the growth rate showed no signs of slackening’in the coming years, continued development and extensive use of large subsonic jet aircraft were not only desirable but essential. Borger pointed out that the engine for the Boeing 747— which would carry times more passengers than present intercontinental transports—was being developed with only commercial airlines as potential customers. This was the first time in air history that a new aircraft powerplant had been undertaken on this basis. Borger noted that a major requirement for the "jumbo jets” was that they be available at least 5 to 6 yrs. ahead of the proposed Sst so that initial development and operation costs could be recovered. H.	F. Klump, general manager of cargo traffic and sales for Deutsche Lufthansa Airlines, sounded a warning about the subsonic jet aircraft’s cargo capacity: unless airports expanded their freight handling facilities enormously, they would not be able to handle volume of material "dumped on them.” W. D. Perreault, program director for Lockheed 500—a giant commercial cargo aircraft for the 1970s—discussed evolution of the 500 from C-5A transport under development for usaf. After reviewing three proposed commercial versions of the aircraft, he said one of them "will provide for the first time a cargo plane with direct operating costs of less than 2/ per ton statute mile.” (aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 31; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/66, A10) Commenting on the report of the aiaa Launch Vehicle and Missile Technical Committee, "The Next Generation of Launch Vehicles—• Evolution or Bold Step?” N. E. Golovin of the Office of Science and Technology said: ". . . if a family of reusable boosters is to be developed for reasons of economy then development cost per booster must be so low that economical amortization must be possible over a relatively small number of flights for each type; or, if only a single reusable booster is to be developed its use must indeed be so cheap that it would pay to employ it for payloads which are but a small fraction of its orbiting capacity. This reasoning . . . casts considerable doubt on the Committee’s suggestion that a 'bold step’ leading to the development of reusable boosters is justified at this time.” (Text) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, participating in a panel discussion on "Do We Need New Propulsion Systems for Lunar and Planetary Flight?”, concluded that unmanned missions during the next ten years would probably "not require either new propulsion systems or new launch vehicle stages. They probably will require adding a modified Centaur as an upper stage on the Saturn IB or the Titan IIIC. They may require and certainly could use a 260 inch solid first stage under the S-IV-B Centaur. . . .” Cortright recommended that current launch capability be put "to effective use in exploring space and in developing practical applications of space flight.” (Text) During panel on -Space and Public Policy, "poor communications” between scientists and the general public was suggested reason for death of Project Mohole—killed by Congress because it would have cost at least three times the original estimate, nas president Frederick Seitz said such escalations in cost were "not unusual” for such scientific ventures and revealed the project would soon be renewed under a different name such as "deep ocean drilling.” "The goals of space exploration are primarily those of science, not technology,” asserted panelist Hunter Dupree, science historian and history professor at Univ. of California, Berkeley. Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee’s Panel on Space Science Louis Branscomb replied that no one wanted to see the space program purely as a "spectator sport,” and that space programs should be conceived to "maximize their scientific returns.” Commenting on the same subject, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: "We must grapple with the problem of what we will do with the moon. This is not an esoteric problem.” Concerned about the lack of aiaa advice to Congress on questions of scientific policy, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said the loudest critics of the space program were scientists in other disciplines eying the space money. "I call on aiaa to come to Congress with a sharpened viewpoint. You can speak with the consensus of Avco Corp. vice president Arthur Kantrowitz feared that "aiaa is not equipped” to do the suggested job because unanimity within the society could not be achieved on policy questions. And unless it could, the assignment "would induce strains within aiaa and change its complexion.” (aiaa Daily, 12/2/66, 1, 29) Four major aiaa awards were made at Honors Convocation: Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II (posthumously), the Louis W. Hill Award "to honor his many outstanding contributions to the biomedical sciences in their applications to space and in particular his pioneering development of protective devices enabling the human body to function and operate safely in the aerospace environment”; Joe H. Engle of NASA frc, the Lawrence Sperry Award for "outstanding contribution to aeronautics as the youngest pilot to fly the X-15 in various spaceprobing research programs since June 1963”; Warren J. North of msc, the De Florez Training Award for "contribution to astronaut training and operational crew procedures development in support of the manned space flight program”; and Dr. A. K. Oppenheim, the G. Edward Pendray Award for "outstanding contributions to the field of aeronautical and astronautical literature in the area of gaseous detonation and gas wave dynamics.” (aiaa Daily, 11/29/66, 30; Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 19) November 30: NASA launched two-stage, 30-ft.-long Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Wallops Station in cosmic ray and ionospheric experiment for Univ. of New Hampshire. 120-lb. payload reached altitude of 223 mi. (359 km.) and impacted 142 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Measurements obtained were radioed back during flight and recorded at ground receiving stations. (Wallops Release 66-56; NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of William B. Rieke, nasa Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and former president of Lockheed Aircraft International, Inc., as Acting Assistant Administrator for Administration. Mr. Rieke would assume new duties beginning May 30, replacing John C. Young who resigned to become an assistant to bob Director, (nasa Release 66-131,• nasa Ann.)
U.S. offer at U.N. Sept. 22 to provide U.S.S.R. with tracking facilities on U.S. territory for Soviet space program received editorial comment in New York Times: "If all the Russians are after is improved tracking facilities for their own space program, the . . . offer . . . should be most agreeable to Moscow. Conclusion of a Soviet-American treaty for this purpose would very likely help smooth the way for similar bilateral agreements between the Soviet Union and other non-Communist countries. . . . Ambassador Goldberg’s suggestion points the way to satisfying legitimate Soviet needs without forced infringement on the national sovereignty of others.” (NYT, 9/24/66, 22)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh, flew by helicopter to gsfc for three-hour tour, during which they watched GSFC technicians receive first photos from essa ii meteorological satellite. Successful operation of essa ii officially created world’s first fully operational weather-forecasting satellite network. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/3/66)
Alex P. Aven, owner of an Oklahoma City, Okla., petroleum consulting firm, was sworn in by NASA Administrator James E. Webb as consultant to the Administrator on management. (NASA Release 66-112) May 10-13: NASA successfully launched 18 Areas and Hasp meteorological sounding rockets to 200,000-ft. altitudes at intervals ranging from four minutes to six hours to investigate daily cycle of wind and temperature variations in upper atmosphere, compare results of various rocket and balloon measuring systems, and study effects of radiation from the sun on meteorological instruments. Instrumented payloads descending by parachute transmitted atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure data, and ten specially instrumented high-altitude weather balloons, interspersed among rocket firings, transmitted information as they rose to 130,000 ft. Radar tracked both balloon and rocket payloads to determine speed and direction of high-altitude winds. Launches were managed by nasa Langley Research Center and sponsored by NASA, USA, usn, usaf, and essa. (nasa Release 66-118; Wallops Release 66-25) National Academy of Sciences delegate Dr. Richard W. Porter, summarizing activities of 1965 U.S. space program, said a manned lunar landing by 1970 would be a "difficult goal” but U.S. had made "substantial progress.” Dr. Porter presented an analysis of data transmitted by NASA mariner iv Mars probe which appeared to support theory that earth sometimes has comet-like tail stretching past orbit of Mars. On Feb. 5, 1965, a peculiarly timed solar eruption sent series of intense proton clouds into space, five of which were detected within 48 hrs. by mariner iv and two other U.S. satellites in near-earth orbit. Second and third clouds were reported by mariner iv three to five hours prior to their detection near earth, possibly because solar eruption had blown earth’s tail to enormous length, forcing two clouds to detour through tail in order to penetrate earth’s magnetic field. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli A. Blagonravov summarized 1965 U.S.S.R. space program, and said luna x, which entered lunar orbit April 3, had recorded radiation pattern from lunar surface similar to that from basaltic part of earth’s crust. Apparently lunar surface exhibited no differentiation equivalent to granite on earth, indicating that earth and moon were created separately, luna x had found level of moon’s magnetic field barely above that of interplanetary space; small increase was attributed to moon’s passing through earth’s magnetic tail at time of measurement. Implication was that moon is cold throughout, since liquid metal core would produce large magnetic field. Report suggested that new minerals would be found on the moon because of unusual chemical reactions caused by its extreme temperature range, the impacts of micrometeorites, and rains of high-energy radiation. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Soviet delegate A. G. Prishchep, in a joint paper with colleague V. I. Vashkov, revealed that U.S.S.R. planetary probes were assembled in clean rooms and sterilized with two-fold process involving moist heat to prevent dryness and a gas mixture, harmless to the skin, which might have important surgical applications. Gas mixture contained 50% ethylene oxide—extremely poisonous substance which is dangerously explosive when combined with oxygen—diluted with 40% methyl bromide for safety reasons. General Electric scientists H. G. Lorsch and M. G. Koesterer reported that current sterilization cycles varied from treatment at 320° for three hours to baking at 200°F for 14 days. They argued that no more than 10 billion microbes should exist within a spacecraft prior to beginning of sterilization if reasonable chance of killing virtually all of them was to be assured. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/12/66, 79; Beller, M&R, 5/16/66, 17-18) Drs. Herbert Friedman and R. W. Kreplin, Naval Research Laboratory, reported that solar radiation level would probably exceed highest ever recorded in 100 yrs. during 1969-1970—time of first projected manned lunar landing. Basing their prediction on measurements of solar x-ray emissions taken by explorer xxx (iqsy Solar Explorer) satellite, Friedman and Kreplin explained that x-rays, which could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, warned of approaching sunspots before they could be seen. Solar activities in the form of sunspots and gaseous flares occurred in 11-12 yr. cycles, but there was also a gross cycle which reaches its greatest intensity every 80 to 100 yrs. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/13/66, 19; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Dr. Bessel Kok, Research Institute for Advanced Studies, described a small instrument which could determine the existence of life when landing on another planet. Designed on the assumption that even the simplest forms of life use water and such common chemical compounds as phosphates and nitrates, device would trace the transfer of nonradioactive isotope—Oxygen 18—from these chemicals to water. (Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Reports on little-publicized efforts were presented to the meeting: (1) Italy’s platform for launching San Marco earth satellite at sea was in African port of Mombasa and would be towed shortly to site where U.S. Scout booster would launch satellite into equatorial orbit; (2) Pakistan was conducting monthly firings of rockets that injected copper chaff into stratosphere to disclose winds in that region over subtropics; (3) U.S.S.R. had fired 150 meteorological rockets—almost half from shipboard—and U.S. was firing about 120 monthly; (4) Romania had used orbital data from Washington and Cambridge, Mass., to photograph echo I and echo ii comsats in coordination with Soviet expeditionary stations in Egypt and Mali; (5) Sweden, Finland, Russia, and East Europeans had joined in observing orbital flight changes of echo i and echo II attributable to density variations in wisps of air at satellite altitude; and (6) East German scientists reported their conclusions on upper air structure derived from real-time transmissions from NASA explorer xxh satellite. It was estimated that 60 stations in various parts of the world were monitoring satellites that sent out "blind” data. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/66, 10E; Sullivan, NYT, 5/16/66, 88) Dr. A. I. Lebedensky, Soviet Academy of Sciences, reported that Luna ix photos revealed lunar surface was steadily eroding, at least in some places. He suggested that erosion could be caused by solar winds or impact of micrometeorites. Lebedensky pointed out two peculiar features on luna ix’s photos which supported his theory. First was series of streaks, resembling mineral veins in earth’s bedrock, on floor of crater where luna ix had landed. It had previously been assumed that moon’s surface was buried deep in debris churned up by meteorite impacts. Second was presence of rock-like objects on small pedestals similar to those on earth where soft but rock-strewn surface had been eroded. Stones, which ranged in size from one foot to less than one inch across and whose pedestals appeared as high as they were wide, "were the most unexpected and important result of the flight,” Lebedensky said. "Our conclusion is that the stone is harder than the ground around it and screens the ground underneath from the erosion effects of solar winds and micrometeorites.” Lebedensky admitted the possibility that erosion was peculiar to the crater or a particular region of the moon, but saw no obvious reason why this should be true. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/17/66, 28; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/17/66, A17) Radio occultation measurements from mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, Mars flyby indicated that regions on the surface of Mars might vary in height by three miles (five kilometers), jpl scientist Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore reported, (jpl Release) Venus was rotating clockwise only once every 243 days, but during that period it seemed to be synchronized with earth, Dr. Richard Goldstein, chief of jpl Communications Systems Research, told the meeting. Dr. Goldstein also reported that radar probes of winter 1965 when Venus was nearest earth indicated prominences with the ability to depolarize microwaves. "They may well be mountain ranges,” Dr. Goldstein said, "although large fields of boulders would also depolarize microwaves. On earth, of course, such areas usually indicate the presence of nearby mountains.” (jpl Release) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli Blagonravov, addressing the annual cospar press conference, said France and U.S.S.R. had been negotiating —within the framework of cospar—on cooperation in space research which might extend to incorporation of French instruments in Soviet satellites "if this should be asked for.” Asked if he could imagine similar close cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Blagonravov said there was no need for it; if the situation arose, it would be better for them to cooperate in processing data obtained from their own satellites. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/20/66, A5)	.
The Nation was facing a crisis in space planning, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a press interview at NASA Hq. The question was what to do with the Apollo project after men had landed on the moon. The answer would determine whether the U.S. remained a "major spacefaring nation,” and must be found within a year, he said— long before the first lunar landing was made. Search for the answer had been postponed several times because the problem seemed remote and budgets were tight. "It is extremely important not to think you can postpone the decision again. I think it is imperative to have a thoroughgoing national debate on whether we want to go past the point of no return.” If the Nation did not mind being second to the moon or chose to "dismantle the Apollo machine without recovering its great investment,” he would accept that, he said. But he did not believe that either the Congress or the public had consciously reached these decisions. He feared they just had not thought about them. (Clark, NYT, 5/30/66, 1, 22)
700-seat auditorium would be built at National Academy of Sciences and a special award established as a memorial to Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late nasa Deputy Administrator. Financing would be by Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fund, established by Dr. Dryden’s personal friends and scientific associates shortly after his death in December 1965. Announcement was made jointly by Mrs. Dryden, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz. Commenting on proposed memorial, Webb said: "To a very large degree nasa and nasa’s program owe their existence and success to Hugh Dryden. . . . His wise leadership as Deputy Administrator of nasa and as nasa’s first scientist, played a leading role in creating effective working relationships between Government, industry, and the universities of the Nation to meet the tremendous new scientific and engineering tasks of the space age.” Dr. Seitz said: "It is particularly appropriate that funds raised in the name of Hugh Dryden, who served the Academy for ten years as its Home Secretary, be used to provide the Academy with an auditorium in which scientific and engineering questions of national importance could be discussed and considered. Dryden’s remarkable personal gifts as fundamental scientist, engineer, and public administrator were responsible, in great measure, for this nation’s preeminence in aviation and its successes in space. To all his activities, he brought ethical and professional standards that were deeply admired by all who knew him.” (nas-nrc Release; nas-nrc-nae News Rpt., 1; Wash. Post, 9/28/66, B4)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, predicted in response to questions in an interview with the Chicago Tribune that there would be at least four Gemini flights during the year: "We may even get off a manned Apollo flight before the end of the year.” Duration of the flight would depend on success of test flights of unmanned Apollos. (Chic. Trib., 1/16/66)
usn’s Pacific Missile Range reported 2,608 live missile firings in record total of 13,155 operations during FY 1966. (SBD, 7/19/66, 93) During June: Lurain as seen by surveyor i Science Evaluation Analysis Team after preliminary analysis of data was a dark, relatively smooth, gently rolling plain "the consistency of a freshly turned field,” studded with craters ranging in diameter from one inch to several hundreds of feet and littered with fragmental debris ranging in size from few hundredths of an inch to more than three feet. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said terrestrial scenery most closely resembling the lurain as seen by surveyor i would be Sedan crater at aec’s Nevada Test site—large crater covered with small craters and "secondary ejecta” resulting from explosion of subsurface nuclear device. Lurain appeared to be composed of soil-like substance, or a fine sand, with rougher material through it. It appeared to be about three feet deep with harder surface beneath. Surface had dynamic bearing strength of 6-10 psi. Leonard Jaffe, nasa Project Surveyor scientist, noted that results of surveyor i could be summarized by list of previous theories on nature of lurain that had been disproved: surface was not composed of hard rock; it was not composed of one piece of very porous rock; it was not covered by a layer of loose dust either thick or thin; it was a finely granulated material with particles that cohered to each other but did not seem particularly attracted to spacecraft; it was heavy enough for man to walk and work on and for a properly designed spacecraft to land on; and it reflected accurate radar signal from surface, not from subsurface substance. Jaffe noted there were a few hazards to manned spacecraft, mostly from large rocks and possibility of sinkage, but emphasized data so far indicated surface was adequate for landing Apollo Lem. There appeared to be two different types of rocks near surveyor i: one with pitted, spongy surface that appeared to be caused by molten rock that had cooled and from which gas had escaped; the other harder, smoother surfaced, and smaller grained. surveyor i photographs were considered superior to U.S.S.R.’s luna ix results because (1) camera was higher so that horizon was 10 times farther away; (2) camera resolution was greater (down to l/50th of an inch); camera worked longer and took more photos under different light angles, surveyor i’s pictures of its own footpad had yielded data on surface and subsurface composition. (Clark, NYT, 6/8/66, 1; 6/17/66, 15; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 0/11/06, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 6/19/66, 14F; SBD, 6/20/66, 297) During June: NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., writing in Astronautics & Aeronautics, outlined choices in "potential manned-spaceflight missions of the next generation” and argued for taking up the preliminary options now. He selected what he called "three natural, potential targets” for major extensions of manned space flight. First of these he saw as "a spacefaring research and operations center in earth orbit,” described as a "large, permanent, manned space facility” that would "make possible whole new ranges of experiments, investigations, and operations.” Second choice was "the moon itself... following up the initial exploratory landings with a permanent lunar base.” Third objective could be "manned surface exploration of Mars” within context of "extension of the lunar-landing experience to the near planets.” Citing both advantages and difficulties of the latter, he said: "Such an effort would represent a greater national commitment of far longer duration than our commitment in 1961 to a manned lunar landing, and would generate proportionately increased industrial, university, and government activities. Significant advances in virtually every field of space-related technology would be required. The increase in scientific knowledge from direct, firsthand observation and experimentation on another planet, however, has not yet been measured against the direct cost of its achievement, or against the more subtle cost of longterm dedication to a given course of action, with its inherent loss of national flexibility in allocation of the limiting resources—technical and scientific manpower.” (A&A, 6/66, 30-33)
Military should increase its interest in the Nation’s technological base rather than rely so heavily on the civilian sector for basic and exploratory research, suggested William Coughlin in Technology Week. He noted the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program: ". . . . much of the technology on which this military effort is based was developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on programs deliberately tied to the peaceful uses of space. It is a fair question to ask where a military space program would be today vis-a-vis the Soviet Union if the technological base had not been developed under NASA funding. "Other areas of military importance have not been as fortunate because they lack a civilian counterpart. Steps must be taken to see that development of a technical base in these areas is not overlooked. It is not easy to justify expenditure of manpower and funds in this somewhat invisible arena. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk, 11/14/66, 54) During week of November 14: Increasing application of engineering techniques developed in space program to medical problems was reported by participants at 19th Annual Conference in Medicine and Biology in San Francisco. Among developments reported: application of computer techniques to detection of pathological conditions and to mass diagnosis of heart disease; automation of classical laboratory techniques in hospital, resulting in increased accuracy and speed; use of new engineering devices to obtain information for better diagnoses; application of new engineering to treatment, including refinements on artificial heart and control of photosensitive epilepsy with a real-time computer. (Tech. Wk, 11/21/66, 30)
Materials Research Center at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute—$1.6 million, NASA-sponsored facility—and adjoining Engineering Science Research Building—built with Rensselaer funds and matching nsf grant—were dedicated at Troy, N.Y. Principal speaker at ceremony, which climaxed two-day "Man and Materials” symposium, was NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Rensselaer had received first grant under NASA program for establishment of interdisciplinary centers at selected universities, (rpi Release, 4/2/66)
On the floor of the House, Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) discussed Committee changes made in Dept, of Transportation bill, H.R. 13200. A "clean bill,” H.R. 15963, was introduced giving proposed Secretary of department responsibility for aviation and making Federal Aviation Administration (new name for faa) a division of Dept, of Transportation. Civil Aeronautics Board aircraft accident investigation unit would also be under Secretary of Transportation. (CR, 6/30/66, 14272-5)
The study of future national space objectives by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight was termed a "timely and thoughtful” document in Technology Week editorial by William J. Coughlin. Noting that its major contribution "is to focus attention on the urgent need for a major decision concerning the nation’s space program,” Coughlin added: "Not only does Congress have a role to play in such decisions, but the Teague subcommittee is moving to fill a vacuum in the decision-making process. The Administration has shown itself reluctant to bring forth decisions in this area. NASA itself has backed away from defining the next space objective. The subcommittee is performing a valuable national service in attempting to bring the matter to a head.” (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 50)
Soviet physicist Peter Kapitsa, who had received the 1966 Rutherford Prize for Physics May 3 in London, told a press conference that U.S.-U.S.S.R. rivalry was good, stimulated research, and produced variety of solutions to different problems. Kapitsa said he thought the Soviet space program was ahead of U.S., but could not prove it. {Wash. Post, 5/5/66, A20)
Gemini IX mission was scrubbed when Atlas booster failed to place Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv) in planned 185-mi. (298-km.) circular orbit. Launch of Gemini 9 with Command Pilot Thomas Stafford and Pilot Eugene Cernan was to have followed 99 min. after Atlas-Agena launch; Gemini spacecraft was to rendezvous and dock with Gatv to evaluate extravehicular life support and maneuvering equipment and procedures. Simultaneous countdown of the Gemini Launch Vehicle/Spacecraft and the Atlas-Agena had progressed smoothly and the Atlas launch was normal until 121 sec. after liftoff. Then, said the Flight Safety Review Board: "The Atlas No. 2 booster engine swiveled to an extreme hardover position about 10 sec. before booster engine cutoff. The other booster engine and the sustainer engine, acting under auto pilot control, continued to work to counter the asymmetrical thrust. "After booster separation, the vehicle continued the flight under sustained thrust but at a down angle. It had also rolled to a position where ground guidance could not lock on or reacquire. Signals to shut down the sustainer engine and inhibit ignition of the Agena engine were sent <nd acted upon by the vehicle. Agena separated on schedule and both vehicles plunged into the sea.” Gemini IX-A mission was scheduled for May 31—and later rescheduled for June 1—using Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda) as target vehicle, (nasa Releases 66-97, 66-124; msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 5/17/66, Al, A6; Lewis, Wash. Post, 5/18/66, Al, A6; NYT, 5/18/66, 1, 26)
Washington Post commented on report of satellite collision made by Dr. Hilliard Paige at iaf Congress in Madrid: "Belated disclosure that two Air Force space vehicles collided in space in April, 1965, ought to remind the country that part of its space program is being carried on behind a cloak of secrecy as absolute as that which conceals space operations in the Soviet Union. The open policy of NASA, which has done so much to keep the whole nation interested in and excited about space progress, is in sharp contrast to the policy of the Air Force. . . .” [Ed. note: Satellites were usn, not usaf.] (Wash. Post, 10/13/66, A22)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences unanimously approved nomination of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as NASA Deputy Administrator. (Transcript)
In speech at Univ. of Missouri on impact of Federal research and development expenditures on American colleges and universities, Leo S. Tonkin, Executive Director of D.C. Commissioners’ Council on Higher Education, cited statement by two NASA employees on problems involved in awarding research grants. Dr. Thomas P. Murphy, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legal Affairs, and Dr. Thomas W. Adams, Socio-Political Specialist for Office of Policy Planning, said in a paper presented at 1965 annual apsa meeting: "Can a mission-oriented agency use geography as a criterion in awarding grants, recognizing full well that it concomitantly will sacrifice time, quality, and money in the process? When grants are given to one institution on grounds other than merit, there is little basis for denying similar grants to other universities which would not normally merit them.” (Text; CR, 2/23/66)
President Johnson announced his intention to nominate Dr. Werner A. Baum, Vice President for Scientific Affairs of New York Univ., as Deputy Administrator of essa to succeed V/Adm. H. Arnold Karo who would retire Jan. 1, 1967. (Pres. Doc., 9/19/66, 1305)
Purposes of Saturn/Apollo Applications program, M/G David M. Jones (usaf), nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in an interview in Data magazine, were to serve as transition program from Apollo to next space goal and to accomplish "significant scientific experiments.” Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) said in an ' interview in the same issue that "barring some major setback, some major failure in a static test on the ground or major failure on a flight, it is reasonable to expect that the lunar landing . . . will be accomplished before the end of 1969.” (Data, 6/66, 27, 32)
William J. McWilliams, president of Republic Supply Co., was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb and NASA Secretariat, (nasa Release 66-46)
NASA’s "new policy of calling a spade a spade—and a failure a failure—in discussing the results of its manned operations in space” was noted by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: "nasa has been subjected to harsh criticism—some of ij bordering on ridicule—for the past disinclination of its officials to admit . . . that things occasionally had gone wrong. . . . Seamans’ outspoken evaluation [June 17] of the Gemini 9A flight was regarded here as a signal to other nasa officials to lay the facts on the line when things do not go exactly according to plan.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/20/66, A10)
Changes in organizational structure of NASA Hq. were effective this date. Most important change was establishment of an organizational unit called the Office of the Administrator, which included the Deputy Administrator and his staff, the Associate Administrator and his staff, and the Executive Secretariat, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., newly appointed Deputy Administrator, was continuing to serve as Associate Administrator. Willis H. Shapley, Associate Deputy Administrator, serving as the principal assistant to Administrator James E. Webb and to Dr. Seamans, was responsible for policy planning and for general supervision of the agency’s work processes. The Executive Secretariat, headed by Col. Lawrence W. Vogel (usa), was responsible for channeling and scheduling work within the Office of the Administrator. Earl D. Hilburn continued as Deputy Associate Administrator. Director of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, Edmond C. Buckley, became Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. (Other Associate Administrators were Dr. George E. Mueller, Manned Space Flight; Dr. Homer E. Newell, Space Science and Applications; and Dr. Mac C. Adams, Advanced Research and Technology.) Four Deputy Associate Administrators became Assistant Administrators: William B. Rieke, Industry Affairs; D. D. Wyatt, Programming; Adm. W. Fred Boone, Defense Affairs; and John D. Young, Administration. These were in addition to the four existing Assistant Administrators: Richard L. Callaghan, Legislative Affairs; Arnold W. Frutkin, International Affairs; Julian W. Scheer, Public Affairs; and Breene M. Kerr, Technology Utilization. Kerr also was serving as Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis (formerly Policy Planning), (nasa Release 66-3; Organ. Chart, 1/2/66; NN 1132)
kasa Administrator James E. Webb, in an article written for AP, discussed national power in space: "The question that arises is this: in terms of national power, is there going to be a real contest for the control of this new environment? Is there going to be a shared mastery or an effort at domination? "The danger is clear in having such a very great power available to only one nation, and especially to the Communist nations who have a strong, determined drive to dominate the world, to enforce their views on others. .. . "The U.S. space program gives us a mastery of the space environment. It gives us the knowledge which permits us to judge what is in our own interest. It gives us the assurance that we are going to be at the decision table when the big decisions of the future are made. It also gives us the image of a 'can do’ nation, the image of a nation that is not going to focus on pure commercialism or fail to respond to a great challenge. It gives us also the power to exploit space.” (Text)
In msc ceremony, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Gemini x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins nasa Exceptional Service Medals for "outstanding contribution to space flight and engineering,” and the astronauts reviewed their July 18-21 mission for the press. Pilot Collins revealed that maneuvering difficulties during his walk in space had forced him to approach Gatv vm three times before successfully retrieving a micrometeoroid experiment. He felt the "basic problem” in Eva was that "without some sort of handholds or restraining devices, a large percentage of the astronaut’s time is going to be devoted to torquing his body around until it is in the proper position to do some useful work.” Command Pilot Young said mission’s fuel shortage had been caused by large out-of-plane error, not human error as previously believed: "We had to use a brute force method of rendezvous [with gatv x]. That takes quite a lot of fuel.” (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. was showing increasing signs of having conceded manned lunar landing race to U.S. as part of vastly revamped space program, Donald C. Winston postulated in Aviation Week. Significance of new program was that it reflected emphasis Premier Alexey Kosygin had fomented in Soviet planning. Brezhnev and Kosygin, who came to power while three-man voskhod i was still in orbit in October 1964, ordered the spacecraft to earth prematurely as one of their first moves even before the overthrow of Nikita Khrushchev was made public. It was not long before Kosygin grounded the rest of the Voskhod series, which was to have continued with at least five launches through 1965. Only voskhod ii was permitted off the ground after Kosygin took power. The March 1965 mission was conducted because planning had reached an advanced stage by the time Khrushchev was ousted and because Cosmonaut A.A. Leonov’s Eva—first in history—had high propaganda value. Winston theorized that the new space philosophy could produce a much less complex manned circumlunar mission without landing within the next year. (Av. Wk, 11/28/66, 22)
nas President Frederick Seitz told Charter Assembly of the Aerospace Science and Technology Branch of the Research Society of America, Bolling afb, he believed the scientific community would pursue the interests of science far more effectively if it recognized its unique opportunity to make the space program scientifically valuable by lending support to those components "which do have a significant bearing on scientific knowledge.” He believed the knowledge we could gain of the solar system through the space program represented "a major contribution to our heritage of knowledge, fully as important as the knowledge of the earth we have gained in the last 500 years through the exploration which began with Henry the Navigator’s systematic explorations of the coast of Africa.” (Seitz, Science, 6/24/66)
M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), made 12th glide flight at Edwards afb after air-launch from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude. Purposes of flight were to obtain data on stability and control at 7° and 11° angles of attack and on upper flap effectiveness, (nasa Proj. Off.) Need to develop a V/Stol aircraft as an "air bus” for faster short-haul transportation of cargo and passengers within large urban areas was rapidly increasing with growth in population, asserted Jack D. Brewer, program manager for V/Stol research, NASA Hq. By 1985, according to prediction, more than 130 million persons—half the U.S. population— would be living in super metropolitan areas at San Francisco-Los Angeles, Buffalo-Chicago, and Boston-New York-Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 66-282) Cooperation as well as competition would be necessary to meet challenges of future air transportation, John C. Brizendine, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Aircraft Division vice president for engineering, told the Congress. He said progress in solving problems such as noise, limiting effects of weather, congestion of airports and airways, and rapid transportation needs between airports and cities, should be accelerated. ". . . if society is to realize the progress and benefits technology can offer, we as leaders of large segments of society also must display increasing unity of purpose in striving to overcome the major environmental problems common to all of us.” (CR, 1/23/67, 5729-31)
Dirty windows which obscured astronauts’ vision moderately to severely in many of nasa’s Gemini missions had been caused by volatile vapors produced by silicones used in window seals, Gemini program director Charles W. Mathews told news briefing at msc. Problem would be corrected by curing silicone seals in a vacuum. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66, A4)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, speaking to a group of Life magazine executives visiting ksc, remarked:	. . the space program has added greater meaning to our lives. I have talked to a great many Americans recently about the benefits of the space program, and I have found that my fellow Americans get a thrill and a sense of accomplishment and satisfaction out of this great undertaking of our nation. "Our young people have a new frontier to explore. And this comes at a time when we thought all the frontiers were gone. They have new and exciting places to go out in the universe, new ideas to bring home and enrich their lives, new challenges to hone their character. "Yesterday our horizon was limited by the globe of earth, and today, as a result of this new frontier, our horizons are as limitless as the universe itself.” (Text)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, told World Affairs Council in Los Angeles U.S. civil space program "affords perhaps the most effective globed projection of the American personality and the American achievement today . . . "The elements of this favorable projection are the openness with which the program is conducted, the direct benefits to others through space communications and weather systems, the willingness to share both research and results in projects of mutual interest, the energetic forward thrust toward technological and managerial pre-eminence, and . . . the evidence of high national purpose.” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed Dr. John F. Clark as Director of gsfc. Dr. Clark, formerly Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Science), had been Acting Director of GSFC since July 1965. (nasa Release 66-105)
International Assn, of Machinists (iam) struck five major airlines including twa, which provided base support services at ksc. Some work on Project Apollo was curtailed, but NASA officials said essential operations were continuing, (upi, NYT, 7/9/66)
NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 launch vehicle was launched from etb with dummy Surveyor payload. Centaur stage’s failure to achieve successful double ignition in space caused 1,730-lb. dummy Surveyor payload to remain in earth orbit with the Centaur stage rather than enter simulated lunar trajectory as programed. Orbital parameters: apogee, 208 mi. (335 km.); perigee, 113 mi. (182 km.); period, 90 min.; inclination, 31°. Eighty minutes after launch NASA officials at ksc announced that only one of booster’s two hydrogen-fueled RL-10 rocket engines had fired the second time. Both engines were to have ignited for approximate 107-sec. burn and inserted payload into lunar trajectory. Later analysis of data indicated the failure was because of a malfunction in Centaur’s attitude control system [see May 3]. Purpose of AC-8 mission was to demonstrate Centaur’s capability to restart its high-energy engines in the space environment following coast period in earth orbit. Success of this mission was vital to nasa’s first operational mission which would attempt to land Surveyor spacecraft on the moon. Centaur program was directed by NASA ossa and managed by lrc. (nasa Releases 66-58, 66-92; nasa Proj. Off.; Wash. Post, 4/8/66, A9; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/8/66)
Press briefing was held at LaRC on results of nasa’s lunar orbiter i mission, launched Aug. 10 from etr to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. The more than 200 photos transmitted by the spacecraft revealed a rugged lunar landscape covered with thousands of craters. Ridges and hills were more gently sloped near moon’s center and became progressively smoother in the west. Presence of large rocks, or "blocks,” proved that surface was firm enough to support manned spacecraft. Of the nine sites photographed, the Ocean of Storms where surveyor i was resting appeared safest for manned landing. Classified as a dark mare— flat, waterless plain with relatively few craters—it had 20 per cent fewer craters than any of the other sites. U.S. Geological Survey scientists Dr. Harold Masursky and Dr. Lawrence Rowan suggested that the photos showed evidence of volcanic activity. Citing a small cone-shaped hill on line of a geologic rift near surveyor i ana a large crater on the back of the moon, apparently filled with congealed lava, Dr. Masursky said: "The moon is not a cold, dead, lifeless planet. It looks close to being as dynamic as the earth.” Dr. Rowan noted that major faults on the lunar surface seemed to run in two general directions—northeast-southwest and southeast-northwest —and concluded that much of the volcanic activity probably occurred along these lines. LaRC scientist William Michael said nonphotographic data on the satellite’s orbit indicated moon might turn flat side toward earth, not bulgy side as generally believed. He said displacement of moon’s center of mass toward earth could explain both a flat face and moon’s slight wobble, which had been accounted for previously by the "bulge” theory. Micrometeoroid detection experiment had not recorded any "hits” during satellite’s eight weeks in lunar orbit in contrast to earth-orbiting satellites which often registered a hit every two weeks. Project Manager Clifford H. Nelson announced that Lunar Orbiter B—second of five satellites in series—would be launched between Nov. 6 and 11 to photograph area slightly north of that scanned by lunar orbiter i. (Clark, NYT, 10/7/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/66, A3; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 10/7/66, Al)
Indications were increasing that President Johnson would accede to pressure from White House fiscal advisers to cut $1 billion from Project Apollo budget as part of effort to reduce proposed FY 1967 Government spending by $4 billion, Leslie Carpenter reported in the Washington Sunday Star. It was contended that reduction would postpone manned lunar landing by only two years, putting it between 1970-72 rather than 1968-70. nasa Administrator James E. Webb, opposing the move, argued it would raise the overall cost and permit the U.S.S.R. to beat the U.S. to the moon. (Carpenter, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/25/66, A21)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, jpl Voyager program manager, told Aviation Week in an interview that heavy funding for the Voyager Mars program was anticipated with FY 1968 funds if the Vietnam war did not create new funding problems. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 40)
Resources of U.S. space program were minimal "while the Russians apparently are increasing theirs,” Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told a news conference at mtf. "Competition in space is not lessening with time, but rather is increasing. What is needed is a clear definition of where the nation is going in space after the moon is explored.” (Russell, Miami Her., 5/3/66)
Potential of U.S. space program was described by Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), NASA Director of Field Center Development, OMSF, in a speech before Michigan Assn, of the Professions in Detroit. "Man’s exploration of space, the moon and the planets is potentially the greatest inspirational venture in the history of man, and one in which the entire world can share. Thus, the exploration of the space frontier can well provide the seed for new flowering—sparking a Twentieth Century Renaissance, stirring man’s imagination, ennobling his ambitions, and igniting his spirit with fresh hope and excitement. As the European Renaissance was sparked by the discovery of new continents and seas, so a new Age of Discovery in many arenas may well be awakened by man’s venture into space. . . .” (Text)
At Pentagon ceremony, Chief of Naval Operations Adm. David L. McDonald presented astronaut wings to Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan (LCdr., usn) who set a world record for length of "walk in space” during June 3-6 Gemini ix-a mission. McDonald suggested to NASA officials that "you get your own Navy” for astronaut recovery operations. usn felt smaller ships not needed in the Vietnam war could be used as effectively for this task as the aircraft carrier and dozen ships assigned to NASA. Speaking later at NASA Hq., Cernan said that what a man needed in space to do useful work was a "three-point restraint system”— three points of contact with the spacecraft for stabilization. (Norris, Wash. Post, 1/21/66, Al, A6)
Space negotiations played important roie in visit of West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard to U.S. Following discussions with President Johnson, joint statement was released from White House: "The President and the Chancellor discussed possibilities for increased cooperation in technology and science and in particular in the field of space research. The Chancellor expressed his satisfaction that effective steps toward increased cooperation in space research have been initiated since his last meeting with the President in December 1965. The President and the Chancellor welcomed the decision to expand the present cooperative satellite program reached as a result of the recent discussions in Bonn between NASA Administrator Webb and Minister of Science Stoltenberg. "The President and the Chancellor agreed that scientific cooperation should be pressed forward for the mutual benefit of both countries and the advancement of human knowledge, preserving opportunities for additional nations to participate and contribute.” President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, later flew from Washington, D.C., to Cape Kennedy for tour of ksc. During speech in Vehicle Assembly Building, President Johnson said he was discussing "with the Chancellor, as well as other leaders, my hope that our scientists can join in joint endeavors to reap the full benefits of space research.” He said he had authorized Administrator Webb "to discuss whether solar physicists from Europe may wish to be associated with the American solar physicists” in program for Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) to be flown "on an Apollo flight in order to study the sun at the height of the solar cycle.” Appealing to the U.S.S.R. for early conclusion of a treaty on outer space exploration, Johnson said: "I earnestly hope that the Soviet Union—whose space achievements have been very great—will feel as we fee] in America: that the rapid evolution of space technology makes ... a treaty between us governing the use of space a most urgent matter ... as we explore the vastness of space, and as we dream of new horizons, we work, too, for the manmade controls that will keep these efforts at the service of man and at the service of peace.” He noted that the U.S. sought and would continue to seek cooperation in space with U.S.S.R.: "We have an agreement to exchange certain kinds of space data. . . . We will soon publish jointly American and Soviet material on space biology and medicine.” The President also mentioned that the U.S, was "on schedule in our plan and our determination to put men on the moon before 1970.” (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1365-6, 1370; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/28/66, Cl)
W. Cameron Roberts, Jr., director of Atlantic Research Corp.’s Production Div., died of a kidney ailment. Roberts, an expert on solid-propellant and meteorological rocketry, had conducted extensive research for U.S. upper-air and space programs, and was co-inventor of Areas—one of world’s most widely used meteorological rocket systems. (Wash. Post, 3/27/66, B10)
A Soviet victory in the race to achieve first manned lunar landing "would be a worldwide propaganda disgrace because we ourselves chose the target . . . [and] a crushing political blow at home to the President linked with it, which the present White House incumbent has been from the inception,” wrote William J. Coughlin in Missiles and Rockets. He suggested a possible solution: ". .. extend the U.S. national goal prior to a manned lunar landing by either the U.S. or the Soviet Union. Then, if the Russians were the first to arrive on the Moon, we would be in a position to gracefully acknowledge their achievement while pointing out that to us the Moon was but a way-station en route to a more distant objective. If we accomplished the first landing, we would also have the benefits of victory. But we would not be so exposed in the event of a defeat. . . . "Without establishment of a higher goal and a greater challenge, U.S. space capability will dissipate. NASA efforts to prevent this by getting a worthwhile Apollo Applications Program under way have not met with notable success. This provides a second good reason for lifting our national goal. . . .” (Coughlin, M&R, 5/2/66, 46) During week of May 2: msc officials had not pinpointed exact cause, but had isolated probable cause of faulty thruster which prematurely terminated Gemini viii mission March 16, Missiles and Rockets reported. Corrective action would affect all these components on Gemini 9 and later spacecraft. Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews emphasized that thruster and its associated hardware and electronics were contained in adapter module abandoned by crew in orbit prior to reentry. "If we can believe telemetry data, we can isolate the cause of the problem to either spacecraft wiring or thruster valve solenoids,” Mathews said. Specific trouble spot within wiring or valve solenoids would be difficult to determine without testing actual equipment. (M&R, 5/9/66, 17)
House passed H.R. 6125 amending Air Museum Act to authorize construction of a National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., to replace the National Air Museum, Museum, to be completed in five years at an estimated $40 million, would house permanent exhibits of space exploration and be part of the Smithsonian Institution. The NASA Administrator would serve on its advisory board. (NASA LAR V/20)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in a speech at Mills College, Oakland, Calif., that the "complex interdevelopment of technological power and of the social organization necessary to control, direct, and exploit it ... is a central element of the space age. . . . The success of our space program is helping to grove to ourselves and to the world that we have the will and the capacity to establish far-reaching, difficult goals and bring them surely to fruition. This kind of proof is a major basis for national prestige and international cooperation.” (Text)
dod and NASA signed agreement specifying funding arrangements, responsibilities, and general procedures to be followed in acquisition, modification, test, and associated administration of the Apollo/Range Instrumentation Aircraft (A/Ria), which would provide telemetry and communication relay support for Apollo and other national missile and space programs. National Range Division (nrd) of afsc would exercise overall management responsibility for A/Ria project. (Text; NASA nmi 1052.67)
Dr. Otis E. Lancaster, professor of engineering education at Pennsylvania State Univ., was sworn in as a consultant to NASA Administrator. He would advise on the subjects of NASA-university relationships, methods for strengthening engineering education programs, and ways to provide stronger engineering/administrative ties, (nasa Release 66-256)
NASA’s second space-tracking station near Canberra, Australia, was officially opened by Minister of Supply Denham Henty. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, attended ceremony and praised Australia’s contribution to U.S. space program saying: "We will explore space together for the benefit of mankind.” (NYT, 2/25/66, 3)
President Johnson, in his State of the Union address to the joint session of Congress, proposed a "program to construct and to flight-test a new supersonic transport airplane that will fly three times the speed of sound—in excess of 2,000 miles per hour.” No mention of the space program was made in the address. This fact received comment in Aviation Week: "Mentioned or not, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has decided to stake out a top spot in domestic prestige after Apollo. . . . The agency now will take the initiative.” (Pres. Doc., 1/17/66, 31; Av. Wk., 1/17/66, 25)
Columbia Univ. professor of business administration Dr. Leonard R. Sayles was sworn in as consultant to nasa Administrator on organization policy and managerial practices and procedures, (nasa Release 66-235)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences as it began hearings on NASA’s FY 1967 budget authorization, said U.S.S.R. would become unchallenged leader in space exploration unless U.S. soon decided to support post-Apollo missions. Webb reviewed U.S.S.R.’s very active year in space and said: "More important to us than any other indication from Soviet space activity is the clear commitment to a long-term effort. The fact that they are making such a commitment shows the importance they attach to advancing their capabilities in space. Unless we soon decide to follow through with a strong program in the years after we have achieved a manned lunar landing, we cannot avoid a gap in our flight schedule while they forge ahead as the unchallenged contestant in the field.” Webb noted FY 1967 budget for NASA reflected a Presidential decision "to hold open for another year decisions which cannot be delayed beyond the period of the FY 1968 budget.” He added: "The programs we are now carrying out so successfully, the new knowledge we are acquiring so rapidly, the ending of the period of uncertainty as to what both Russian Cosmonauts and American Astronauts can achieve in space, and the growing utilization of the long term values that our investments have created in reliable launch vehicles, spacecraft, and assembly test and launch complexes, all point toward decisions to use rather than lose the values we have worked so hard and spent so much to create. And so I believe that our presentation of this 1967 Budget marks not just assertion to you that we have built well as we have created a foundation for space power, but also marks the beginning of a momentous era in which we must decide how we will use this power in future years.” He assessed the national space program: ". . . we have demonstrated that we can do the tasks we set out to do. An important value of the space program is this demonstration of national capability in science and technology. That we have this capability is no longer a matter of opinion but a demonstrated fact that is clear to all who concern themselves with the power nations can and do develop for many purposes from the mastery of a new environment or a new technology. We have put it on view for all the world to see. The world knows today that the United States can digest the space-related problems of long lead-times, can hold its position in a demanding competition, and can forge ahead simultaneously in both aeronautics and space and in those advanced technologies of which space is the leading symbol.” (NASA Auth. Hearings, 15-17)
Administrative History of NASA, 1958-63 (SP-4101), by Dr. Robert L. Rosholt and with a foreword by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, was published by NASA. Volume—first in history series covering major programs and other aspects of NASA operations—would be available through Superintendent of Documents, Gpo. (nasa Release 66-158)
Rep. Hale Boggs (D-La.) told House: ". . . no businessman would invest tens of thousands of dollars in a locomotive and then allow it to rust in the yard for lack of a $5 part. Neither can we invest tens of billions in a space program and leave it to falter for the lack of funds.” Calling the present budget "austere,” Boggs warned that in future budgets we could not put important elements of our capability into mothballs. "We must use it or see it rust.” (CR, 6/21/66, 13707-08)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh, speaking before Metropolitan Washington Board of Trade’s Science Industry Committee, replied to criticism that the national space program is highly expensive and wasteful: "The national space program is the largest concerted effort undertaken by any nation to advance the frontiers of human knowledge. As such, it is a seedbed of invention, a spur to our productivity, a source of insurance for our national security, a stimulus to learning, and a world-wide ambassador for peace. Because of it, our chances of improving medical research and finding a cure for cancer or heart disease are greater, not less. Because of it, our chances of improving our educational system and solving a vast range of social problems are greater, not less. "The issue is really not that of substituting space progress for progress in some other worthy field, because the space program contrihutes importantly to advances in practically all other lines of endeavor, and it stimulates the national economy at the same time. . . .” (Text)
Discussing the "cost to land men on the moon” in Journal of the Armed Forces, James J. Haggerty, Jr., said late NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, "without much detailed information on which to base an assessment,” had estimated $20 billion. Now that work on all major contracts was well advanced, NASA had made new estimate that validated original figure: total cost would be $22.7 billion with possibility of adjustment that would bring it down almost to $20 billion. (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 6/18/66, 8)
Lawrence Levy, founder and president of Allied Research Assoc., Inc., and former Defense Adviser to U.S. Ambassador to NATO, was sworn in as a consultant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb on "cooperation with western Europe and future space programs. . . .” (nasa Release 66-231)
Dr. C. V. Raman, 1930 Nobel Prize winner in physics, said in convocation address at Indian Institute of Technology in Madras that it was "nothing but sheer raving lunacy” to spend millions of dollars "to shoot men into space and make them walk there.” Dr. Raman said it was "mere pretence” to say these exploits were intended to find out what was happening on the moon. "It is militarism, very thinly disguised.” Dr. Raman said he thought spaceflight was the "most sinister aspect” of the progress of science in the last 60 yrs. (NYT, 8/1/66, 42) During July: Teofilo M. Tabanera, president of Argentina’s Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales (cnie), reviewed accomplishments and current plans of space program in the Air University Review. Since creation of cnie in 1960, Argentina had organized meetings to promote interest in space research and conducted experiments in aeronomy, ionospheric studies, cosmic radiation, and meteorology, launching balloons and rockets from Chamical Rocket Range. Current plans included: (1) continuation of Centaure sounding rocket launches for wind studies, using "luminous-trails” technique; (2) cooperation in inter-American experimental meteorological sounding rocket research network (exametnet) under agreement with NASA to launch boosted Darts and Areas rockets; and (3) launchings of sounding rockets to study cosmic radiation and ionospheric phenomena. {Air Univ. Review,
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller, testifying on FY 1967 budget authorization before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, stated that NASA had reached a manpower peak of 300,000 people in the manned spaceflight program: "We have passed our peak in engineering, we are reaching our peak in manufacturing, and we are at our peak in total Manned Space Flight manpower resources. . . . "A striking anomaly of the space program is that we begin to 'go out of business’ before we fly our first operational vehicle. . . . The program to develop the uprated Saturn I launch vehicle illustrates this situation. The decline in manpower on this program has been underway for several months, but the first flight took place only 2 weeks ago—and the first manned flight is almost a year away. By then, the employment level will be almost half the peak level of 1965.” Reviewing NASA plans for a manned project after Apollo, Dr. Mueller cited five major program alternatives under study. The alternatives "placed emphasis on (1) direct economic benefits to mankind, (2) lunar exploration and science, (3) planetary exploration, (4) maximum effort in all program areas, and (5) a program balanced over the whole spectrum of alternatives, which could be shifted as required to meet national needs. "We have not made a decision upon which of these courses we will embark.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 32-3, 148)
Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Commander-in-Chief of U.S. European Command, was sworn in as a special assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 66-288)
Franco-Soviet cooperative space agreement was being viewed with skepticism by French scientists who foresaw effort would break down for same lack of Soviet candor that had stymied useful information exchange between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Aviation Week reported. In addition, French Communists were protesting to Kremlin that high Soviet sanction of President De Gaulle’s space program was weakening Communist political stature in France. {Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 23)
NASA’s Eighth Annual Honor Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. NASA Administrator James E. Webb accepted from Mr. and Mrs. C. Thomas Clagett, Jr., for placement at ksc a replica of the bronze Kennedy bust sculpted by Felix de Weldon for the John F. Kennedy Memorial Library; and from the American Society of Gvil Engineers, the 1966 Outstanding Gvil Engineering Achievement Award for ksc’s Launch Complex 39. Mr. Webb presented nasa’s Distinguished Public Service Medal to Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, chairman, Graduate Research Center of the Southwest’s Board of Trustees, who emphasized the need for careful and immediate post-Apollo planning in his keynote address: "We now have a powerful machinery for the command of space— trained specialists, mighty rockets, a technological dexterity that is unsurpassed. But to keep this capability, we must have new strategic objectives. And that there are many worthwhile and compelling objectives there can be no doubt. . . . "I would assert that it is now imperative that more advanced space strategies be adopted—and quickly—if our space program is to remain efficient and effective. And I would suggest that whatever this further strategy, it employ and advance our full capability in science, men, mechanisms, and skill. ...” Recipients of Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. Hugh L. Dry den, former Deputy Administrator (posthumously); Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator; and Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former AFSC Commander. Recipients of Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal: Richard F. Arenstorf, msfc; Helmut J. Horn, msfc; Norman F. Ness, Gsfc; and George F. Pezdirtz, LaRC. Outstanding Leadership Medal: John F. Clark, gsfc; Edgar M. Cortright, Hq,; Robert L. Krieger, Wallops; George J. Vecchietti, Hq.; Harold B. Finger, Hq.; Harry H. Gorman, msfc; Edmund F. O’Connor, msfc; Eberhard F. M. Rees, msfc; and Herman K. Weidner, msfc. Exceptional Service Medal: M. Helen Davies, arc; Herbert A. Wilson, LaRC; Robert A. Rush worth, usaf; Roll D. Ginter, Hq.; David S. Gabriel, lrc; Edmund R. Jonash, lrc; J. Cary Nettles, lrc; Wilfred E. Scull, gsfc; Harry Press, gsfc; Leland F. Belew, msfc; Lee B. James, msfc; William G. Johnson, msfc; and Peter A. Minderman, ksc. Group Achievement Award: jpl; lrc; LaRC (2); and Hq. Space Nuclear Propulsion Office. Public Service Award: Grant L. Hansen, General Dynamics Corp. (Program; Text AF/SD, 1/67/54-5)
nasa awarded George Washington Univ. a three-year, $750,000 grant "to undertake a multidisciplinary program of policy studies in science, technology, and public administration.” Program was expected to contribute to analysis of various policy questions related to development of the space program and utilization of knowledge derived from it. (nasa Release 66-240)
Achievements in space since first flight in Gemini series March 1965 had been "phenomenal,” stated Washington Post editorial: ". . . the people of this country can feel pride in the officials of. . . [nasa] who have deliberately but confidently advanced the space program without catering to pressures for spectacular stunts. The total achievement, in and of itself, is spectacular beyond the wildest hopes of a few years ago.” (Wash. Post, 7/20/66, A20)
American Federation of Government Employees (afge) at ksc had charged nasa with preferential hiring of retired military officers for choice civilian jobs—a practice which was "demoralizing” career officials and damaging the space program, afge’s charge was supported by House Civil Service Manpower Subcommittee, which had been investigating the situation for several months. (Young, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/4/66, A2)
Complexities of modern society required a new concept of management, nasa Administrator James E. Webb told graduation class of Harvard Univ.’s Graduate School of Business Administration. "The kind of challenges that we in management are facing today . . . call for new and experimental approaches to organization. One ... is the question of the chief executive function. In traditional thinking, the structure of an organization peaked in the chief executive. . . . However, as organizations have become more complex and their challenges more interdisciplinary . . . there has been an increasing tendency to experiment with the idea of the multiple executive. ... We saw this kind of need at the very beginning of nasa’s history. We evolved, therefore, a partnership arrangement which included Dr. Hugh Dryden, Dr. Robert Seamans, and myself. We all had many common ideas, and yet each brought to our work on the critical decisions affecting the nation’s space effort certain specialized experience. To do it any other way would have deprived us of the kind of mutual support and broadly-based leadership that I think we achieved.” (Text)
Joseph C. Satterthwaite, former State Dept, foreign service officer, was sworn in as a consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb for international affairs "in the general area of Western Europe.” (nasa Release 66-39)
NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin addressed the American Academy of Political and Social Science in Philadelphia on international significance of space program: ". . . the United States has welcomed direct foreign participation in space research and exploration. The U.S. has contributed its boosters to launch six satellites which were conceived, engineered, instrumented and funded by cooperating foreign countries. Eight more such satellites are to be launched by us under existing agreements and, at this date, other agreements are in early prospect. We have opened our own satellites to foreign experimenters. Some twenty experiments proposed by scientists abroad have been selected on their merits for flight on our satellites. These foreign experiments are contributed to the program; we contribute space in the satellite and its support systems and retrieve the data for the experimenter. Even wider cooperation—with twenty different countries —is achieved through programs which utilize small, nonorbiting rockets to obtain data for which satellites do not commend themselves. In all of these projects, we have shared the tasks and costs in literal cooperation without exporting a dollar.” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb praised development of the Nerva nuclear rocket engine following a tour of aec’s Las Vegas, Nev., test site. He observed the nuclear engine was capable of producing longer-duration flights than engine systems in current use. (upi, Houston Chron., 4/22/66)
Prof. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, said at the Asia-Pacific Seminar that the U.S. was the only nation in the scientific revolution and that the U.S.S JL, U.K., and West Germany had not yet entered it. He described the scientific revolution as dependent upon man’s brains and not upon water, coal, or iron, as was the industrial revolution. The computer, he said, was the chief symbol of the scientific revolution. (AP, NYT, 1/27/66, 3) January 24-26: At aiaa Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff was elected 1966 aiaa president. Dr. C. Stark Draper, chairman of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture on the role of "informetics” in modern flight systems. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell chaired a special "Space Sciences Report” plenary session which considered priorities in planetary exploration and the interaction of solar wind with the planets. Donald L. Hunter of Kitt Peak National Observatory said Venus exploration was likely to be as interesting as exploration of Mars; high Venusian surface temperature did not rule out possibility of rudimentary life forms, and Venus’ environment might be less hostile than that of Mars. Manned round trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus "swingby,” according to Rollin W. Gillespie and Stanley Ross of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; direct flights would take 800 to 900 days. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal speaker at the Honors Convocation. He said: "Yesterday, President Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress. . . . This year, the process of sorting out priorities and allocating resources has been especially difficult. Abroad, there is the growing commitment to Vietnamese freedom. At home, there is the growing commitment to freedom from poverty, ignorance, ugliness, and unemployment. In addition to these and other commitments, the President’s budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated year after year: to undertake the exploration of space for the benefit of mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more than $5 billion for NASA’s part in this enterprise have been requested. . .. "It is within this framework that the nasa program has been hammered out—not representing the sum of our program demands. However, as we indicated in our budget briefing for the Press this past weekend, we believe we have a balanced program of aeronautics and space research, of science and technology, of large scale manned exploration and unmanned probes and satellites. "We recognize there is an enormous responsibility attached to the planning, justification, and direction of a sum so large during a period so rich in other needs. . . . "We have reached a point where the exploration of space is no longer a promise but a hard fact, where scientific data and tested capabilities are in hand instead of in the future. ". . . The program that we have laid out for nasa for the coming year will meet the highest priorities of scientific and technological needs. It will permit flexible evaluation of the next major steps open to us in space. It will maintain the forward momentum that has been built up with energy and care over the past years. It will permit strong competition for those who wish to outstrip us and meaningful cooperation for those who can find communities of interest with us. It will provide an honest and practical balance between the many elements of scientific investigation, technological application and operational experience. It provides a challenge that will require hard work, hard judgment, and careful appraisal at every step of translation from plan into execution. It does not close to future exploitation the many options that have been built for the nation in the past. Most importantly, it recognizes that true national security is best measured by the useful knowledge in men’s minds and that the great arena of space remains a battleground between the intellect of man and the unknown.” Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was made at the Honors Convocation by L/G James Doolittle (usafr) : "On the second of December 1965 the world became poorer; our country lost one of its foresighted leaders; aeronautics lost a man who had devoted a major part of his life to its advancement; astronautics lost its great ambassador at home and at large and those fortunate of us—who had been privileged to know and work with him—lost a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate. "Dr. Hugh Latimer Dryden dedicated his whole life to the service of his fellow man. He was a doer, but a gentle person—a man who strove prodigiously, but instinctively did the kindly thing. He was eager and courageous. He had been critically ill for several years, but he worked hard and effectively up to a few days before his death. . . . "Hugh Latimer Dryden: engineer, scientist, administrator, public servant, patriot, theologian, realist. With his immediate family and all the nation we, his close friends and associates, mourn his passing. We will long remember him with affection, admiration, respect, and gratitude, for excellence endures.” Goddard Award, aiaa’s highest, was presented jointly to Hans J. P. von Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab., Wright-Patterson afb, for "his contributions to the achievement in 1939 of the first successful application of turbojet propulsion to aircraft”; and to A. W. Blackman, Chief of Propulsion, United Aircraft Corp., and George D. Lewis, Project Engineer, uac Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div., for "their contributions to the understanding of the phenomenon of combustion instability and for their recognition of acoustical liners as a method of suppressing such instabilities in turbojet afterburners and rocket engines.” Sylvanus Albert Reed Award went to Clarence L. Johnson, vice president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and designer of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft and the YF-12A interceptor, for his "production of two triple-sonic military aircraft, for continuing personal design innovation, imaginative engineering, and practical manufacturing techniques that over the years have aided immeasurably in maintaining U.S. ascendency in defensive aerial weaponry.” 1966 Research Award was given to Prof. Shao-Chi Lin, Univ. of California (San Diego), for "basic research in the electric and electromagnetic properties of ionized gases, and for significant contributions to reentry physics.” (Texts; aiaa Release; aiaa Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Space Business Daily that nasa had presented several proposed FY 1968 budgets to bob, including one for "just over $6 billion” and another for $5.5 billion. He said that in the $5.5-billion budget about $500-$600 million would be for Apollo Applications (Aa); the $6-billion budget would include about $1 billion for Aa. Emphasizing that major funds for Aa must be included in the FY 1968 budget if the billions of dollars spent on Apollo technology were not to be wasted, he indicated that a budget of about $5 billion would end plans for an adequate Aa program to follow Project Apollo. He noted that under a $5-billion budget, there would be a greater percentage cut back in contractor operations as opposed to inhouse nasa efforts, but that with a $5.5-billion budget the current ratio would remain about the same. Seamans confirmed that the first manned Apollo lunar landing could come as early as 1968, but said it is "most likely” to occur in 1969. (SBD, 8/29/66, 317-8)
Paramount objective of NASA’s Apollo program was not to land man on the moon before U.S.S.R. but to make "U.S. first in space by the end of this decade, and to make this pre-eminence unmistakably clear to all the world,” NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told ieee Aerospace Systems Conference in Seattle, Wash. Apollo program was a means of acquiring the ability to operate in space on a variety of missions, Dr. Seamans explained: ". . . we are building much more than a rocket and a spaceship. We are developing, in government, in industry, in our universities, one of the most remarkable teams that has ever been assembled. There are more than 400,000 men and women, 20,000	industrial companies, and more than 150 universities actively engaged in the nasa program. More than 90 percent of NASA’s five-billion-dollar-a-year budget goes to contractors.” He warned against failing to look beyond the near-term goal of manned lunar exploration and said: "Programs of the future must be determined within the total context of national need and the availability of resources. The Nation’s interest in space projects, and the level of support accorded them must in the long run be related to tangible benefits that can be derived from the emerging technical and operational capabilities.” (Text)
nasa released its 1,000th Tech Brief, one which described development of improved titanium alloy of possible value in field of medicine. Potential industrial uses of inorganic fibers developed as reinforcements in materials for spacecraft were discussed in Non-Glassy Inorganic Fibers and Composites, issued by NASA Office of Technology Utilization. Techniques used to monitor astronauts’ blood pressure could be adapted to prolong the lives of persons with certain types of heart disease, concluded Westinghouse Research Laboratories engineers William J. Jones and Wyatt C. Simpson in monograph entitled NASA Contributions to Cardiovascular Monitoring. Study was conducted for nasa’s Office of Technology Utilization, (nasa Releases 66-238, 66-246, 66-250) During September: usaf had begun evaluation studies of Adam (Air Deflection and Modulation) II—a revolutionary type of aircraft with engines located inside the wings—at Wright-Patterson afb. A full-span, powered model of the propulsive-wing V/Stol aircraft would be designed, built, and tested by ltv Aerospace Corp. under a 15-mo., $439,000 contract jointly funded by usaf and usa. Wind-tunnel tests would be made at LaHC. Aircraft could be used in both military tactical and commercial passenger versions, (afsc Release 154.66)
Charles H. Ruby, president of the Air Line Pilots Assn., charged faa had implied pilots were to blame for four recent Boeing 727 jet aircraft crashes although investigations were incomplete. He referred to "premature and seriously questionable public assessment” of the 727 during a Feb. 17 faa meeting at which faa said the aircraft was airworthy and had no serious defects: "We don’t believe this [cause determination] can be expected to be achieved with total objectivity by closed door meetings of parties with a substantial stake in the outcome.” Ruby added pilots felt the 727 was basically a "good and safe aircraft.” (vpi, Wash. Post, 2/24/66, A2) Gemini program director Charles W. Mathews announced that NASA had canceled plans for land landings of Gemini spacecraft because of "development time constraint”; U.S. spacecraft would continue to make ocean landings "for the foreseeable future.” (Text; Houston Post, 2/24/66)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Wehb told National Conference of Lieutenant Governors in Cleveland that new satellite weather reporting system meant "you say to every other nation the United States is developing this power technique of space, not to get power over you, but to develop power together with you over the limitations of nature.” (AP, Miami News, 6/26/66)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey attended ceremony at nasa Hq. celebrating successful launch of essa i, essa’s first operational meteorological satellite. During ceremony, first pictures taken by essa i, launched by nasa from etr Feb. 3, were released; nasa Administrator James E. Webb administered the oath of office to nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; and the Vice President presented nasa Exceptional Service medals to Dr. Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Programs; Herbert I. Butler, nasa Chief of Operational Satellites, gsfc; and David S. Johnson, essa Environmental Satellite Center Director. Vice President Humphrey praised the spirit of cooperation between nasa and Dept, of Commerce, noting that "science leaves no room for jurisdictional disputes.” He said of NASA’s Administrator and Deputy Administrator: "I know of no two men who are more dedicated to our space program than Jim Webb and Bob Seamans. Their devotion is almost sacrificial.” (nasa Release 66-29)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown had indicaten that future U.S. military exploration of space would concentrate od existing and proved technologies, Dr. I. M. Levitt, director of Fels Planetarium, reported in the Philadelphia Inquirer. Dr. Brown had isolated three areas of vital interest to the military: (1) electronic systems which would ensure long life and reliability in orbit; (2) reusable materials for spacecraft, launch vehicles, and propulsion systems; and (3) space electrical power systems which world provide better power-to-weight ratios at reduced cost per kw for long duration missions. (Levitt, Phil. Inq., 12/4/66, 5) NASA Administrator James E. Webb responded to accusations that he was more concerned with life on Mars than with life in Chicago or Los Angeles: "Neither I nor any other leader in the space program has ever suggested that the space program should have any priority over the needs of the American City. . . .” He agreed that cities needed more Federal funds, but suggested that they first offer greater assurance that their programs would work well. Benefits in medical, industrial, and other fields added dimensions to space program far beyond the value of the lunar-landing program alone, he said. (Transcript; Janson, NYT, 12/6/66, C34)
Benefits of U.S. space program were emphasized by NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh at aiaa meeting in St. Paul. He cited in particular space program’s contributions to education, saying, "it has added immeasurably to total available knowledge of man, of the earth, and of the solar system. . . . Funds have flowed from NASA ... to our educational institutions in the form of scholarships and fellowships, in the form of new laboratories, and research opportunities. It is estimated that from this one source about 1,000 new Ph.D.’s are added annually to this resource of the Nation ... and ... it has been a catalyst and a stimulus to education throughout the whole country. . . .” (Text)
West Germany’s Chancellor Ludwig Erhard and President Johnson are briefed by NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center.
Question whether "superrockets” for the Apollo manned space program should have liquid or solid stages was no longer debatable, said William Hines in the Washington Evening Star; the solids had been "forced through studied neglect to default.” He continued: "This is not to suggest, however, that the whole liquid-solid debate is moot. "Between Saturn I-B’s 35,000-pound orbital capability and Saturn V’s 250,000 pounds is a huge gap; between Atlas-Centaur’s 2,300-pound escape capability and Saturn Y’s 95,000 pounds is a gap that is even greater, proportionately. "A wide variety of scientific and manned payloads can be envisioned as fitting within these gaps. A flexible booster system based on large solid rockets of varying lengths and flight characteristics could fill the gaps quickly and at reasonable cost; liquid systems could not.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/17/66, A6)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in Washington, D.C., to gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman for achieving first rendezvous in space by two separately launched maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. After the ceremony, the Vice President told newsmen he was one of those "manning the ramparts” against those who failed to see any direct public benefit from space exploration. He thought the space program had resulted in a superior educational system, increased industrial competence, new products, "and if it hasn’t done anything else it has taught us to manage” vast undertakings. (Clark, NYT, 12/16/66, 21)
Senegalese President Leopold Sedar Senghor, speaking at a press conference in Dakar, criticized the wealthy nations for spending money on space programs and abandoning the world’s poor. He said that was the reason he had never cabled congratulations to heads of state for their countries’ space exploits. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 4/7/66)
nasa Assistant Administrator Breene M. Kerr presented a charter to the recently formed Northern Alabama Chapter of the American Society for Public Administration. Kerr announced nasa Administrator James E. Webb had been elected to succeed Harlan Cleveland as president-elect of ASPA. Cleveland had resigned when appointed ambassador to NATO. (Marshall Star, 1/26/66, 1)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) Secretary-General Renzo di Carrobio, addressing members of "Britain in Europe” committee in London, contrasted "present hesitancy” on space programs in Europe with positive U.S. position. Americans, Carrobio said, were aware of economic benefits from technological applications of space research and were "making great efforts to ensure that the spin-off from their heavy investment in space research is put to good use in the industrial sector.” He noted that U.S. $5-billion space budget meant $26 per capita annual expenditure, while Europe spent $200 million annually or $1.15 per person. (Science, 3/18/66, 1372-4)
Five leading European aerospace companies announced formation of consortium to seek European space contracts. Called the European Satellite Team, group’s major goal was $18-million design and construction contract for Esho’s 800-lb. TD-1 and TD-2 research satellites scheduled for launch by NASA in 1969 and 1970. Consortium was composed of Elliott-Automation, U.K.; Compagnie Francaise Thomson-Houston, France; Fokker, Netherlands; Allmanna Svenska Elektriska, A.B., Sweden; and Fabbrica Italiana Apparecchi Radio, Italy. General Electric Co.’s Missile and Space Div. would serve as consultant. (Wil-ford, NYT, 7/13/66; Chic. Trib., 7/13/66) July 12-13; NASA launched five Nike-Apache sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station between 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. edt. Each rocket was programed to eject a vapor cloud of reddish or bluish color as its altitude increased from 50 to 125 mi. Experiments were to measure wind velocities and directions at various altitudes; motion of the trails was photographed from five camera sites within a 100-mi. radius of Wallops. Launches were conducted for gca Corp., under contract to GSFC. (NASA Release 66-181; Wallops Release 66-38)
Research by NASA and Air Transport Assn, indicated that wet-pavement skidding by aircraft could be substantially reduced by cutting 34s' to M-in.-deep grooves one to two inches apart in runways. Test runways would be equipped with grooves at cost of $70,000 by early 1967 for further experimentation. (Hudson, NYT, 8/14/66, 90; upi, Chic. Trib., 8/15/66) Spacecraft’s cameras had exposed 211 dual frames of film to photograph nine potential Apollo and Surveyor landing sites during mission’s photo acquisition phase, announced complete on Aug. 30. Readout was expected to be completed by Sept. 15. Medium-resolution camera returned good images; however, except for an excellent photo of moon’s far side, all exposures made with the high-resolution camera were disappointing. Camera’s malfunction was attributed Aug. 25 to spurious signal generated by spacecraft’s film transfer motor at 31-mi. perilune. Signal was tripping high-resolution camera shutter and causing film smear; lunar orbiter i’s perilune was lowered to 23 mi. (37 km.) to eliminate signal. Unprogramed photograph of earth, commanded Aug. 23 and received at NASA’s tracking station at Robledo de Chavela, Spain, Aug. 25, showed appearance of earth’s terminator—line dividing sunlit and shadowed portion of planet—from distance of about 240,000 mi. (386,400 km.). Spacecraft also photographed surveyor i landing site. (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Releases 66-228, 66-230, 66-233; Wilford, NYT, 8/15/66,1, 23; 8/16/66,15; 8/19/66,1; 8/20/66, 8; 8/21/66,1; 8/22/ 66, 8; AP, NYT, 8/24/66, 15; NYT, 8/25/66, A5; 8/26/66, 13; AP, NYT, 9/1/66, 2; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 8/15/66, Al, A13; 8/19/66, Al; 8/20/66, Al; 8/21/66, Al; AP, Balt. Sun, 8/18/66; Av. Wk, 8/29/66, 18) .
President Johnson said at news conference at Texas White House that there would be $60-million program reduction in NASA FY 1967 budget requiring some contract cancellations. About $30 million in expenditures was involved. Asked if changes in the NASA budget would cause postponement of target dates for any of the space programs, Johnson said: ". . . $30-million out of some several billion dollars wouldn’t cause a change in the target date of the moon schedule, if you are talking about that.” (Pres. Doc., 12/S/66, 1741; Transcript, NYT, 11/30/66, 18)
Astronaut David R. Scott would attempt—during about 90 min. outside earth-orbiting Gemini 8 spacecraft—to crawl about using hand holds, move through space using a maneuvering gun with nine times the capability of that used by Astronaut Edward H. White II, and unscrew bolts at small mechanic’s station on the spacecraft, NASA announced at msc news conference. Gemini VIII mission, designed to test man’s ability to maneuver in space and the first rendezvous and docking mission, would take place before the end of the first quarter of 1966. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager, said "the main significance of the mechanical work is that he [Scott] will be evaluating a tool that is specifically designed for space.” The special tool contained a motor to eliminate need for twisting motion by the astronaut that would swing his body around when he was weightless. Target for the rendezvous and docking—Gatv or Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda)—had not been chosen. (AP, NYT, 1/17/66, 12) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Office, said in an interview in Houston that the U.S. would achieve its goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth before the end of this decade: "No new inventions are needed. No breakthrough is needed. This certainly doesn’t mean that it is going to be easy. It is not going to be, but the technology needed to do the job is known now.” He stressed that the pace that had been set would have to be maintained until the goal was achieved. (Maloney, Houston Post, 1/16/66)
Trendex poll indicated favorable attitude toward nasa’s Project Apollo had increased 13% over past three years; negative attitude had decreased 40%. Sentiment to speed up program was greater than to slow down, but majority of respondents were content with present progress. While there was evidence of some increase in desire to reduce expenditures on space program, this attitude was in line with public’s increasing concern with governmental expenditures of all kinds because of the defense buildup. Public appeared receptive to news and information of further space programs and plans. (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told press conference in New York that U.S.S.R. had "a better chance now than two years ago” to land a man on the moon before the U.S. Basing his view on the Soviet lead in payload-orbiting capability, Webb said: "They have been launching and recovering 10,000-pound spacecraft for four years. You cannot work in space without large boosters.” He suggested that the 10-mo. period of Soviet inactivity in manned space flight would end "very soon.” (Loory, NYT, 10/11/66)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a letter to msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun that after "careful review” he had approved an agreement between msfc and Lodge 1858, American Federation of Government Employees (afl-cio). Mr. Webb noted that agreement, negotiated after msfc employee vote May 19, 1965, for afge representation, was "a forward step in the nasa Employee-Management Cooperation Program.” (Marshall Star, 2/2/66, 1-2)
Commenting on success of Project Gemini in developing techniques and experience vital for manned lunar landing, William J. Coughlin said in Technology Week: "Gemini technology will ... be applied to the manned scientific space stations still to come. This fanning out of technology from the direct-line effort to effect a manned lunar landing is a dramatic demonstration of the rapid maturing of the national space program.” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 50)
Apparent inactivity in Soviet manned space program might reflect "growing dismay over the tremendously high cost of astronautics where men are involved,” wrote William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. "The Russians may feel they have better things to do with their money, just as the United States would have if the Kennedy 'moon message’ of 1961 had not been hung like an albatross around the national neck as a commitment involving American prestige before the world.” Cost of Project Gemini was about $700,000 per man hour. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66, A12)
Data from onboard cameras and other recovered instruments had confirmed success of NASA’s first high-altitude experiment to investigate parachute designs and techniques that might be used to land instrumented capsules on Mars. Launched aboard a balloon Aug. 30 from Walker afb, experiment had "provided a solid data base with which we can compare and correlate the results of later flight tests involving parachutes and flight units of different sizes and shapes,” Project Manager John C. McFall reported, (nasa Release 66-241)
zvaa’s Rocketdyne Div. at Edwards afb was struck by afl-cio United Auto Workers in a wage dispute. An estimated half of the 227 workers in UAW bargaining unit stayed off their jobs. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/1/66, A9)	_ During January: Series of tests was being completed by NASA msc’s Landing and Recovery Div. to check out direction and finding equipment for homing an Apollo spacecraft for post-landing location and recovery. Tests were performed off Galveston Island in Gulf of Mexico using Apollo boilerplate spacecraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Apollo Survival Radio transmitting signals. Homing runs were made from altitudes of 28,000 ft. to 500 ft. to determine range of direction finder receiver onboard a usaf HC-130H air rescue aircraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Survival Radio on the spacecraft in the Gulf. Equipment had performed as expected with line-of-sight acquisition of boilerplate Apollo on all homing runs by the aircraft, (msc Roundup, 1/21/66,3) During January: Eulogies for the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, nasa Director of Space Medicine, appeared in Air Force and Space Digest: Walter T. Bonney said of Dr. Dryden: "Hugh Dryden was a deeply religious man. He held that man’s life at its fullest is a trinity of activity, physical, mental, and spiritual. Throughout his life he preached the compatibility of religion and science, and he lived what he preached. No less, he was a realist; and so, as in 1954, he would often remind his listeners that: 'I am not one of those few who believe that we can abolish the use of force in the world. As a nation we find it necessary to build great military power. I am confident that such strength is a greater contribution to the peace of the world ... than military weakness.’ "In 1947, he was called to direct the work of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. His tasks were enormously difficult—radically new and expensive research facilities had to be provided, but even more important, learning the nature of the intricate problems of flight in the new speed ranges and methods for their solution demanded new concepts of team activity and functional coordination. His leadership, disarmingly light and unobtrusive, was amazingly perceptive and effective. Facilities were obtained and changes were made; the period 1947-58 became what might be truly called naca’s golden age. "With establishment of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (of which naca was the nucleus), he undertook the role of scientific leader, reporting to the Administrator, and made of it a position of paramount influence. He rejoiced in the US policy that activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes and worked to promote international space cooperation; but no less, he saw in US exploration of space an activity essential to the strength and security of the nation. As perhaps never before, his great wisdom and his unexcelled mastery of the art of the possible were in those later years valued and used to their fullest.” Editor John Loosbrock said of Dr. Lovelace: "In widening circles, the full import of Randy’s untimely death becomes apparent. The Air Force Association and the Aerospace Education Foundation have lost a distinguished leader. The medical profession is poorer for the passing of a brilliant surgeon, an imaginative ^researcher. The United States Air Force will miss his sound advice and pioneering efforts in the special kind of medical knowledge that is required for those who fly—in air and in space. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration must find new leadership for its space medical effort. The entire nation and the world itself will find that Randy Lovelace’s death leaves a large and well-nigh unfillable niche.” (AF/SD, 1/66) During January: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA Administrator, paid tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, in Applied Mechanics Reviews on Dr. Dryden’s scientific and engineering accomplishments. Dr. Bisplinghoff noted that the naca, under Dr. Dryden’s leadership, "produced a vast body of new knowledge which made possible routine supersonic flight and laid much of the ground for space flight that was to come. We discern here, perhaps as much as any other place, the impact of Dryden’s leadership on the nation’s destiny. The development of high-speed wind-tunnel facilities and a companion competence for theoretical research within the naca contributed, in the opinion of the author, more than any other single factor to the leadership of the United States in supersonic flight. . . .” (AMR, 1/66, 1-5)
B/G J. C. Maxwell (usaf), faa deputy administrator for supersonic development, told a Washington meeting of Aerospace Industries Association’s Public Relations Advisory Committee that total cost of delivering the first American Sst for airline service may exceed four billion dollars. He explained: "The sst program has been, and still remains, a high risk program. That fact, combined with the sheer magnitude of the development cost, is why the Government is participating in the program to develop an aircraft aimed solely at a civil market.” Adding that the cost estimate was "considerably more than the total net worth of the major aircraft manufacturers combined,” Maxwell said: "Our philosophy for financing the sst program beyond the prototype construction and flight test phase is to encourage industry and the financial community to assume as much responsibility and risk as practicable. We eagerly look foward to the day when we can turn the whole program over to private enterprise. Conceivably, this could occur when the prototype has flown and proven out the design. If all goes well—and the work performed by the airframe and engine manufacturers during the past nine months gives us cause for optimism—the sst prototype will take to the air in late 1969 or early in 1970 to begin an intensive period of testing. At about this time, production development will get underway with the first production model rolling off the line early in 1973 followed by type certification and entry into commercial service by 1974.” Although the British-French Concorde was expected to be in airline service by 1971, Maxwell said this three-year timelag would be offset by the U.S. Sst’s advantages: (1) cruising speed of mach 2.7, compared with Concorde’s 2.2; (2) 250-passenger capacity, compared with Concorde’s anticipated 140 passengers; and (3) growth potential of titanium construction contrasted with volume-limited aluminum of Concorde. (Text)
Howard H. Haglund, formerly Deputy Project Manager and Spacecraft System Manager for Surveyor at jpl, had been named Manager of jpl’s Surveyor Project Office. He succeeded Robert J. Parks, who returned to his former position of jpl Assistant Director for Lunar and Planetary Projects, (jpl Release 426) o Efficient management in both industry and Government was the key to a continuing successful space effort, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told the Management Club at Patrick afb. "The space challenge is unique. To face up to its imperatives calls for new ways of doing things. The pacing item is as much managerial competence as it is technology or money. . . . "Under the stress and pressure of getting the job done, there is imposed a harsh necessity which breeds innovation. So long as purposeful men accept such challenges, this nation will flourish and its economic and political systems will continue to lead the way. On the other hand, should we slip into the path of the familiar and decline to accept the challenge of the new, this nation will suffer a grievous loss and so will the peoples throughout the world. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Lee Arnold, chairman of New York Univ.’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and director of Daniel Guggenheim School of Aeronautics, was sworn in as a consultant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb on technology utilization, (nasa Release 66-271)
Speech by Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D-Wisc.) on need for research and development on socioeconomic problems such as transportation, construction, and waste management was inserted in the Congressional Record: "We should not allow heavy concentration of research and development in the three fields of space, defense, and atomic energy to blind us to the potential for research and development in civilian technology. . . . "But much of the growth and success of these three . . . 'giants’ must be explained in terms of the remarkable men associated with them. . . . "We think of Admiral Rickover and the nuclear submarine. Of Jim Webb and the space program. ... Of the personal sponsorship of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson for our manned landing on the moon______” (CR, 3/28/66, 6529)
Siberian-born scientist Mikhail K. Yangel, elected to Communist Party’s Central Committee in April and to Supreme Soviet June 12, had been tentatively identified as new head of U.S.S.R.’s space program. Several other scientists known or believed to be associated with space program had been selected to Supreme Soviet for first time; however, since Yangel was only one also to occupy seat in Central Committee, this was taken as indication he occupied top position. (Shabad, NYT, 6/26/66,
In a White House ceremony, President Johnson awarded the National Medal of Science to 11 scientists, including the late Dr. Hugh L.	Dryden, former nasa Deputy Administrator. Dr. Dryden was cited for his "contributions as an engineer, administrator, and civil servant for one-half century to aeronautics and astronautics which have immeasurably supported the Nation’s preeminence in space.” Mrs. Dryden accepted the medal—first ever awarded posthumously—for her husband. President Johnson told recipients that "in a nation of millions and a world of billions, the individual is still the first and basic agent of change. Without the unfettered curiosity of individual men probing and reaching for new truth our planet would be a dry and dreary place.” {Pres. Doc., 2/14/66; NYT, 2/11/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/11/66, A2; Balt. Sun, 2/11/66)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was presented Gen. Benedict Crowell Gold Medal by American Ordnance Assn.’s Cleveland Post. (Lewis News, 11/10/66, 1)
At msc, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented NASA Exceptional Service Medals to Gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan and to Richard E. Dineen (Col., usaf) who had helped solve problems in the Titan II booster that had launched the spacecraft. Referring to difficulties that occurred during the June 3-6 Gemini ix-a flight, Seamans said: "We know that if we had been a little sharper, if we had worked a little harder, that this would not have happened. ... We are . . . dissatisfied with ourselves when technical and procedural failures keep us from our goals.” He added he had requested review of plans for Gemini X, XI, and XII missions for "tightening up” of procedures. Summarizing Project Gemini’s results to date—"at the three quarter mark”—and forecasting its probable total impact on the space effort, Seamans said: "I am convinced that this program will be completed with far greater return to the nation in scientific information, technology, and operational experience than we had originally set out to accomplish when we began the program in 1961.” {Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; Waldron, NYT, 6/18/66, 10; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/20/66, A10)
Practical dividends from investment in space program were cited by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun in an address at Midwest Space Exposition, Jackson, Mich. In addition to "tangible returns” from advances in navigation, meteorological, and communications satellites, he noted uses of space technology for surveying earth’s resources and suggested ultimate benefits, as yet unpredictable, would "dwarf” those he had named. (Text)
First picture of earth from the vicinity of the moon, taken by NASA’s lunar ORHJTEH I. summer maximum of noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rocket and instrumentation performances were satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. SRL) August 14: The critical voices raised during Aug. 8-9 Senate debate on the NASA portion of the Independent Offices Appropriation bill (H,R. 14921) indicated the U.S. space program was in "political trouble,” concluded New York Times editorial. "Fundamental questions are being asked about whether this country should have gotten involved in the moon race in the first place, and invidious comparisons are being drawn about the dividends from money spent in space and those that might have been realized had those same funds been used to meet urgent human needs. . . . "There are important and useful things to be done in a post-Apollo space program, but it is doubtful in the extreme that the nation should go on indefinitely paying five billion dollars or more annually for such a program....” (NYT, 8/14/66, E10)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed B. L. Dorman, vice president of Aerojet-General Corp., Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, effective Jan. 16, 1967, and Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.) Acting Administrator for Administration, effective Jan. 1, 1967. Both positions were formerly held by William B. Rieke, who resigned to return to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. (nasa Release 66-327)
usaf and NASA signed agreement to establish procedures for joint space program accident investigation. Ad hoc joint boards, consisting of at least three voting members appointed by usaf Director of Aerospace Safety and three by NASA Safety Director, would study particular launch vehicle accidents. Chairman would be from agency with "primary responsibility at time of accident,” determined by circumstances of each case. (Text; nasa nmi 1052.74, 4/27/66) "As it turns out, even the most fantastic thinking 30 years ago has proved to be very conservative. We have already flown planes like the SR-71 at speeds greater than mach 3 for extended periods. The experimental X-15 has flown at mach 6 and reached altitudes of over 50 miles. Our long-range ballistic missiles have ranges of from 5,000 to 9,000 miles. And our Mercury and Gemini astronauts have sped through space for extended periods at speeds better than 17,000 miles per hour. With the Apollo program we are not too many years away from landing a man on the moon.” (Text) Entertainer Bob Hope presented General Schriever the inaugural award of Arnold Air Society’s Eugene M. Zuckert Trophy "to recognize and stimulate the growth of professionalism in the United States Air Force.” General Schriever was cited for his "outstanding dedication to the task of insuring the development of vitally needed modern weaponry for national defense” and the gathering of "highly qualified technological management teams required to perform this task.” (afsc Release 74.66)
AiAA-sponsored tour of European aerospace companies began in Paris with briefing arranged by Eurospace, the Council of European Industrial Groups, aiaa President Raymond L. Bisplinghoff led the combined tour, which then broke into three groups for visits to facilities in France, U.K., Belgium, the Netherlands, West Germany, and Italy. In a welcoming address in Paris, Eurospace President Jean Delorme said his group would (1) urge establishment of a "European Space Authority” modeled after esro, (2) encourage greater national investment in cooperative r&d progress, and (3) point out discrepancy between Europe’s high economic potential and low investment in aerospace R&D. (Newbauer and Hersey, A&A, 1/67, 46-56)
NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said NASA would request $6 billion for FY 1968, including $900 million for Apollo Applications and $100 million for Voyager, Aviation Week reported. Seamans’ statement that "Apollo Applications will fill the post-Apollo gap and that there is no need to define another goal now” was said to conflict with the recent contention of Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, that a clear definition of the Nation’s post-Apollo goal was necessary. (Av. Wk., 5/9/66, 25)
Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman and his family were welcomed by a parade in their hometown of Tucson, Ariz. Borman, who was given the keys to the city and told that a $300,000 planetarium would be built in his honor, was also praised in a special resolution passed unanimously by the Arizona legislature. He told a press conference he had joined the space program to go to the moon and "that’s what I want to do.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 1/9/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/11/66)
NASA awarded Univac $30-million, five-year contract to provide "new computing system” for msfc beginning in 1967. Computer Sciences Corp. was selected to provide support services for msfc Computation Lab. under $5.5-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract with provisions for four one-year extensions. Services would include computer operation, maintenance, and programing, (nasa Releases 66-164, 165)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told Clear Lake (Tex.) Chamber of Commerce that he foresaw no curtailment of space program because of Vietnam war. If there were curtailment, "it will be aimed at all Government programs.” (Amerine, Houston Chron., 10/21/66)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was elected to National Geographic Society’s board of trustees. (NYT, 4/8/66, 3)
Apollo Command Module (Cm) hardware could be recovered and refurbished for use on extended earth-orbital missions and long stays on the lunar surface, North American Aviation, Inc., Vice President Dr. John McCarthy suggested at aiaa-aas Forum discussing "After Apollo— What Next?” in Washington, D.C. "Such refurbished hardware could be available within 18 months at no interference to the lunar landing program and would permit the gathering of vital data and experience for the more difficult task of exploring the planets,” Dr. McCarthy said. He recommended an integrated space program which would include developing one advanced earth reentry module, single basic laboratory module, and modular launch vehicle system; he emphasized the need to determine the Nation’s 10-yr. space objectives "as soon as possible.” (Text)
Reporting on a January Thiokol Chemical Corp.-sponsored Trendex poll on public opinion of the U.S. space program, William Coughlin wrote in Missiles and Rockets: "Some 77% of those interviewed now favor the program as against only 20% opposed to it. This is a dramatic gain from 1963, when only 59% were in favor of the lunar landing and 39% were opposed. . .. "In the four cities in which the latest poll was conducted—Cincinnati, Syracuse, Pasadena and Des Moines—the public appears to be far ahead of the Administration in its assessment of the importance of military space. The response was: defense and security, 38%; scientific and non-military benefit, 35%; and opportunities for economic growth and employment, 18%.” (Coughlin, M&R, 3/21/66, 46)
One of the world’s largest and most sensitive automatic space tracking and telemetry antennas was officially dedicated at Goldstone, Calif. Newest facility in nasa’s Deep Space Network (dsn), 210-ft. dish antenna was U.S.’s largest fully steerable antenna and world’s largest built for research by spacecraft. Operated by jpl, $14-million antenna would be used to track future Mariners and other spacecraft to Mars, Venus, and even Pluto on the outer reaches of the solar system. Dedication ceremonies, hosted by jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, included addresses by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), chairman of Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of Science and Astronautics Committee. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, also participated, (nasa Release 66-88; msc Roundup, 4/29/66)
V/Adm. Rufus E. Rose (usn, Ret.) resigned as special assistant on policy studies and analyses to nasa Administrator James E. Webb to become an assistant to the president of Allied Research Associates, Inc. Admiral Rose, who joined nasa in 1964 after 44 years usn service, would be involved with "planning, organization, management, and overseas operation” at Allied, (nasa Release 66-148; Marshall Star, 6/22/66,3)
Deactivation of Gemini launch pad at etr’s Complex 19 began. Equipment that could be used in other space programs would be salvaged; other components would be reduced to scrap. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/13/66, A6)
Editorial on five years of "outstanding service” by nasa Administrator James E. Webb appeared in Technology Week: ". . . it is time to state . . . our belief that Mr. James E. Webb has done an outstanding job as nasa Administrator. He has presided over an explosive growth of the agency which would have overwhelmed a less capable administrator; he has met and solved some exceedingly thorny management problems; he has dealt effectively with some of the world’s most temperamental scientists; he has successfully steered the space agency’s budget through the perils of both Administration and Congressional financing; he has given the space program a nationwide base of facilities and political strength; and, most important of all, he has forged a team which is writing an unparalleled record of technical accomplishment. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk, 7/25/66, 152)
