NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced resignation of Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., effective Jan. 5,1968. “Dr. Seamans joined the government with a commitment to serve two years, but . . . served seven years . . . [and] has now decided to return to private life,” Webb said. “His departure will leave a wide gap [in NASA leadership].” A former mit aeronautical engineering professor, RCA engineer, and member of naca technical committees, Dr. Seamans joined NASA in 1960 as Associate Administrator. In 1965 he was appointed Deputy Administrator and was presented NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, for distinguished service to U.S., outstanding leadership of NASA, and “ability to bring together into a framework of effective action thousands of industrial organizations, tens of thousands of scientists and engineers, and hundreds of thousands of aerospace workers.” He had also received Naval Ordnance Development Award (1945); aiaa Lawrence Sperry Award (1961); and Godfrey L. Cabot Aviation Award (1965). (nasa Release 67-257; O’Toole, W Post, 10/3/67, A3)
First Saturn V booster was moved to its launch pad on a crawler-transporter from ksc’s Vehicle Assembly Building. Three and one half mile trip took about 10 hrs. The 364-ft tall booster would undergo at least six weeks of additional testing at the pad before being used to launch unmanned Apollo 4 mission, tentatively scheduled for October. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) told newsmen at KSC that the movement of the Saturn V was an important milestone in the Apollo program. He predicted that, barring any maj or problems, U.S. could still achieve its goal of landing a man on the moon in 1969. He warned, however, that “it’s a long way to the moon and we have a maj or j ob ahead. Dangers go with this business. We’ve done everything we can to improve the equipment. But, remember, we’re treading on new ground and it’s a risky business. We feel we can overcome the risk and make it work.” (NASA Release 67-219; AP, W Star, 8/27/67, A3; NYT, 8/27/67,1,29; W Post, 8/27/67,1)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller testified on Apollo project reprogramming before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. First “man-rated” Apollo Block II spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in late 1967 and launched three months later with Walter M. Schirra, Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele as prime crew, Webb said. Back-up crew would be Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Ceman. Spacecraft would still have 100%-oxygen atmosphere, but use of noncombustible and fire-resistant materials would minimize fire hazard, he asserted. “We are confident that the results of the first Block II Apollo flights will justify moving rapidly to follow-on flights, thus overcoming some of the effects of the present delay ... [so that] we can carry out this plan within the funds now available for fiscal year 1967 and in NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1968.” In order to “assure maximum progress” and reduce pressures on North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, nasa was realigning its contracting arrangements, Webb said. Contracting changes included: negotiation of a new strong-incentive contract with naa for manufacture, test, and delivery of standard Block II spacecraft; extension of Boeing Co.’s present contract responsibility to include integration of command and service module and lunar module with the Saturn booster system; selection of a third contractor to make necessary modifications to standard Apollo spacecraft produced by NAA; and consideration of offers by other aerospace companies to provide contractor assistance in Apollo systems management and check-out and test procedures. Dr. Seamans described impact of Jan. 27 fire on Apollo schedule and budget. Lunar landing before 1970 “remains possible,” he said. “The impact . . . has been to reduce that probability, not eliminate it. . . . After the first manned Block II flight on the uprated Saturn I in 1968, we plan three to four manned Saturn V missions . . . [and] in 1969 ... up to six Saturn V missions.” Resulting $75 million of additional costs through FY 1968—for materials and equipment changes, flammability testing, launch facility modifications, and spacecraft delivery rescheduling—would be absorbed within the total budget plan currently before Congress. NASA’s responses to recommendations by Apollo 204 Review Board were outlined by Dr. Mueller: (1) bulk combustibles and other flammable materials had been replaced with flame-resistant materials, and necessary flammables stored in fireproof containers; (2) emergency procedures would be reviewed and exercised prior to each hazardous operation, and a quick-opening hatch installed for simplified egress from capsule; (3) new NASA Office of Flight Safety would be established under omsf to review and evaluate safety provisions and monitor test operations; (4) all emergency equipment had been reviewed and additions or substitutions—including installation of water fire extinguishers—made where necessary; (5) detailed design review of spacecraft communications system had been conducted and minor changes made to assure reliable operation; (6) full-scale mockup tests had been conducted to assess fire hazard and problems of gas detection and control; and (7) management and organizational changes had been instituted to clarify responsibilities and improve coordination between NASA centers and contractors. In response to questions by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) regarding rating of companies in the 1961 Apollo spacecraft contract competition, Webb said that Martin Co. had been rated first, on the basis of its technical proposal, by the source evaluation board. However he, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans—considering other factors such as lower cost estimate, outstanding company performance record, overall capability offered, and experience with X—15 experimental aircraft— chose NAA as prime candidate. Senator Smith expressed concern that the Committee was not kept informed of serious problems revealed in the Phillips Report and asked whether NASA followed any guidelines to determine when situations should be brought to the attention of the Committee. Webb replied that no such guidelines existed and indicated that he thought it unnecessary to detail the problems to the Committee since he thought that NASA could control them. Several other committee members also expressed their desire to be informed of any problems approaching the magnitude of those surrounding the Phillips Report. When Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) continued to criticize NASA’s reluctance to make the report public, Webb offered to discuss it, in complete context, in executive session, and repeated his objection to releasing such evaluations of contractor performance out of context. (Testimony; SBD, 5/10/67, 57-66; O’Toole, W Post, 5/10/67, Al)
Five NASA officials were among 45 young business and Government executives from U.S. and abroad selected to receive mit’s 1967-68 Alfred P. Sloan Fellowships for one year of study at mit’s Sloan School of Management “to accelerate their development into positions of major executive responsibilities. . . .” NASA recipients: R. Bryan Erb, Assistant Chief, Structures and Mechanics Div., msc; Robert H. Kirby, Jr., Flight Mechanics and Technology Div., Lane; Calvin K. Perrine, Jr., Assistant Chief, Mission Operations Div., Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, msc ; Robert J. Schwinghamer, Technical Assistant to Director of Manufacturing and Engineering Laboratory, MSFC; and William E. Scott, Deputy Chief, Research Div., Office of University Affairs, NASA Hq. (nasa Release 67—104)
NASA established Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to review safety studies and operations plans, report on them to the NASA Administrator and advise him of any hazard in facilities and proposed operations, and perform other duties. Panel of chairman, vice chairman, and seven other members would review, evaluate, and advise on all elements of NASA’s safety program, (nmi-1156.14)
NASA announced personnel changes, effective Jan. 1, 1968. Adm. W. F. Boone (usn, Ret.), Assistant Administrator for Defense Affairs, would retire after five years of service with NASA. He would continue to serve as a part-time consultant. Functions of Admiral Boone’s office would be included in new Office of Department of Defense and Interagency Affairs, headed by Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf,Ret.). Gen. Smart, Assistant Administrator for Policy, would be replaced by Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, who would also continue as a Special Assistant to the nasa Administrator on aerospace safety. NASA Administrator James E. Webb, expressing his appreciation for Admiral Boone’s service, praised the “effective cooperation developed between [dod] and NASA in the .. . buildup ... of large launch vehicles and spacecraft required for a lunar landing and exploration ... in large measure due to [his] leadership. . . .” (NASA Release 67-314)
North American Aviation, Inc., President J. Leland Atwood assured the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that naa was making numerous technical, inspection, and management changes that would enable U.S. to “effectively accomplish the lunar mission in this decade.” He accepted naa’s share of responsibility for Jan. 27 Apollo fire but urged the Committee to view the deficiencies cited by Apollo 204 Review Board [see April 9] in the perspective of the standards involved. “... it must be recognized that in space work the standards are and must be extremely high. Literally perfection is the goal.” Noting that many of the problems in naa’s management of the Apollo program had resulted from “a rapid build-up in manpower . . . encountered in almost all large, complex developmental programs,” Atwood explained that the survey of naa workmanship summarized in the Phillips Report [see April 18] had been conducted during time when these problems were reaching their peak. Thus the report did not truly represent overall naa performance “but reflected the fact that the [Apollo] mission criteria had been evolving towards their final form.” Atwood stressed, however, that General Phillips’ recommendations had been accepted and corrected to NASA’s “general satisfaction” by April 1966. To further improve Apollo program progress, Atwood said, he and NASA Administrator James E. Webb had reviewed “the overall working relationship” between naa and NASA. As a result of this review efforts would be made to (1) improve coordination of management effectiveness and program control; (2) establish clearer and more specific objectives and measurement techniques for program performance; (3) conduct more periodic surveys and audits of program progress and performance; and (4) include sharper incentives and penalties in contract relationships. Only major changes in Apollo spacecraft would be incorporation of a quick-opening hatch and installation of additional insulation for interior wiring and tubing. (Hines, W Star, 5/4/67, 2; Wilford, NYT, 5/5/67,19; SBD, 5/5/67, 33^)
Acting Under Secretary of Commerce Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, in testimony before Senate Commerce Committee and Committee on Public Works’ Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution, recommended against direct Federal support of an electric car “at this time.” He urged instead a program to reward the “best designs of low-pollutant vehicles by basing Government purchase on performance competition. ... If electric vehicles can compete successfully ... a market could be made available on which production facilities and schedules could be based. . . .” (Testimony, 9, 11) Arthur C. Clarke, author and past president of British Interplanetary Society, chided critics of space program expenditures because “ ‘there is so much to do on earth.’ . . . There was plenty to do in Europe when Columbus left—there’s still plenty to do there. But the opening up of the new world did more to revive the stagnant European culture and economy than an internal action could possibly have done. “. . . I welcome the so-called space race, despite the multiplication of cost and human effort that it involves. If we weren’t racing, we wouldn’t be moving quickly enough. . . .” (Text) Mariner spacecraft would be increasingly useful in returning scientific data from the planets, JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering predicted. He noted launch opportunities during 1970’s in which Mariner-type spacecraft could be flown to more than one planet in series of gravity-assist missions and said 1970-6 period offered several favorable opportunities for closeup study of the comets by Mariner-type spacecraft carrying up to 150 lbs of scientific instruments. (Text) GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark, discussing possible first mission configuration for a Galactic Jupiter probe, said an initial flight could probably be launched during a 20-day launch window centered on first week of March 1972. Planetary encounter would occur between 17 and 20 mos after launch. (Text) Sterilization of lander and surface laboratory constituted “the most difficult technological task” of NASA’s Voyager program to explore Mars and Venus with automated spacecraft during 1970’s, Edgar M. Cort-right, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the meeting. The most difficult scientific task vas developing an effective integrated set of biological experiments. (Text) Exploration of the planets would contribute to, not detract from, man’s ability to meet problems on earth, Dr. Charles Sheldon II, Library of Congress, suggested. “Also one has the right to hope that even if elements of past history repeat in new forms, mankind with a shrinking world and shrinking solar system, and with a greater awareness of his place within the scheme of things will divert his restless energies and struggles to overcoming the space frontiers rather than wasting his talents and his treasures in fratricidal war. . . .” (Text) U.S. had achieved world leadership in the technology of space exploration, but that leadership was relative and by no means conclusive, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) asserted. “The challenge is no less great now than it was in 1957 when Sputnik I jolted us out of the narcosis of complacency. To our peril, we cannot allow the transient pressures and strains of American life to vitiate our determination to maintain that leadership. At the same time we cannot ignore or overlook any opportunity to reach a rapport and an understanding with Russia that will be of material assistance in making the exploration of space for peaceful purposes truly a monumental achievement of all mankind.” (Text) March 15: NASA and West Germany’s Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) signed Memorandum of Understanding for study of electric fields in the upper atmosphere. NASA would furnish five Nike-Apache sounding rockets for launch from esro facilities at Kiruna, Sweden, beginning in April. Rockets would release barium clouds, particularly in the auroras, to be observed from the ground, bmwf would provide chemical payloads and ground observation equipment and would conduct launchings in cooperation with esro and Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) . Both NASA and bmwf would bear cost of their respective responsibilities. Results would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 67-57)
Report by nrc Space Science Board on the concept of orbiting large reflecting mirrors concluded that there was no overwhelming evidence that scientific damage would result from the deployment of a single reflector system. It recommended, however, that such a satellite not he considered in the future unless the ability to destroy it by ground signals were an inherent part of the design and unless detailed studies of its effects on ecology, biology, and astronomy were previously conducted and made public. It said it could see no scientific merit for such a satellite system commensurate with its cost to the public and its nuisance to science. Report was prepared by Board’s Committee on Potential Contamination and Interference from Satellites as a result of NASA’s 1966 announcement that it had asked five aerospace companies to study feasibility of orbiting large reflecting mirrors that could illuminate land masses at night. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, confirmed in a letter to nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz that the Government no longer had plans for such a project. (NAS—NRC—NAE News Report, 5/67, 2) 0 National Academy of Sciences Panel on Applied Science and Technological Progress had concluded that the “most important invention in the pursuit of modem . . . applied science is the big mission-oriented industrial or Government laboratory,” and had underlined importance of a symbiosis between mission-oriented institution and university. Panel’s report, forwarded to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also recognized Government’s special responsibility for integrity and sufficiency of man’s environment and for dealing with national and regional social questions. It urged adaptability of large, interdisciplinary Government laboratories to new national problem areas. (Text)
NASA’s Mariner V would fly within 2,500 mi of planet Venus at 1.34 pm edt, Oct. 19, at communications (direct) distance of about 49 million mi from earth, NASA announced. Launched from etr June 14, spacecraft would have traveled about 217 million mi in its arching trajectory. Scientists and engineers hoped their instruments would record precise data on planet’s atmosphere, ionosphere, temperatures, and perhaps even surface qualities. As Mariner V approached Venus, its scientific instruments would begin measuring planet’s magnetic field, charged particles, gases present in upper atmosphere, and radiation levels. Spacecraft’s flight path would curve behind Venus and would vanish from view of tracking stations on earth. Just before spacecraft went behind planet (as seen from earth) its radio signals would pass through atmosphere of Venus. Effect of Venusian atmosphere on Mariner Vs radio signals would be measured, thereby providing measure of density of planet’s atmosphere. Current scientific theory on density ranged from five times earth’s atmosphere to several hundred times. Density measurement by occultation was one of prime objectives of spacecraft’s flight. Since launch of spacecraft, engineering and science subsystems had performed as planned. Master timer had-commanded Canopus cone angle update as scheduled on Aug. 24, Sept. 10, Sept. 26, and Oct. 10; timer had also commanded spacecraft transmitter to switch to high-gain antenna on Oct. 2. Encounter sequence would be initiated by command from dsn station in Australia, at 10:49 pm edt, Oct. 18. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 67-260, 67-267)
NASA awarded General Dynamics Corp. a one-year, $21.1-million, costplus-award-fee contract to provide management and engineering services for Centaur launch vehicle, ending Sept. 30, 1968. This vehicle had been used successfully to launch six Surveyor spacecraft and would continue in use for lunar and planetary as well as earth orbital missions. LeRC was Centaur project manager. (LeRC Release 67—72)
NASA established the NASA Lunar and Planetary Missions Advisory Board to “ . . . develop and review . . . scientific objectives and general strategy for manned and unmanned lunar and planetary missions [and to formulate] guidelines and specific recommendations for the design of missions and for the scientific payloads. . . The Board would have a close working relationship with all senior NASA officials involved in lunar and planetary exploration and would work “. . . through the Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications.” (nmi-1156.12)
Detailed information on French space budget for 1968, expected to be approved soon by National Assembly, was reported to total $141 million, increased about $36 million over 1967 budget. It would include $121.5 million for research and operations and $19.3 million for facilities and administration under spending plan being developed by Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). Research and operations funds would be divided, $87.8 million for French programs and $33.7 million for ELDO and ESRO projects. About $1 million also had been allocated for bilateral space research projects outside eldo and ESRO. Major items of budget included: development costs for eldo Europa l/PAS launch vehicle and Diamant B launch vehicle; R&d costs for two Roseau radio observatory satellites (scheduled for U.S.S.R. launch in 1971); planning costs for two Symphonie communications satellites (joint French-West German venture with one spacecraft structure group and two avionics groups to be chosen from competing groups in both countries); construction costs for Kourou launch complex in French Guiana; and partial costs of new Toulouse complex for satellite development and balloon sounding projects. Budget also contained funds for future studies for second phase of France’s space program, according to ones officials. French fifth financial plan committed about $408 million in 1965 for the first phase through 1969. (Fink, Av Wk, 11/6/67,24)
President Johnson submitted to Congress nasa’s 15th Semiannual Report, covering January to June 1966, and praised the continued progress of U.S. space program: “The achievements reported here reflect not only our progress in space flight, but also new steps taken toward the real objective of all our efforts in space—the application of new knowledge to bettering the lives of all people. Already, we see dramatic examples of success in the satellites which have improved our weather forecasts and navigation, and which are extending radio and television communication to the farthermost regions of the earth. . . . “The United States space program, as reflected in this report, continues to exemplify our Nation’s conviction that the road to peace, progress, and abundance is through continued cooperation among all nations.” (PD, 5/15/67,729-30)	_
Group of NASA officials, headed by MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, arrived at McMurdo Station in the Antarctic beginning 10-day expedition to observe environmental conditions—including temperatures, isolation factors, and survival techniques—for comparison and possible application to problems of space flight, (msc Roundup; NYT, 1/4/67,10; AP, W Post, 12/22/67, A21)
usaf Space and Missiles Systems Div. had awarded a contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., for $1.2 million for Agena launch services at Vandenberg afb Oct. 1, 1967, through Sept. 30, 1968. (dod Release 896-67) Detailing systems engineering activities of U.S. manned space flight program, nasa Saturn Apollo Applications Director Charles W. Mathews said that efforts had encompassed three flight systems—Mercury, Gemini, 324-801 0—69and Apollo—and included many other aspects, worldwide instrumentation and communications networks, control centers, recovery support elements, and scientific and technical experimental equipment. Thus, systems engineering had had to be all inclusive in providing for logical development of flight hardware, successful conduct of flight operations, and achievement of maximum benefits from each mission. (Text) T. J. Gordon, L. M. Dicke, and J. S. Nieroski of McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. (mssd) presented “Economics of Commercial Space Stations.” Space station would pay its own way by taking a share of increased customer profits. According to mssd representatives, customers would be “those enterprises who, by virtue of their use of the orbital services, can offer new or higher quality profits or services, or lower operating costs for existing products or services.” Possible space station uses were described as locating fish, reducing ocean shipping transit time and hazards, locating petroleum and mineral reserves, controlling and routing air traffic, reducing air and water pollution by detecting sources, improving fresh water reserves by surveying sources, and improving agricultural and forest productivity by use of detectors of disease, damage, and other factors. (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 11/25/67, 9) Soviet Academician L. I. Sedov described “Ten Years of Space Exploration in the Soviet Union” and said: “Cosmic systems have become necessary not only for the study of fundamental problems of physics and the Universe, but also for various practical purposes of importance to national economies [and] there is no doubt that cooperation will favourably affect many sides of international life. We hope that this cooperation and its benefits will grow deeper in the future.” (Text) Worldwide cooperation in space was urged by msfc’s former advanced mission planner, Dr. H. H. Koelle, now professor of space technology at Technical Univ. of Berlin. To get around tremendous costs and avoid reduction in space activity in all countries, he urged “international organizations to plan and coordinate advanced manned missions in the 1980s.” He said space powers should begin by increasing coordination of mission objectives in their national space programs. For a cooperative concept, he called for annual investment of $4 billion and work force of 350,000 persons, with 200,000 persons from U.S., 60,000 from U.S.S.R., 60,000 from Western Europe, and 30,000 from rest of world. (Fink, Av Wk, 10/2/67, 21-2; Van Osten, Aero Tech, 10/9/67, 43-7)
NASA awarded contracts: (1) IT&T Federal Electric Corp. received a $4.6-million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for logistical and technical information support services at msc; (2) IBM Federal Systems Div. was selected for negotiations on a three-month, $998,000 contract extension for computer programming and engineering support services at GSFc’s Real Time Computer Complex (rtcc) ; and (3) Bendix Corp. was selected for negotiation of a $4,500,000, 18-mo, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for “design, development, qualification, and delivery of long-duration cryogenic gas storage tanks” for first 56-day manned Apollo Applications (aa) flight. Bendix contract award would not be made until NASA’s FY 1968 appropriation and expenditure levels were established, (nasa Releases 67-269, 67-270, 67-271)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) introduced in the House H.R. 8145, a bill to establish Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to “provide the [nasa] Administrator with independent advice and assistance in safety matters, regardless of operational ‘commitments’ or budgetary considerations. Regardless of the outcome of the current [Apollo accident] investigation . . . the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s . . . safety practices need strengthening. Based on NASA statements and . . . [FT 1968] testimony . . . the area of greatest weakness appears to be in the lack of a truly independent review of NASA’s facilities, operations, and procedures solely from the viewpoint of safety.” (CR, 4/6/67, H3657; nasa lar VI/39)
Recent cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget were due in part to lack of Congressional understanding of the U.S. space program, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told aiaa’s Joint Propulsion Conference in Washington, D.C. “Many members of the Congress understand” certain areas of the space program, but “not enough of our legislators seem to have sufficient comprehension of the vast benefits flowing from space activities. And if many members of Congress and very many of their constituents don’t know about these benefits, then they may well feel j ustified in cutting back on the amount of money to be spent. . . .” To help increase understanding, Dr. Welsh recommended that the space industry avoid “confining their advertising to superlatives” about prod. ucts and communicate the overall benefits of the space program. (Text)
Impact of Jan. 27 Apollo accident on Apollo program schedule was discussed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “We will include in our schedules the time necessary to conduct a thorough program of reverification and requalification of changes . . . based on what we have learned from the AS-204 accident. . . . Our policy of full qualification prior to manned flight will remain unchanged. “I do believe we still have a reasonable possibility of meeting the major milestones for the Apollo program which were established in 1963. In particular, although the probability is lowered, I believe we will be able to land men on the moon and return them safely to earth before 1970.” Asked about a manned lunar landing in 1968, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, who accompanied Dr. Mueller, replied that it was “not impossible, but almost impossible.” (Testimony; Transcript, 286)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences had defaulted on their responsibility to report to the American public about the Congressional hearings which had been held on the Jan. 27 Apollo accident. In a statement inserted in the Congressional Record, Rep. Ryan said that since Congress seemed reluctant “to face some unpleasant truths and to ask some hard ques-. tions that need to be asked,” he had prepared his own report based on the hearings and on the hundreds of letters, documents, and personal commentaries he had received. Much of this correspondence, he said, which cited deficiencies and negligence which were both intentionally ignored and unintentionally overlooked, was made in confidence for fear of reprisals by NASA or NASA-contractor employers. Rep. Ryan concluded that Congress overfunded and underexamined the validity of major technological programs and the success and integrity of their administration. Having an excellent space program, he said, “is essential both to our pride and to our progress . . . [but] it is essential as well that we throw off the shackles of the space race and declare our intention to make rational plans designed to meet the needs of America not distorted by the conceptions and value judgments of another nation. It is essential that we examine our national priorities with the utmost care and make certain that the space program is neither made a handy villain by its critics nor a handy saviour by its spokesmen. We must establish reliability and make a sober and objective appraisal of the space program’s role in our society.” Congress, he asserted, ought to: (1) demand that NASA adopt new standards of candor, present regular status reports, and clarify its budget presentations, and that a panel of independent experts be created to provide objective technical evaluation of NASA management and planning procedures; (2) relinquish romanticism and evaluate each program in terms of specific objectives and social value; (3) revise its attitudes about hearings on the space program, being sure to call both friendly and hostile witnesses; and (4) establish a realistic view so that the space program could be assigned its proper place in national priorities and receive whatever funds necessary. (CR, 12/18/67, A6320-9; Ryan’s Off)
Latest Harris poll indicated American people, by 54%-to-34% margin, did not believe U.S. space program was worth an annual $4-billion expenditure. By 60%-to-30%, public would oppose continuing program at present rate of expenditure if U.S.S.R. were not active in space. People were divided sharply by income and age: (1) low-income persons opposed Apollo manned lunar landing program by almost three-to-one, while upper income favored it by nearly two-to-one; (2) 62% of persons over 50 opposed program, while 58% under 35 favored it. A 1965 poll had showed public supporting space program by 45%-to-42% margin. {WPost, 7/31/67, A2)
Congressional cuts in nasa’s FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296) indicated that a new era was beginning for NASA and the U.S. space program, Robert Hotz suggested in Aviation Week editorial. “We do not think it was the intent of this Congress to either repudiate or emasculate the U.S. national space program. We think it was the aim of these legislators to mark the end of the era when NASA got everything it wanted simply because it asked for it in a strident and persistent voice. We think it was also the goal of Congress to put the national space program in a better perspective in relation to such other high-priority problems as the Southeast Asia war and the urban riots. . . .” Hotz predicted that the future of the space program as a valid, continuing national goal “will depend in the long run on the successful development of its new hardware and the successful operation of this equipment on missions of increasing complexity and greater value. The most significant contribution that NASA and its industrial contractor complex can make to the future of the space program now is to bend their every effort to assure that the Apollo hardware will function flawlessly, not only for its missions to the moon but also for long-duration earth-orbital operations. . . .” (Hotz, Av Wk, 8/7/67, 17)
Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr. (usaf), first Negro selected for a mission in the Nation’s space program, was killed during routine training flight when his F—104 aircraft crashed on landing at Edwards afb. Copilot Maj. Harvey J. Royer (usaf), chief of operations at usaf’s Aerospace Research Pilot School, was injured. USAF appointed a board of officers to investigate the crash. Selected June 30, to train for DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program, Major Lawrence was ninth astronaut—first in dod astronaut program—to be killed in an accident and fifth to die in an air crash; three others had died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire and one in an automobile accident. Memorial services were conducted at Edwards afb and in Chicago. ( W Post, 12/9/67, Al; AP, NYT, 12/10/67, 44; B Sun, 12/11/67, A15)
Soviet space program would be seriously delayed because of the April 24 accident which killed Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov, Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin disclosed in Komsomolshaya Pravda. “Flights of spaceships of the type of Soyuz I will be possible only after a complete determination of the causes of the accident, their elimination and then test flights. This, of course, will take time.” Gagarin confirmed that Soyuz I mission had been first of a series of flights planned for summer 1967. Concerning rumors that Komarov had survived the crash landing of Soyuz I, he said: “How we all wish that Volodya Komarov was alive. . . . But one must look facts in the face.” (NYT, 5/18/67, 31; AP, W Post, 5/18/67, A26)
Adm. David L. McDonald, Chief of Naval Operations, and Gen. John P. McConnell, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, presented Distinguished Flying Crosses to the military astronauts who had made space flights in special Pentagon ceremony. Included were posthumous awards to L/Col. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and L/CoL Edward H. White II (usaf), who died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Capt. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., speaking on behalf of his fellow astronauts, said they were “proud members of the military, but also . . . representatives of a great and significant national effort,” who had grown “to enjoy the [space program’s] successes and live with its failures.” (dod Release 642-67; AP, B Sun, 7/14/67, 6; SBD, 7/17/67,_ 68)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reviewed nasa-university relations at dedication of Univ. of Illinois’ Coordinated Science Laboratory building in Urbana, 111.: “During NASA’s first year of operation . . . [$3 million] was invested in research at universities. . . . The second year, approximately $6 million went to universities, and the third year about $14 million . . . [primarily for] solution of immediate problems. . . .” Appraisal of program in 1961 concluded the universities were already making significant contribution to the space program, but that with the right kind of help they could do more for themselves and for NASA. Expansion included support of research, construction of facilities, and establishment of graduate fellowships, until program reached peak in 1966 with 10,600 campus participants. Today, however, need was “to reduce expenditures for research, to preserve at minimum cost the essential strength needed for the future, and to increase the multidisciplinary flux that will magnify the values the nation can derive from the activities we can support.” To find the best ways of reducing the program, he said, nasa had formed a “special task force to evaluate all our relationships with the academic community and to come up with specific recommendations as to least harmful methods we can use. There is no longer any doubt that NASA’s university support programs will have to be redefined quite drastically in some areas.” Since much of the program was funded in three one-year steps, this would help spread the impact over a longer time period. Ph. D. candidates now holding NASA grants would be able to obtain their degrees. Looking to the future, Webb urged the universities to think, reorganize, and work in interdisciplinary groupings. “The development of a few university teams working together across the traditional disciplines, combining the best efforts of technology, the social sciences and management capability which they have created and which make them the best available source of trusted information in our society can write a new chapter of history of problem solving in this nation.” (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testified in support of nasa’s FY 1968 budget authorization before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. He reviewed 1966 accomplishments and discussed future space-flight activities: “We completed 22 missions during 1966 successfully out of 29 attempts, or a 76% success. This record is somewhat lower than the previous year, but it is marked by qualitative advances greater than any before. “The FY 1968 request represents the first true post-Apollo decisions. ... The combination of the 1971 Mariner flights and the initiation of a continuing, major Voyager program” represented effective translations into action of President’s Science Advisory Committee’s recommendation that planetary exploration be given a high priority in the post-Apollo period. “During FY 1968 we will be decreasing somewhat our application of manpower effort on the manned space flight programs with a considerable shift in effort from the Apollo to the Apollo Applications part of that activity. We will be increasing our total effort in space science and applications programs, particularly in the build-up of the Voyager program activity . . . [and devoting] more effort to our advanced research and technology activities. . . .” Emphasizing that he was “not prepared nor willing to state that a manned lunar landing cannot be achieved before 1970,” Dr. Seamans admitted there was a high probability that Apollo program would have to operate on a delayed schedule. “An important contributor to . . . success will be adequate resources and the flexibility to apply them when needed. . . . We cannot say today that the $2.6 billion requested for Apollo is not enough [but] we can say it is not too much. ... It cannot be reduced and still accomplish the objectives we have defined.” (Testimony; Transcript, 118)
The press praised Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire. Technology Week: “The harsh, scathing report of the Apollo 204 Review Board has effectively laid to rest charges that the board was assembled to conduct a whitewash of the January 27 fire, which took the lives of three astronauts. The board should be commended for the vigor with which it undertook to establish the cause of the fire, the energy with which it attacked what it regards as dangerous practices and procedures and the directness with which it distributes the blame. . . . Perhaps the question that will linger longest about the January tragedy is the part played by the pressure of the lunar landing deadlines. We personally believe that such target dates play a large and important factor in motivating the space program and keeping it moving at a healthy pace. But they should not be so sacred as to invoke carelessness. . . . Without waiting for another accident, it might be well to undertake the same sort of review of practices and procedures throughout the major elements of Apollo that has just taken place in regard to the spacecraft. . . . The Apollo 204 Review Board has set a good example of what can be accomplished.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 4/17/67, 50) Aviation Week: “Its report is technically incisive and sharply critical of NASA and the private contractors manufacturing Apollo hardware. It is as thorough and technically solid as any other investigation of aerospace disaster in the past three decades. It disproves earlier charges that NASA is incapable of investigating its own technical faults. In fact, it would have been impossible to assemble another group sufficiently knowledgeable about the Apollo system from any other source to complete a useful investigation within this time span. “. . . there are none of the pat answers, so often demanded by legislators and harping critics, to the dangerous and complex problems of probing the unknown. Apollo is man’s most daring foray in his history on this planet. If all the problems involved in a lunar voyage were so obvious and the solutions so simple as many critics seem to think, we could all buy tickets for a lunar excursion tomorrow.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 4/17/67, 21)
NASA’s Oso III (oso e) Orbiting Solar Observatory was successfully launched from etr with three-stage Thor-Delta booster to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 354 mi (570 km); perigee, 336 mi (540 km); period, 96 min; and inclination, 33°. Third of eight spacecraft in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of the sun, Oso III weighed 627 lbs, carried nine experiments, and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry-command equipment, batteries, electronic controls, gas spin-control arms, and seven experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and two solar pointing experiments. Primary purpose of Oso III was to obtain high-resolution spectral data in the range 8A-1300A from pointed solar experiments during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Spacecraft’s experiments were designed to continue and extend work of Oso I (launched March 7, 1963) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) spacecraft by collecting data on solar x-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet radiation, and other solar activity. Project management officials at gsfc tested or turned on all nine experiments and reported that satellite spin rate, power level, charge rate, and temperatures were normal. Both tape recorders were operating. Last experiment, the high-voltage portion of gsfc’s x-ray spectrometer, was successfully turned on March 14. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 67-32,67—52)
Letter to editor of Space Business Daily by unidentified leader in U.S. space program attacked nasa’s use of pure oxygen in life-support systems: “. . . most engineering people in industry, most reputable bio-engineering people in usaf and NASA felt two gas was the way to go. In addition, there has never been an overwhelming engineering reason for a pure oxygen system. . . . The argument of reliability and complexity is ludicrous when you examine the complexity of other systems in the spacecraft and booster. Now it is even more ironic in that, if pure oxygen is kept, all sorts of complicating compensations must be made. The truth is that a few key people in NASA flew in the face of strong industry technical advice against pure oxygen. To add to the problem, Gemini made them cocky and they forgot completely the sleeping monster they had created. Take anyone, regardless of skill and training, show him a fire in pure oxygen, and ask him if he’d agree to live in pure oxygen with that danger in the complex environment of a spacecraft. The answer is painfully obvious. Now we’ll make a bad situation worse by jury rigging a system to avoid pure oxygen on the pad—but—we’ll stiff have it in space. “nasa and everyone must face it. It was a bad decision compounded by complacency, for example, the hatch design. If the atmosphere were two gas, chances are, survival would have occurred. Let’s get guts, fix the basic deficiency and take the delay. That is the only answer and sooner or later it must be faced.” (SBD, 4/19/67, 282)
“We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation,” President Johnson pledges during tour of Michoud Assembly Facility. On the platform in front row from left are Astronaut Walter Cunningham, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., the President, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Mrs. Webb, Gov. John J. McKeithen, and NASA Associate Administrator for Administration Harold B. Finger. In the back row, behind and to the right of Webb, are Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Industrial Operations, msfc; Dr. George N. Constan, manager of Michoud; H. D. Lowrey, president of Chrysler Corp. Space Division; and J. K. Swearingen, project manager for Ling-Temco-Vougbt Range Systems Division. “In the 9 years since I first introduced in the . . , Senate the Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, we have seen the power of our rocket engines increase 50 times—from 150,000 to 7,500,000 pounds of thrust in the engines that you build here. “Not long ago-we had to stand by and watch other countries accomplish what we could not accomplish. I will never forget the days of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2, and the real concern. . . . “We were the most scientifically advanced nation on the face of the earth but we did not launch man’s first earth satellite. “We were backward because we did not choose to adventure. We did not choose to have vision. We did not choose to look forward. Now let us remember that our future achievements—or our future failures— will depend on how far ahead we choose to look and how far ahead we choose to think. “If we think second, and if we look third, then we are going to wind up not being first. . . we will advance in space to the extent that our people and their representatives are prepared for us to advance and are prepared to pay the cost of that advance. We may not always proceed at the pace we desire. I regret . . . that there have been reductions and there will be more. There have been interruptions, and I hope that we have had all we can take. But I do have faith and confidence in the American people. “We will not surrender our station. We will not abandon our dream. We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation.” (SBD, 12/13/67,218; PD, 12/18/67,1696-7)
Most Soviet reporting of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died was factual. A few members of Soviet and Italian press, however, charged that “haste” had contributed to the accident. Radio Moscow: “We in the Soviet Union are deeply grieved at the news of the tragedy at Cape Kennedy. “The courage of Virgil Grissom, Edward White, and Roger Chaffee had won our esteem and we join in paying homage to their memories. . . .” Trud (Moscow): “The astronauts became the victims of the space race created by the leaders of the United States space program. Recently, the hurry, the haste in space Sights has continued to grow. There were a number of Saws in the ApoHo system.” La Stampa (Turin, Italy): “Technical revisions must be brought about so that the tragedy will not repeat itself . . . perhaps the rigorous time schedule . . . ought to give way to slower and more secure rhythm.” II Popolo (Rome) : The accident offered “questions for reSection, above all an invitation to weigh in proper measure the margin of risk that accompanies all the conquest of man. ... It is ironic that this happened, just when any danger seemed to be less proximate, during a normal exercise on earth.” (AP, NYT, 1/30/67, 2, 3; AP, B Sun, 1/30/67; Trud, 1/29/67, 3, uss-t Trans.)
NASA announced establishment of Apollo Lunar Exploration Office within omsf to increase effectiveness of directing Apollo lunar exploration and planning for post-Apollo lunar exploration. New office, headed by former Lunar Orbiter Manager Lee R. Scherer under general direction of Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), would consist of Flight Systems Development and Lunar Science Divisions. It would be responsible to OSSA for scientific aspects of Apollo lunar exploration; ossa would review operating plans, science SR&T tasks, mission objectives and plans, and scientific payloads and principal investigators for specific missions. (NASA Ann, 12/19/67)
U.S.S.R.’s Academician Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, Chairman of Soviet Commission for Exploration and Use of Outer Space, writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics, explained that general trend- of Soviet space program was similar to that of U.S. program, and refrained from “any forecasts [on] . . . further programs in space research,” He said work planning Was difficult “because [it] calls for additional checkups or presents prospects of new and unforeseen investigations.” He believed “realistically” in prolonged manned space flights, and said there was “no doubt that it will be possible to overcome all the difficulties. . . .” (Blagonravov, A&A, 10/67, 70-8)
Trendex poll conducted for Thiokol Chemical Corp. in six American cities indicated that interest in the national space program had dropped to lowest in more than four years. Some 41% of persons questioned thought the Government was spending too much on the space program; 83% thought more attention should be given to water pollution, 82% to air pollution, 68% to training unskilled workers, 51% to beautification program, 45% to antipoverty drive, and 26% to space exploration. Competition to achieve first manned lunar landing was favored by 51%, dropping from 77% in September 1965, and opposed by 35%. Most significant change of attitude, Trendex said, was increase in number of respondents who did not know whether they fayored the competition— 14%, compared to 1% in 1963. (NYT, 12/3/67, 28; Thiokol pio)
Rep. Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) in joint dialogue with Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.), appearing in General Electric Forum, when asked: “What is the present climate in the 90th Congress for other key legislative programs such as space?” stated: “Congress is interested in space and will support a strong space program. Those who are knowledgeable recognize that we have gone past the point of no return in giving full support to the Apollo lunar landing program. But many Congressmen are concerned about our course in the future exploration of space. When you relate the financial demand of another big quantum jump in space technology to our other fiscal burdens, you get the feeling that the 90th Congress will not be willing to embark on another major manned space program beyond the moon that will lead to another commitment of five or ten years or longer.” (GE Forum, 4/6/67,11-4)
nasa personnel changes: (1) George H. Hage, former Engineering Manager for Boeing Co.’s Lunar Orbiter Program, had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering), replacing Robert F. Garbarini, who resigned effective April 27. Hage would be responsible for maintaining the highest possible standards of engineering excellence and discipline, systems performance and project management on the spacecraft and launch vehicles in the OSSA program. (2) Bernard Moritz, former nasa Deputy Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, had been appointed Assistant Administrator for Special Contracts Negotiation and Review. Moritz would be responsible for negotiation and review of certain assigned contracts involving new policy or administrative arrangements requiring consideration or decision by the Administrator or Deputy Administrator. (3) m/g John
President Johnson’s Science Advisory Committee’s (psac) report, The Space Program in the Post-Apollo Period [see Feb. 11], was criticized by Dr. Philip H. Abelson in Science. Report did not fully discuss the comparative value of space and nonspace activities and “quickly ducked” the difficult problem of priorities, Dr. Abelson said. Nowhere was there an evaluation of the chances of finding extraterrestrial life. “Another deficiency is the lack of a full discussion of the role of man in deep space exploration. To date, manned missions have contributed little scientifically. The unmanned missions have had a cost effectiveness for scientific achievement perhaps 100 times that of the manned flights. Nevertheless, the report implicitly calls for a major role for man in the post Apollo program. . . .” (Abelson, Science, 5/17/67)
Charles W. McGuire, formerly an aerospace engineer in the test directorate of NASA’s Gemini program, became Director of Safety for the Apollo Program. He would be on the headquarters staff of and report directly to the Apollo Program Director while being administratively assigned to the Safety Office, omsf. (nasa Ann, 8/7/67)
European aerospace industry assn., Eurospace, was urging formation -of an optional regional communications satellite system to provide TV and telephone coverage for Europe, Donald E. Fink reported in Aviation Week. An expanded version was also being studied to link the continent with the entire Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, and major portions of Africa. Designated Eurosat, system would consist of one 375-lb comsat launched into stationary orbit by an eldo Europa II booster and at least 18 ground stations in Europe and North Africa. Fabrication of satellite and ground stations would be restricted to European aerospace companies. Initial cost estimate for satellite system was $100 million. (Fink, Av Wk, 8/28/67,29)
Canadian government should establish a national space agency and develop an extensive space program to avoid losing its control over domestic communications to U.S., report to new Science Council of Canada by a four-man panel of scientists and engineers concluded. Report asserted satellite communications were best means of binding Canada’s five time zones and bringing advances to isolated northern communities. It advocated that Canada “make or buy” her own satellite launching facilities; centralize her fragmented space program for coordinated planning; renegotiate cooperative agreement for sounding rocket launches with U.S. so that Canada could gradually assume complete control of project; and set up a nationwide comsat system within five years. (Walz, NYT, 3/8/67,21)
Technology Week marked beginning of its second decade of publishing by asking some of the Nation’s leading educators, scientists, and engineers to project their goals for technology, aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Sea-borg emphasized the need for man to first choose goals for technology: . . we must give more thought to guiding the direction of our technological future. “. . . if there are any ultimate goals for technology we will know what they are only when we all agree on the goals of man.” MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun proposed an earth resources management system employing space technology—principally, resourcesensing satellites—to meet the needs of the world’s rapidly growing population. Said Dr. von Braunam firmly convinced that one of the great future contributions of our space program will be in helping to manage more effectively the utilization of our world resources.” In discussing long-delayed peaceful application of nuclear explosions—Project Plowshare—Dr. Edward Teller, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation Lab., suggested that questions of safety, fear of the unknown, limited nuclear test ban, and international politics were chief obstacles to program. Until these obstacles were removed, Plowshare would continue to lie dormant. Prof. Isaac Asimov, Boston Univ. School of Medicine, foresaw that mankind, now faced with the practical need for working under low-gravity conditions, would have to develop “low-gravity engineering.” Low-gravity engineering might also prove useful in future exploration beneath the sea. Dr. Joshua Lederberg, Professor of Genetics at Stanford Univ. School of Medicine, proposed that man’s central technological goal was the harmonization of his technical goals, a process Dr. Lederberg called “eutechnics.” He went on to declare: “In the eutechnical society, the penultimate crime may become to introduce any technological innovation as a subsystem benefit without analyzing its impact on the whole future of man. The ultimate one would be to deny man his humanity by denying him the chance to think, to know himself.” Dr. Charles S. Draper, head of mit’s Aeronautics and Astronautics Dept., emphasized the need to establish an adequate balance between “directly beneficial” and “remedial” technologies. As air and water pollution, land damage from mining, soil erosion, and other problems become acute, man must give more thought to remedial actions for disturbances inflicted on the environment. Dr. Draper suggested space vehicle technology as “. . . an excellent model for the technology of overall environmental control for the earth.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former afsc Commander, believed that the big challenge of the next 25 yrs would be the effective management of technology for the public good. Schriever suggested that: “the systems management concept [developed in Nation’s military and space programs] will be required to bring these technologies to bear on these problems. ; . .” Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Vice President, listed 10 aerospace projects which, he felt, should receive major attention during next 20 yrs. Among these projects were use of nuclear power plants in aerial transports to reduce fuel-to-cargo ratios, solution of sonic boom problems, and development of high-density fuels. Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, dean of Univ. of Minnesota’s Institute of Technology, explored the objectives and benefits of geotechnology— use of geophysical and geochemical knowledge “to intervene in the natural processes of our environment on a massive—and even global— scale.” Dr. Spilhaus said he believed the public would “. . . welcome ... an imaginative experiment in city living designed to remove the chores, dirt, delays, and human wastage, and emphasize the opportunities for social, cultural, economic and recreational advantages that high-density living provides.” In final article, TRW Vice Chairman Simon Ramo wrote: “We are in the science era of mankind; we are not yet in the social era of mankind. ... A quick look at our society shows that science’s greatest challenge now and for the next few decades is for the application of science to human needs.” (Tech Wk, 1/23/67, 32-79)
Two-stage Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Natal, Brazil, failed when rocket strayed from planned trajectory. Failure was first in Brazil’s space program which opened Dec. 15, 1965, with the launch of a Nike-Apache sounding rocket. (Reuters, W Post, 8/23/67)
Our national security depends upon progress in science and technology as much as or more than any other aspect of our national strength,” Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, said at Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute in Tulla-homa. “The Federal budget for research and development test and evaluation [rt&de] has experienced a steady and phenomenal growth over the past twenty-five years . . . from 7/10s percent in 1941 to almost 3% in 1965. Most recently, we have been through a period of highly accelerated growth in which the initiation of a massive space program added to a rising curve of cost for development, and acquisition of ballistic missiles resulted in rdt&e growth rates ... of 20% per year. . . . This trend, if it were to continue from the level of ’66 for ten years, would result in a Federal RDT&E budget almost as large as the total budget of today by that time.” (NASA lar VI/129)
Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, a leading scientific pioneer in the U.S. space program, died at age 62. He collapsed, apparently of a heart attack, while attending a Washington, D.C., meeting of the nas Council, and died the next day. Credited with being the “father” of the International .Geophysical Year (igy), Dr. Berkner was the principal administrator of the U.S. part of the igy program during its operation in 1957 and 1958. From 1958-1962, he was chairman of nrc’s Space Science Board, which advised the Government on the national program of space research. For his “outstanding and pioneering leadership,” of ssb, he received NASA’s Distinguished Public Service Medal Oct. 7, 1966. He served as President of the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest in Dallas from I960, until 1965, when he retired because of health. He continued until recently as Chairman of the Board of Trustees, and was a member of the NASA Historical Advisory Committee. A Rear Admiral in the U.S. Navy Reserve, Dr. Berkner would be buried with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetery June 7. (NYT, 6/5/67, 41; W Star, 6/5/67, B5; Science, 6/9/67, 1349)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb received an honorary Doctor of Science in Commerce degree from Drexel Institute of Technology in commencement exercises in Philadelphia, (nasa pao ; P SB, 6/18/67)
Jerald Kubat, formerly Special Assistant to the Apollo Program Director, omsf, had been appointed Director, Apollo Program Control. He would have overall responsibility for program planning, configuration management, logistics, resources control, and procurement operations to ensure the attainment of Apollo goals, (nasa Ann, 7/17/67)
nasa appointed Vincent L. Johnson Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering). Johnson’s former position of Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs was filled by Joseph B. Mahon, former Agena Program Manager and Deputy Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, (nasa Release 67-289)
U.S. experts believed establishment of permanent lunar colonies and exploitation of lunar resources were among long-range goals of Soviet space program, Heather M. David reported in Technology Week. Analysis of research reports had indicated that future Soviet missions directed toward these objectives would include: (1) orbiting of three or four cosmonauts for three weeks; (2) extensive practice of extravehicular activity and assembly in orbit; (3) orbiting of animals to continue studying effects of long-term weightlessness and radiation; and (4) lunar landing of animals for observation. David predicted preparations for interplanetary travel would be initiated shortly after establishment of permanent lunar colonies. (David, Tech Wk, 1/2/61, 18) .
msc Apollo Program Manager Dr. Joseph F. Shea briefed major Apollo contractors and subcontractors at msc about Jan. 27 flash fire, John Wil-ford reported in New York Times, msc made no announcement of the meeting. (Wilford, NYT, 2/4/67, 15)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), releasing testimony earlier submitted to Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee, urged that $427 million be cut from NASA’s FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296). “We have to establish our priorities, and when it comes to parceling out money the space program stands far below defense, education and many other vital programs.” Specifically, Proxmire recommended: (1) temporarily delaying initiation of programs that would commit U.S. to a manned Mars mission and other deep-space probes; (2) cutting aa funds; and (3) cutting advanced missions funds. (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying on NASA’s FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 6470) before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, urged congressional approval for funding to begin program to develop Nerva II nuclear rocket engine. Estimated cost over 10 yrs would be $2 billion: $500 million would be needed to develop nuclear stage and $1 billion for ground testing. NASA’s decision to develop Nerva II was based primarily on “our own national objectives in space; what do we do in the future; now looking ahead to the late ’70s and ’80s, as a requirement for booster capability in this country. . . . However, we also must consider our capability in the world arena and, of course, specifically today we have to be cognizant the best that we can of the Russian capability and the Russian plans.” Dr. Seamans noted that Soviet Proton booster could launch 50,000 lbs into earth orbit, cornpared to 40,000-41,000-lb capability of Uprated Saturn I. “We have every reason to believe that in the [Soviet] program they recognized the same kind of needs that we recognized for our program and that they are moving on a broad front, including the development of very large boosters,” (Transcript, 1131-4)
Senate Minority Leader Everett M. Dirksen (R-Ill.) suggested on abc’s “Issues and Answers” TV program that Government expenditures on the space program be cut to avoid a tax increase. “I’ve been looking at that space program, I don’t mind telling you. Does it really make a difference whether we get to the moon this year or next year, or the following year ? “I doubt very much whether it makes a great deal of difference. And if we reconcile ourselves to that thesis, then of course there is a place where you can make a very substantial budget cut.” (W Star, 1/16/67, A5)
Latest Trendex poll indicated 69% of Americans believed U.S. space program should continue at its present pace even if U.S.S.R. were to achieve first manned lunar landing. (Jackson, LA Herald-Examiner, 1/11/67)
NASA had been concerned about oxygen fire danger prior to Jan. 27 flash fire and had taken steps to curb the danger, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. NASA felt it “had control of the sources of ignition . . . [but] underestimated badly .. . the course such a fire would take. If more thorough testing of flammable materials used in the cockpit had been conducted, the accident might not have happened.” He denied emphatically April 11 suggestion by naa Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy that Astronaut Gus Grissom could have triggered the fire by kicking loose a wire, and said he generally agreed with the Apollo 204 Review Board’s criticisms of deficiencies in project operations, conceding: “We were wrong in the standards we applied to the selection of materials for the spacecraft.” Efforts were currently being directed toward eliminating flammable cockpit materials such as nylon and replacing them with glass fiber cloth and Teflon plastic. Although a study was also under way to assess the relative merits of pure oxygen and two-gas life-support systems, Dr. Mueller doubted that present system would be abandoned. In answer to specific questions concerning escape and rescue, Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, testified that the astronauts had died from asphyxia before the spacecraft hatch was opened and that their bums alone would not have caused death. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips told the Committee that his concern “about the load of work on naa” had prompted an inspection by a NASA team of naa’s Downey, Calif., plant. He had reported to naa President J. Leland Atwood Dec. 19,1965, “some of things that if done differently would contribute to the progress of the program,” and on April 22, 1966, noted that progress was satisfactory: naa was “completely responsive to the programs we described ... and a very aggressive effort___was applied to these problems.” He declined to discuss specifics as requested by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) but indicated that NASA would consider releasing his report to the subcommittee [see April 18]. (Wilford, NYT, 4/13/67, 52; Reistrup, W Post, 4/13/67, A2)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh was interviewed by Christian Science Monitor’s Neal Sanford. Comparing American and Soviet space budgets, he expressed belief that U.S.S.R. was spending more than twice the U.S. percentage of gross national product on space. “Their [gnp] is less than half of ours. While they are spending about the same amount of money that we are on space it is about twice the percentage of gnp. They are putting a greater priority on space than we are.” Soviet space program for 1967 had been “the most active in . . . [their] history, so far as launches go,” he said. “I don’t know if they are cutting [their budget] back. They are going along at a good rate . . . [and] from the progress they are making, we assume they are going along at about the same funding.” (Sanford, CSM, 10/4/67, 5)
Growing confidence that U.S. would accomplish a manned lunar landing by 1970 had plunged space planners into an urgent debate over post-Apollo plans, John Wilford wrote in the New York Times. Should the U.S. concentrate on unmanned and manned exploration of Mars or Venus? An expanded lunar-oriented program? Giant manned laboratories in earth orbit for research and surveillance? Networks of communications and meteorological satellites? Or a series of instrument probes to comets, asteroids, and outer planets? Such questions had opened a searching reexamination into the value of space exploration, and some critics were urging a less ambitious and costly program, with more emphasis “on the problems that confront us here on earth.” While the debate continued, nasa was said to favor concentrating on manned orbiting laboratories that would exploit present technology. Although a broad range of space goals was considered attainable in the next two decades, NASA officials said failure to define post-Apollo objectives soon could cause U.S. to find itself unprepared to achieve any major space goal before the mid-1970s. (Wilford, NYT, 1/22/67, 1)
Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel C. Phillips, commented on countdown operations for Satum/Apollo (AS-501): “. . . I was tremendously impressed with the smooth teamwork that this combined government/multi-industry team put together [and] you could almost feel the will with which it was being carried out. I think that’s important to the progress of Apollo . . . perhaps even more so than some of the technical returns we’ll get from this mission. . . . Apollo is on the way to the moon.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by Apollo 204 Review Board members, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, testified on Jan. 27 flash fire before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Webb said the Board had found error, “but it has also found the capability within NASA and the Apollo team of contractors to overcome error.” NASA and industry would share their part of the blame “for what we have done or left undone,” Webb said, but the committee could have confidence that “nasa and its contractors have the capability to overcome every deficiency required to proceed to successfully fly the Apollo Saturn system and accomplish its objectives.” He said Board Chairman Dr. Floyd Thompson had reassured him that the “concepts and the basic design on which the Apollo system is based can be made to work in a reliable manner,” and Astronaut/Board member Frank Borman had reported he would be confident to fly the Apollo spacecraft if reported deficiencies were eliminated. Webb concluded: “If any man in this room asks for whom the Apollo bell tolls, it tolls for him and me, as well as for Grissom, White and Chaffee. “It tolls for every astronaut test pilot who will lose his life in the space simulated vacuum of a test chamber or the real vacuum of space . . . for every astronaut scientist who will lose his life on some lonely hill on the moon or Mars . . . for Government and industrial executives and legislators alike . . . for an open program continuously evaluated by the opinion makers with little time for second thought—operating in the brilliant color and brutal glare of real time, worldwide mass media with the speed of the television, from euphoria to exaggerated detail....” Asked why six of the eight Board members were NASA employees, Webb replied that they were the best qualified people for the investigation and noted that they were all familiar with the spacecraft or with similar types of investigations. He said that in his opinion the Board had “to a large degree . . . overstated the case.” Questioned about charges by the press that many qualified Project Apollo technicians were not called to testify before the Board, Webb responded: “It is easy to make allegations, hard to conduct an investigation, and even harder to make the Apollo Saturn fly at the earliest possible date. I do not believe these allegations are worth your consideration.” Dr. Thompson discussed methods and procedures followed by the Board, and key Board members traced the process of establishing the course of the fire, the “most probable” ignition source, and detailed findings and recommendations. (Testimony; Transcript 10, 15-8)
Although arc was the smallest NASA field center, Newsweek said, it was producing “some of the agency’s biggest ideas.” Summarizing arc history, the article noted that when center opened in 1940 it had been primarily a site for testing warplane aerodynamics. “Ames still maintains its original wind tunnel—the world’s largest—as well as 29 others, [but aeronautics] . . . represents only a quarter of the effort at Ames today. Most of the scientists are otherwise engaged in pure research in such fields as planetology, exobiology . . . and chemical evolution. “. . . the center’s laboratories enable more than a thousand scientists, engineers and technicians to pursue as wide a variety of problems as their imaginations and the broad guidelines of the space program permit. The problems now range from designing a new hard space suit to studying the effect on mice of reproducing in a 2G environment.” (Newsweek, 6/12/67)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb issued statement based on third interim report by Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., on work of Apollo 204 Review Board. Webb observed: (1) “The risk of fire that could not be controlled or from which escape could not be made was considerably greater than was recognized when the procedures for the conduct of the test were established. Our experience with pure oxygen atmosphere included not only the successful Mercury and Gemini flights but a number of instances where a clearly positive source of ignition did not result in a fire. . . .” (2) Apollo spacecraft had been equipped with such items as Velcro adhesive pads to hold frequently used equipment and nylon netting to catch dropped objects. “While most of these [items] were constructed of low-combustion-potential material, they were not arranged as to provide barriers to the spread of a fire. Tests conducted . . . since the accident have shown that an oxygen fire in the capsule will spread along the surface of Velcro and along the edges of nylon netting much faster than through the material itself. (3) Soldered joints in piping carrying both oxygen and fluids were melted away, with resultant leakage contributing to the spread of the fire. . . .” (4) Capsule burst in such a way that flames traveled over and around astronauts’ couches toward rupture. “Under these conditions, and with just a few seconds of time available, the astronauts could not reach the hatch and open it. (5) This fire indicates that a number of items related to the design and performance of the environmental control unit will require the most careful examination and may require redesign. . . .” Webb announced that Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences would hold open hearing on Review Board’s preliminary findings Feb. 27 and that House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight would conduct full investigation of accident after completion of Board’s inquiry, expected by late March. Dr. Seamans said in his report that an “electrical malfunction” was regarded as “most likely source of ignition” of the fire but the “possibility exists that no single source will ever be pinpointed.” Board was still considering chemical reactions in onboard materials, spontaneous combustion of certain materials, and possible electrical phenomena. Evidence indicated fire had had three distinct phases: originating in left side of spacecraft, it had burned several seconds unnoticed, then spread becoming more intense and causing cabin pressure to rise rapidly as atmosphere became heated. Fifteen seconds after crew first reported fire, cabin ruptured. During second phase, gases and flames flowed past astronauts’ couches and through hole moving from left to right. With cabin’s oxygen quickly reduced by rush of flames and gas outside, fire continued as localized flame, smoking heavily, in third phase. Dr. Seamans said Board noted: “The experience in flight and in tests prior to the accident had suggested that the probability of a spacecraft fire was low. Continued alertness to the possibility of fire had become dulled by previous ground experience and six years of successful manned missions. . . . Potential ignition sources inside the spacecraft had been treated so as to be considered safe; neither the crews nor the test and development personnel felt the risk of spacecraft fire to be high. . . .” Dr. Seamans emphasized that Board did not recommend changing pure oxygen system or planned cabin pressure for space flight, but did urge that “trade-offs between one- and two-gas atmospheres be re-evaluated . . . [and] pressurized oxygen no longer be used in prelaunch operations.” It also recommended: (1) combustible materials be replaced where possible with nonflammable materials; (2) nonmetallic materials be arranged to maintain fire breaks; (3) systems for oxygen and liquid combustibles be made fire resistant; (4) full flammabmty tests be conducted with mockup of new configuration; (5) more rapidly and easily operated hatch be installed; and (6) on-the-pad emergency procedures be revised to recognize possibility of cabin fire. (NASA Release
NASA completed membership of its Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and expanded its scope of activities to include: (1) assistance in the “planning and conduct of all manned and unmanned missions to explore the Moon and planets,” and (2) development of “scientific objectives and general strategy for such missions including specific recommendations for mission design and scientific payloads.” Board would report to NASA Administrator James E. Webb through Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell. (nasa Release 67—133)
Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra, Australia— newest member of NASA’s 16-station network to support manned Apollo missions—was dedicated in ceremonies attended by Australian Prime Minister Henry E. Holt, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey cabled congratulations to Prime Minister Holt: “The establishment of this tracking station is another link in the long chain of cooperative efforts in space between . . . Australia and the United States. “In its support of the Apollo program, this new station will play a vital role in communications with our astronauts in preparation for their landing on the Moon and return to Earth. . . .” (nasa Release 67-65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified before the Subcommittee on Independent Offices, Senate Committee on Appropriations. His prepared statement made these principal points: NASA would not be able to achieve for this Nation “a position of leadership in space” for less money than an annual budget of between $5.5-$6.0 billion a year. At the proposed level of funding, after launch vehicle #216, production of the Saturn IB and the earth-orbital portion of the Apollo Applications Program would be terminated. Rather than continue to use the Apollo system for work in orbit at conclusion of Apollo flights, NASA would accept a hiatus in the continuous development of manned space flight, deciding on a fresh start for the years ahead. A new study would be begun in FY 1968 and FY 1969 on purposes and form of future development of spacecraft and “the national family of large launch vehicles that should be available in the 1970’s.” This “basic change in the United States space outlook” would make it “clearly prudent to preserve the physical facilities which have been built and paid for and which would be required if a decision is made to construct a large solid rocket vehicle.” Because the budget level approved by the House would prevent beginning work on NERVA II, development of a flight weight engine of the nerva i class, “with probably from 60,000 to 75,000	lbs of thrust” would be initiated in FY 1968. Because we would have “no choice” but to accept the fact that Voyager cannot be initiated in FY 1968, and, in order to preserve “a capability for future planetary programs,” NASA would propose about $10 million for the “lunar and planetary program for studies and supporting research in the technology of planetary exploration.” NASA would propose no changes in the budget for the Apollo program but would “accept the legislative history as a clear signal that we should proceed with a hard-hitting carefully managed effort to achieve the objectives of the Apollo program.” nasa would be able to launch “a total of nine Saturn V unmanned and manned missions before the end of Calendar Year 1969.” A further reduction in funding in FY	1968 could only cause	“complete havoc” and	would be a blow to the	national aeronautical	and space effort	from	which it would be extremely difficult to recover. Webb told the subcommittee: “In this situation, we cannot ask, as we otherwise would have done, that the Senate restore in full the amount reduced by the House. . . . We are here to ask the committee that the Senate approve the amounts passed by the House and accepted by the President, and to make a clear record in the legislative history that will give us	the flexibility we will	need to permit	us to	carry out the strongest	possible program within the amounts	made	available to us. . . . Long leadtimes requiring timely initiation of new programs and implying commitment to proceed over a period of years would . . . make it perfectly clear to all that we cannot somehow find a way to carry forward the same program and give the Nation the same assurance of a strong position in aeronautics and space with a $517 million cut in our budget.” He said he had been in touch with the President in the last 24 hours and “he still believes the recommendations he made in January represent” the best budget for the country. But the President also believed his proposed 10 percent income tax surcharge “is more important to press for than extra money for the space bill.” Webb said he had drastically reshaped the space program to comply with the $4.5 billion fund for this year voted by the House and approved by the President. But Subcommittee Chairman Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) and several senators, with major space installations in their states, gave strong indications they would plan to restore some of the millions of dollars cut by the House. Webb promised to revise his multi-billion-dollar space plans again “and bring you the best program possible for the money.” (NASA lar VT/101; Text; Testimony; AP, NYT, 9/29/67, A3; 9/30/67, 52)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed l/g August Schomburg (USA, Ret.) as a consultant. Schomburg, whose last duty assignment was Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces, would work in areas of national security, NASA’s interfaces with industry and defense, and education in industrial affairs for NASA’s field centers. (nasa Release 67-280)
Astronaut-Aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) was detached from NASA at usn’s request for assignment in Navy’s Deep Submergence Systems Project (dssp) . One of the Nation’s seven original astronauts, Carpenter became the second American to orbit the earth when he piloted Aurora 7 spacecraft on three-orbit mission May 24, 1962. Active in USN’s Man-in-the-Sea program since 1965, he set a world record in underwater work during Aug. 28-Oct. 10, 1965, Sealab II experiment when he lived 205 ft down in the Pacific for 30 consecutive days. Under dssp he was tentatively assigned as an aquanaut in Sealab III, a 60-day experiment 600 ft down in the Pacific scheduled to take place in 1968. As usn’s senior aquanaut, Carpenter’s duties would include responsibility for Sealab III ocean floor operations, experiments, and equipment and for coordination of aquanaut team training. NASA Administrator James E. Webb commented on Carpenter’s departure. “. . . we are grateful to him and the United States Navy for his services over the past eight years. During the past two years, he has demonstrated that many of the technologies, techniques, and psychophysiological factors related to space flight have direct applications to the Man-in-the-Sea program. Thus, Cdr. Carpenter becomes the first astronaut to return to his parent service in order to apply the skills, knowledge, and experience acquired during his assignment to NASA. ...” (nasa Release 67—208)
Dr. Jack E. Froehlich, 46-year-old scientist and rocket pioneer, was drowned with his nine-year-old son, Mark, in a boating accident. He had been president of National Engineering Science Co. and, during 1959, had been at jpl as a project manager for Explorer I. (Pasadena Star-News, 11/27/67)
Interchange of ideas, technology, hardware, and personnel had helped to make progress in space possible, said b/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf), msfc’s Industrial Operations director, in a talk before the Tennessee Valley Chapter of the Air Force Association, at Huntsville, Ala. “Today’s space program is a joint effort of both military and civilian agencies, and there exists a cooperative give-and-take relationship in the finest sense,” he stated, (msfc Release 67-191)
Briefing on NASA FY 1968 budget was held at NASA Hq. NASA Administrator James Webb said: “. . . I believe that on this budget we can build an excellent foundation for the work that we as a nation will need to do in 1970 and heyond. “I believe it is a balanced program that makes the best use of the resources that we have created since 1958. I believe it includes those items that enable the Congress and the country to clearly see and judge the issues which are basic to our future in space. “I believe it assumes success. That is, that it is a minimum budget for the work that is required and does not provide for losses of stages or for unexpected catastrophes such as are always a possibility in this program. “. . . finally, I believe that this budget indicates that we have proven in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration that the space capability of this nation can be developed, that this job he is putting in this budget can be done, and I believe it indicates clearly that he believes it is important that we continue to develop our national space capability. . . .” (Transcript)
Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fund had received nearly $1 million in donations for construction of 700-seat auditorium at nas Hq. in Washington, D.C., in honor of the late nasa Deputy Administrator. Fund’s ultimate goal was $2 million, (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 3/67, 3)
Initial reaction by the press to Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died: Business Week: “After 16 space flights, in which 19 astronauts returned from their missions safely, many had forgotten the inescapable peril of exploration. No previous frontier has ever been crossed without the loss of life; it was not to be expected that space—the most perilous frontier of them all—could be conquered without sacrifice. None of this lessens the grief that every man in NASA feels for fallen comrades. But it is the nature of test pilots ... to accept disaster not as defeat but as a call for intensified effort and dedication.” (Bus Wk, 2/4/67) Washington Evening Star: “Now that the initial shock ... is beginning to wear off, the second guessers are . . . wondering whether we should be going to the moon at all. . . . From any rational point of view, the only thing to do is to carry on. The Apollo program necessarily will mark time until the true cause of the spacecraft disaster is located and corrected. It is conceivable that the delay could cause the Dec. 31, 1969, deadline to be missed. It is entirely possible that the Russians may get to the moon ahead of us. But so what? The world will not end nor the United States vanish, if the Russians beat us to the moon. ... It would be senseless to stop now. Fortunately, it probably would also be impossible.” (Hines, WStar, 2/2/67) Editor & Publisher:	“The recent disaster at Cape Kennedy indicates we are no less reluctant to face up to disaster than anyone else. Not only were our reporters not prepared for it-—none of them were there for the simulated flight test—but neither were our space officials . . . [because] the full import of the tragedy was fed out piecemeal. . . . The lessons for NASA officials and for newsmen are obvious. Space travel is fraught with dangers in every test, every maneuver, every piece of equipment, but we became complacent about them because of our successes. NASA’s record of dealing with the press up to now has been pretty good and if it hasn’t already developed a ‘disaster plan’ for such accidents it soon will. News media have learned that nothing in the space program should be considered ‘routine’ and that front row seat should never be left unoccupied at any time.” (Editor & Publisher, 2/11/67) Some press reaction to the accident later became increasingly critical of NASA: Washington Evening Star: “The implication of the NASA story was that no fire extinguishing apparatus or quick escape mechanism— neither of which was present on the Apollo 1—could have saved the men. The implication of the truth is that if the spacecraft had been equipped with a means of blowing open the hatch, Grissom, White and Chaffee might have had a chance. NASA’s motive in attempting to distort the truth may have been to protect the families of the astronauts from undue mental anguish. But it also served the function of protecting NASA by heading off criticism of the agency ... by deliberately misleading the press, Congress and the public.” (W Star, 2/9/67) New York Times: “The most basic issue ... is not, as NASA has tended to emphasize, the source of the spark that started the fire. It is rather the question of why so much was permitted to hinge on the assumption that there would be no fire. . . . “The answer is only secondarily, as a NASA official has suggested, that ‘alertness . . . had become dulled’ by previous successes. . . . More fundamental was the willingness to gamble for the sake of winning the race to the moon.” (NYT, 2/28/67,34)
Unless U.S. space program moves much faster than now seems likely, U.S. consumption of helium this year . . . may be down as much as . . . 25%,” Chemical and Engineering News reported. Since Jan. 27 Apollo fire and resulting “slowdown” in space program, use of helium to pressurize rocket fuels—which accounted for 45% of helium consumption—had dropped to about half of its former level. Despite the 1967 recession, however, helium industry was optimistic that trend would be reversed when manned space flights were resumed in 1968. (C&E News, 7/3/67, 18-9)
U.S. space program was a sound investment which would pay “handsome dividends” to all Americans and to humanity in general, UCLA professor of chemistry Dr. Willard F. Libby told aas meeting in Denver. Winner of the 1960 Nobel Prize in chemistry and discoverer of radio-carbon dating, Dr. Libby suggested that space program opponents “quit grumbling about going-to-the-moon extravagance with taxpayers’ money” and realize that large expenditures were necessary to maintain U.S. world leadership in space.	• “And we can’t stop at the moon. . . . Once we’ve ventured that far, we should establish a base there for manned takeoffs to Mars and Venus. “Now Congress is debating the merits of authorizing space exploration beyond the moon in the early ’70s. They have dpty to debate such a venture, costing more than $2 billion. But what . . . would Congress do with that money if it weren’t spent on future space research?” Space research had already made great contributions to medicine, microelectronics, worldwide communications, and many other fields, he said, and could continue to achieve much mote “for the good of humanity and the expansion of frontiers of human knowledge.” (Lindbergh, Denver Post, 7/16/67)	_
U.S.S.R.’s next manned space flight would use a Soyuz spacecraft similar to the one which crashed April 24, according to Astronauts Michael Collins and David Scott who had discussed future space plans with Soviet cosmonauts at the Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 26-31]. In upi interview Collins and Scott said they were “amazed by the similarities between the two [U.S. and U.S.S.R. space] programs.” Collins said that Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Konstantin Feoktistov indicated “that there would be several earth orbital flights and then ... a circumlunar flight” (upi, W Post, 6/4/67, A9)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at White Sulphur Springs 86th Annual Meeting of Proprietary Association, presented social implications of the Nation’s space program. He asked: “If our future is now more dependent than ever on human intelligence, and if these activities made possible by the rocket engine are adding large increments of grist for the human intelligence mill, and trained workers to use the result, how much more important is it today than ever before for leaders in an industry like yours to understand those institutions of organized society that will foster, encourage, and make proper use of the vast powers the human mind is deriving from its understanding and use of the forces, materials and forms and activities of life which are provided by nature in this universe?” He added: “The comprehension of space exploration and its implications for mankind is a tremendous human intellectual enterprise . . . and our capability to use it effectively is only limited by our ability to systematically order it into viable patterns.” (Text)
37-yr-old Astronaut Edward G. Givens, Jr. (Maj., usaf), was killed near Houston when the car he was driving missed a curve and crashed into an embankment. Two other usaf officers with him were injured, one critically. Givens was the first U.S. astronaut to die while off duty. Six others had died in connection with the space program: three in air crashes and three in the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. He was selected to join the NASA astronaut team April 4, 1966. (msc Roundup, 6/9/67, 1; upi, NYT, 6/7/67, 30; upi, W Post, 6/1/61, A7)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb held press conference on management changes: (1) George S. Trimble, Jr., Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program, OMSF, was appointed Deputy Director of msc. (2) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. He would be replaced by Donald P. Hearth, Voyager Program Manager. (3) MSFC Deputy Director Eberhard F. M. Rees was named to serve as Special Assistant in Manufacturing Problems to msc Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager George M. Low. Discussing space law treaty [effective Oct. 10] after making announcements, Webb said it was a valuable further advance of the rule of law into spaee but noted that laws could be broken. “We have an agreement in the Antarctic . . . not to introduce military operations or equipment and this has worked well. . . . We now have this agreement in space, and . . . the most important enforcer of these that relate to space technology is momentum and continued development of technology. The forward capability is what in essence has produced cooperation when we have had it. . . . [U.S.S.R.] and other nations must recognize that they’re not going to have a monopoly in this field. [Our being] . . . there is the most important way to make sure we get the benefits of the treaty. Without continued development of this kind I am not sure what the treaty means.” (Transcript; NASA Release 67-268)
Jonathan Spivak in Wall Street Journal commented on congressional cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Plans to launch unmanned satellites to Mars or Venus in 1971 and 1973 and conduct extended exploration of the moon by astronauts face probable abandonment because of a lack of funds. There will also be sharp curtailment of proposals for long-duration manned flights in orbit about the earth to enhance the nation’s space technology and exploit practical and scientific applications of space. Thus, say space officials, the present outlook is that only a limited national space program will continue in the 1970s after the lunar landing.” (Spivak, WSJ, 10/11/67, 24)
Texas’ role in U.S. space program was summarized by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller for the Texas State Society. “Many thousands of Texans working for dozens of Texas firms are creating through their . . . [r&d] effort the new technology required for space exploration. One measure of Texas contributions may be made in terms of the $771,000,000 of work that . . . [its] firms have performed on NASA’s programs. In addition, Texas colleges and universities are not only conducting high level research for NASA, but are training future space scientists and engineers under nasa grants.” He noted also that Texas was birthplace of seven astronauts and five astronaut wives and “home town” of all 56 astronauts, based at msc. (Text)
The efficiency of Soviet scientific research was deteriorating and the price of getting an idea into production was rising, biologist Alexander Nei-fakh wrote in Literaturnwya Gazeta. Although scientists had doubled every 7 to 10 yrs, published works had doubled only every 13—15 yrs. “This shows that the effectiveness of scientific activity per scientist or per ruble invested in science is consistently falling,” Neifakh concluded. (Reuters, NYT, 4/22/67,31) Miami News: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration badly needed a victory to demonstrate that the moon program is not threatened by technical deficiencies, as the Apollo investigation seems to suggest. The landing of Surveyor III . . . and the transmission of TV picture fills the bill. . . . There is no denying, however, that Apollo is in serious difficulty . . . [and] NASA is creating the impression that it is unwilling to see the investigation carried to a complete conclusion. . . . Surveyor and dozens of similar achievements demonstrate that the overall space program has been a remarkable success. NASA would make a mistake to see the luster of this record dimmed by its failure to cooperate fully in the Apollo investigation.” (Miami News, A/21/67) New York Times: “Inevitably, Surveyor 3 calls attention to the fact that the first stages of lunar study and exploration do not require men, that the moon can be investigated to a considerable extent without incurring either the great risks or high costs of manned lunar flight. From the scientific and technical points of view, Surveyor-type flights are a rational and feasible alternative to Apollo. . . . Manned space exploration has unavoidable dangers, but these are multiplied many times by the pressure of the 1970 deadline that dominates the Apollo project. What Surveyor 3 has done is to remind us that—aside from propaganda and prestige considerations—there is no need to endanger brave men’s lives.” (NYT, 4/23/67,10B) Washington Post: “With the success in landing Surveyor III . . . [nasa] once again exhibited its stunning scientific and technological skills. . . . Surely the time cannot be far off when men will be shuttling from earth to the moon—and far beyond. . . . Bold ventures of mankind are always undertaken in din of criticism, and the manned flight to the moon will be no exception to the rule. Space exploration will continue—not because it excites expectations of an El Dorado or a Fountain of Youth—but because it is an inescapable challenge to human curiosity and imagination.” ( W Post, 4/23/67, C6) Launched April 23 from Baikonur by a “powerful new carrier rocket,” Soyuz / entered initial orbit “close to the estimated one,” Tass announced with unprecedented speed, only one hour 20 min after launch. Orbital parameters: apogee, 224 km (139 mi); perigee, 201 km (125 mi); period, 88.1 min; inclination, 51.4°. Onboard equipment was “functioning normally” and Komarov was “in good health and feeling well.” During the flight Tass distributed only a few terse reports in contrast to extensive publicity usually accorded manned missions. Final announcement, which followed 11-hr silence, said accident occurred during 18th orbit after program of test flight had been completed and spacecraft had been successfully braked with retrorockets for reentry. “. .. when the main parachute was opened at an altitude of seven kilometers [4.3 mi], the lines of the parachute, according to preliminary information, got snarled and the spaceship descended at great speed, which resulted in Komarov’s death.” Tass did not report whether the cosmonaut had a personal parachute to attempt an escape. Western experts believed Soyuz I was tumbling or spinning out of control during reentry : when parachutes were deployed, tumbling caused them to tangle among themselves or wrap around spacecraft resulting in crash-landing. Experts said difficulties apparently developed earlier in the flight because Komarov tried to reenter during 15th orbit but was unable to control his spacecraft. Informed sources had speculated that mission involved the launch of a second spacecraft carrying several cosmonauts that would dock with Soyuz I and permit at least one cosmonaut to transfer from second spacecraft to Soyuz I. Tass’s official announcement said mission would “test the new piloted spaceship, check the ship’s system and elements in conditions of space flight, conduct expanded scientific and physical-technical experiments and studies in conditions of space flight, and continue medical and biological studies on the influence of various factors of space flight on the human organisms.” Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said on April 26 that Soyuz I spacecraft had been tested previously in two to four unmanned flights. Weight, size, and capacity of new spacecraft were not revealed. Immediately following the accident, which was first known fatality during a space flight, the Kremlin announced it was appointing a Government commission to investigate “all the circumstances” of the cosmonaut’s death. Komarov would be cremated and buried in the Kremlin Wall—a final resting place for Soviet heroes—and a monument would be erected on the site of his birthplace in Moscow. (NYT, 4/24/67, 1, 27; 4/25/67, 1, 20 ; 4/27/67, 2; W Post, 4/23/67, Al, A16; 4/24/67, A5; 4/25/67, Al, A16; W Star, 4/23/67, Al)
JPL issued RFp’s to industry on contracts for preliminary design and definition studies of an unmanned Voyager landing capsule. Two identical Voyager spacecraft would be launched by a single Saturn V booster in 1973 and 1975 to conduct scientific studies of Mars and search for extraterrestrial life. From the industrial proposals, due in March, two to four contractors would be chosen. (NASA Release 67-15) * U.S.S.R. was definitely trying to achieve the first manned lunar landing, concluded a 920-page report on the Soviet space program prepared by Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences:	. . materials gathered from Soviet sources on future lunar missions reveal this pattern of complete unanimity: the lunar mission is desirable and necessary; it must be a manned mission; it is certain to succeed. . . Report characterized Soviet space program as “well-planned, orderly, and vigorously pursued with concentration on specific, limited objectives, each achieving a marked advance beyond the one preceding.” There was said to be no evidence “of either Soviet disenchantment with the program or a desire ... to cut it back. On the contrary, space specialists have underscored the durability of the Soviet commitment to space exploration. . . .” Report was entitled: Soviet Space Programs, 1962-65; Goals and Purposes, Achievements, Plans, and International Implications. (Text)
NASA officials dedicated at Corpus Christi, Tex., a 30-ft-dia dish antenna which would be used to receive signals from Apollo spacecraft. Operational responsibility for Corpus Christi tracking station, previously used for Gemini support, had been transferred from dod to nasa in 1966. (upi, AIT, 3/13/67,60)
nasa’s Surveyor VI (Surveyor-F) was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-14) booster on 64-hr lunar intercept trajectory. Primary mission for the 2,223-lb (at launch) spacecraft was to perform a soft-landing on moon and obtain post-landing TV pictures of the lunar surface. As secondary mission spacecraft would determine relative abundance of chemical elements in lunar soil with alpha scattering instrument; obtain touchdown-dynamics, thermal, and radar-reflectivity data; and conduct vernier engine erosion experiment, nasa’s Explorer XXXIV, in orbit since May 24, would serve as a “solar watchdog,” furnishing information on solar radiation for correct interpretation of Surveyor VPs soil analyses. At 00:04:06 get Surveyor VI with two-burn Centaur separated from Atlas and ignited to reach 100-mi-altitude circular parking orbit where it coasted for 12 min; Centaur then reignited to escape earth orbit and boost spacecraft toward moon. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed its solar panels, and locked on the sun and the star Canopus. Based on a 56-mi target miss estimate, a 1.2-m midcourse maneuver was conducted at 00:18:41 get to assure precise landing on target in Sinus Medii in center of moon’s front face. Surveyor VI was sixth in series of seven spacecraft designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, obtain post-landing TV pictures of lunar surface, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. Surveyor program was directed by OSSA Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was managed to LeRC; and prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 67-278, 67-287)
NASA Wallops Station employee James C. McConnell had been awarded $1,000 for his invention “A Method of Plating Copper on Aluminum” by NASA Inventions and Contributions Board. Award was part of agencywide program to encourage and reward NASA employees for meritorious inventions and contributions. A second Wallops employee—Joseph W. McAllister—had been named one of the 1967 Economy Champions under President Johnson’s national economy program for his “Device to Salvage Power Line Guy Anchors.” An economy champion was a Government employee whose achievement or adopted suggestion during FY 1967 had shown first-year measurable benefits of $10,000 or more. (WS Releases 67—9, 67—10)
Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development, OMSF, addressed the National Student Conference in Ann Arbor, Mich.: 324-801 O—69 . . the more dramatic aspects of the space program sometimes tend to overshadow the fundamental purposes of the space effort. Just as the moon had influenced the course of young lovers for centuries, so has the excitement of lunar exploration blinded many to the deeper purposes and far reaching benefits of the nation’s overall space program, and its deep impact on present and future generations. “. . .a dynamic space program will . . . bring rewards in knowledge, wonders, and resources far surpassing the investment it requires in money, materials, and brainpower. We do not know all that we shall learn when we are able to place men, instruments, telescopes, and laboratories beyond the envelope of the earth’s atmosphere. But we do know that we shall know a great deal more than we can possibly now know about the reality of which we are a part.” (Text)
NASA’s previous approach to preventing spacecraft fires by “preventing their ignition” had been inadequate, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified at open hearing held by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. Also present were NASA Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations. NASA’s future approach would seek to: (1) minimize possibility of ignition, recognizing “that this possibility will always exist”; (2) limit chance of fire’s propagating once it has started; and (3) minimize consequences of fire to crew. Dr. Mueller outlined an extensive program of testing, redesign, and procedural changes, which included escape hatch for Apollo spacecraft that could be opened in two seconds; search for new, less flammable materials for cabin interior and spacesuits; and revised emergency procedures. All improvements and changes would be incorporated into an advanced version—Block II—of Apollo spacecraft. No more Block I spacecraft like Apollo 204 would be used for manned space flights. Dr. Mueller said no estimate of fire’s eventual cost in time or money would be made until completion of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, but he indicated that it would be at least 8 to 10 months before next manned Apollo flight. Dr. Mueller testified that launch rehearsal during which fire had occurred had not been classified as “hazardous” because seven years of experience with Mercury and Gemini programs had never indicated such tests were particularly dangerous. Even if the test had been categorized as hazardous., he said, it would have still taken 90 sec for crew to open the double hatch and complete their egress. Crew died within 20 sec after detection of fire. Webb added that the handle for equalizing pressure, necessary precondition to opening hatch, had not been actuated. Dr. Berry said carbon monoxide had asphyxiated astronauts. He confirmed that bodies had had “some thermal bums of second and third degree” but “not of sufficient magnitude to cause death.” Dr. Berry warned that “we are never going to be able to completely eliminate the risk of fire as long as oxygen is available.” Dr. Mueller said “an atmosphere which will support life will also support combustion. Therefore the first answer . . . must be fire prevention in terms of strict control of both potential ignition sources and combustible materials.” During the questioning session, Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) inquired about a 1965 report by Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel Phillips (usaf). Dr. Mueller said that he did “not recall such a report,” and when asked to supply a copy, Webb said NASA would try and identify the specific report and would make it available to the Comptroller General “under any request that the Committee . .. would make to him.” (Testimony; Transcript, 3-4, 24, 41-2, 61, 70, Apollo Accident, Part 2, 65-66, 75, 86, 97, 108, 115, 125 ff., and 130 ff.)
U.S. space program could benefit from experience and scientific research in the Antarctic, group of NASA officials headed by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun concluded after studying U.S. installations and activities at McMurdo Station since Jan. 3. Interest in the Antarctic was based on research being conducted there which was applicable to space flight and on way Americans worked under conditions of stress, isolation, and extreme cold—conditions similar to those on the moon and in space flight. The group also observed minute fungi and algae growing in Antarctic and studied methods being used to detect living organisms, as preparation for detecting and studying such growths possibly existing in harsh environments of other planets. (Durdin, NYT, 1/15/67, 87)	.
msfc had awarded Astro Space Labs, Inc., a $93,136 contract for further development and testing of a remotely controlled device to handle tools, equipment, and men in space. Called a serpentuator, device was invented by Hans Wuenscher of msfc’s Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory. It consisted of links connected by powered hinges, which could be remotely controlled from either end of the device; one end would be connected to the spacecraft; one would be free. Small versions of the device could be powered by a hand pump or batteries; larger versions, by electric motors, (msfc Release 67—151) During week of July 24: West German Cabinet approved $456-million five-year plan which would substantially expand national space program. Commenting on the approval, Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, Minister for Scientific Research, told the press that enlarged national program was necessary to create a basis for improved cooperation with other technologically advanced nations. Plan would emphasize projects that provided a “rapid spin-off” of technical knowledge for industry and the economy, he said. Among the areas of special interest would be new materials, energy sources, electronic components, and new methods of planning and managing. (NYT, 7/30/67,13)
In the last decade, the Nation acquired vast new knowledge, wrote nasa Administrator James E. Webb in Aerospace Technology’s Seventh Annual NASA issue, and it entered “a new era, a stirring period of exploration and adventure comparable to the Age of Discovery in the 14th and 15th Centuries.” Benefits from our mastery of space, he said, “are opening to us and others new sources of national power and new arenas in which to seek international cooperation as important to our future and the future of the world as sea power and air power have been in the past.” He challenged: “Unless we are prepared to move ahead with new programs of [planetary exploration, and work with useful machines and systems in earth orbit] ... we will be backing out of the Space Age almost before we enter it.” (Webb, Aero Tech, 11/20/67, 24-5)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that NASA would present, within two weeks, detailed estimates of how much the Jan. 27 Apollo accident had cost; what changes in spacecraft would be made to reduce fire hazards; and the earliest date for the first manned Apollo mission. He declined to disclose his thoughts concerning canceling nasa’s contract with North American Aviation, Inc., because of failures to meet development schedules and stay within cost estimates: “They did not do all die things they should have done, but I can say the same thing about us at NASA.” He stated his conviction that he was obligated to “act responsibly in respecting confidences between himself and contractors.” Denying that undue risks were taken in order to speed the program, Webb emphasized that NASA had “never put schedule above safety.” Apollo 204 Review Board’s study was “a good report,” he said, but it should not be construed to be an evaluation of the entire space program: “The board has done an outstanding investigation of one accident but it is not a full and fair appraisal of the space program... [and] cannot be taken as a guide to the realities of this program. . . .” In response to questioning Webb stated that, in his judgment, the pacing item in the manned lunar landing program remained the Saturn V booster, and when it was ready for manned flight there would be a spacecraft ready. Committee Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) requested that nasa witnesses appear again not later than May 9 to detail changes the program, as suggested by Webb. (Wilford, NYT, 4/18/67, C26; O’Toole, W Post, 4/18/67, Al; SBD, 4/18/67, 275)
William E. Zisch, Vice Chairman of the Board of Aerojet General Corp., was sworn in as a part-time consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on technology development and utilization of NASA-developed technology by nonaerospace industries. (NASA Release, 67-8)
nasa personnel changes: m/g James W. Humphreys (usaf) , recently returned from a Vietnam assignment as Chief of the Public Health Service Div., Agency for International Development (aid) , became Director of Space Medicine, omsf, replacing b/g Jack Bollerud (usaf), who had been Acting Director since the December 1965 death of Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II. General Bollerud returned to duty with usaf. Jerome Lederer, vice president and technical director of Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., and director of Comell-Guggenheim Aviation Safety Center, was appointed Director of Safety, omsf. Lederer would develop policies and procedures related to manned spaceflight systems safety; act as focal point for consideration of and decisions on matters related to system and flight safety; and provide continuing review and evaluation of safety provisions. m/g Charles R. Roderick, who retired May 31 from usaf where he was serving as Deputy Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs, was named Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Harold Sims, retired career foreign service officer currently serving as mayor of Sparta, Tenn., and Gerald J. Lynch, president and chairman of the board of Menasco Manufacturing Co., were sworn in as consultants to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 67— 84, 67-138, 67-139, 67-140, 67-141)
President Johnson’s FY 1968 budget recommendations marked “a turning point in the Nation’s space program,” nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said President Johnson had “placed before the Congress a program which says that this Nation must go forward in space and not call it quits at the end of this decade.” He summarized recommendations for (1) completion of Apollo program; (2) development of capabilities for long-duration manned space flight in Apollo Applications (aa) program; (3) development of “practical applications of our space know-how” using capabilities of AA program and “advanced unmanned systems like the ats-4”; (4) planetary exploration through Voyager program; (5) development of Nerva II nuclear rocket engine; and (6)	increase in aeronautical research efforts to deal with “emerging problems of civil as well as military aviation” [see Jan. 25]. Webb announced that NASA had established Voyager program management responsibilities “designed to make the best possible utilization of the proved capabilities” of JPL “and of our field centers and laboratories.” Voyager program, since 1964 under NASA Hq. Division of Lunar and Planetary Programs, would become a separate division in OSSA with Oran W. Nicks as Director and Donald P. Hearth, Deputy Director. JPL would be responsible for surface laboratory, tracking, and mission operations systems; msfc, for orbiting spacecraft and Saturn V launch vehicle systems; and LaRC, for landing capsule bus system. Discussing the NASA program, Webb said: “I should be very clear on the subject of risks. In moving ahead to utilize the resources made available to us, we have had to take technical risks in the development of our equipment and in establishing our schedules. These have included risks that a particular design or line of development would not succeed in meeting the specifications; risks that schedules might not be met; and that we could not recover from a serious setback because we did not have parallel or back-up developments. But we have not knowingly accepted a higher level of risks in order to meet our manned flight schedules. In our specifications, trade-off studies, test criteria, or mission plans, we have taken no risks to the lives or safety of the astronauts that we could find a way to avoid.” Webb urged that decisions on Voyager and aa programs and on Nerva II be made this year to avoid acceleration of the “dispersal of the know-how that we have built up in government, industry, and universities that has already begun___” Questioned by Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) on whether U.S. or U.S.S.R. led in space technology, Webb replied that U.S.S.R. would be ahead in large spacecraft until “we get the nerva as a third stage for the Saturn V which will roughly double the capability of the Saturn V for Earth-escape missions.” While U.S.S.R. may lead in planetary exploration, he said, U.S. was superior in “the very sophisticated use of microminiaturization and many new techniques of handling data.” (Testimony; Transcript, 14-15, 28-9, 34; NASA Release 67-40; NYT, 3/1/67, 29)
Charges that haste to meet 1970 deadline to land first man on the moon had contributed to Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy were completely “unfounded,” Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told closed hearing of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in testimony released Feb. 11. “. . . the Apollo program is . . . the longest R.&D. program that we have undertaken in this Nation. ... It has been paced at a deliberate pace so that it would in fact reasonably economically, but certainly safely, arrive at a set of equipment capable of carrying out the mission. . . .” Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, said that a total of 20,756 hrs had been accumulated testing the use of 100% oxygen in NASA-sponsored spacecraft and spacesuit evaluation programs. Before Jan. 27 accident, three fires had occurred in pure-oxygen ground simulators: in all cases fires had been traced to electrical systems not used in spacecraft and crew members had recovered from burns. NASA witnesses recounted long history of precautions to avoid spacecraft fires, including insulation, circuit design and circuit protection for electrical wires, and fire-testing of over 400 materials. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., suggested that exact source of ignition might never be pinpointed: “It is therefore possible that we may fly the Apollo without having been able to establish the cause of the fire. Even in that case, I believe that the care and skill with which the board and program office are conducting their investigations and review will provide the necessary assurance that such an accident cannot be repeated. . . .” (Testimony)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., submitted second interim report to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on Apollo 204 Review Board investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo I astronauts died. Board had established 21 panels to conduct inquiry, and Dr. Seamans said he was satisfied that the procedures they were following were “well worked out. When this work is completed, it will give us as clear a view as can be obtained from the evidence.” Source of ignition had not yet been determined, but physical evidence thus far examined indicated fire had had considerable variation and density and might have had more than one phase. “One hypothesis, supported by the cabin pressure history, assumes a small, low-grade fire whose heat was at first largely absorbed by the spacecraft structure and that was burning at the time of the first crew report; that fire may have continued for as long as ten seconds. A more intense fire may have then developed, causing the rapid increase in cabin pressure. This fire was probably then extinguished by the depletion of oxygen.” Additional information on accident had been identified and was being analyzed. It was now clear that all three spacesuits had been burned through, Astronaut Grissom’s receiving the most exposure and Astronaut Chaffee’s, the least. Dr. Seamans said disassembly of spacecraft was proceeding with great care, and spacecraft was expected to be removed to industrial area at ksc by Feb. 17. He concluded: “It is important to note that no single spacecraft element is touched or removed for analysis without full Board approval and evaluation of its possible effect on any of the other on-going studies or analyses.” (nasa Release 67-28)
President Johnson, in his State of the Union address before joint session of Congress, deferred decision on deploying a Nike-X antimissile missile system despite evidence that U.S.S.R. was building a defensive system near Moscow. “We have a solemn duty to slow down the arms race . . . if that is at all possible, in both conventional and nuclear weapons and defenses. ... I realize any additional race would impose on our peoples and on all mankind for that matter, an additional waste of resources with no gain in security to either side.” The President said he intended to seek international agreements “bearing directly on this problem.” He did not mention the U.S. space program in his address. {PD, 1/16/67, 26-39) January 10—11: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed achievements and objectives of U.S. space program in a series of lectures at the Univ. of Sydney Summer School, Australia. After emphasizing intimate interrelationship between nasa’s unmanned and manned programs, Dr. Mueller assessed Mercury and Gemini flights: “In the Mercury program, we established man’s capabilities in short space flights and we laid the foundation for manned space flight technology. In the Gemini program, we gained operational proficiency, learned about man’s capabilities in flights lasting up to two weeks, and developed new techniques.” The Apollo program, he said, was proceeding on schedule, and several alternative post-Apollo programs were under consideration: “(1) Direct economic benefits, with emphasis on extensive earth-orbital activities; (2) Lunar exploration and science; (3) Planetary exploration and science; (4) Maximum effort aimed at pre-eminence in earth-orbital, lunar, and planetary activities; (5) Balanced combination of economic benefits, lunar and planetary exploration, and science.” (Text) Scheduled to enter commercial service Jan. 27, Intelsat II—B would provide 24-hr communications service between U.S. and earth stations in Hawaii, Japan, and Australia; assist in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements; and provide military communications between Hawaii and Japan, and Thailand and the Philippines for National Communications System (ncs) . It was second satellite in ComSatCorp’s intelsat II program to place two comsats in synchronous orbit—one over the Pacific, one over the Atlantic; first satellite— Intelsat II-A—was launched by NASA Oct. 27,1966, but failed to achieve synchronous orbit because apogee motor malfunctioned. Subsequent “systems tests” of the apogee motor at Arnold Engineering Development Center indicated malfunction had been thermal in nature, intelsat ii comsats, larger and improved versions of Early Bird (intelsat i) satellite, were capable of handling television and data transmissions of 324-801 0—69up to 240 voice channels, (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Release; UPI, NYT, 1/8/67,18; 1/12/67, 8; 1/15/67, 57; AP, W Star, 1/8/67, A18; Reddig, W Star, 1/11/67, A5; W Post, 1/12/67, Cl)
Astronauts Donald K. Slayton, Alan B. Shepard, Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Frank Borman, and James A. McDivitt, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, expressed confidence in NASA’s management of U.S. space program. They noted that there had been only one mishap in the program, compared with 16 successful manned flights under the same management. Since fire had been foreseen as a significant danger in orbit but not on the launch pad before fueling of the launch vehicle, everyone had been “lulled into a sense of false security . . . [and] grossly underestimated the fire potential of the spacecraft,” they said. Schirra explained confidence astronauts felt prior to the fire Jan. 27: “The back-up crew [of which Schirra was commander] had left the Cape with the feeling that we had a good spacecraft behind us. ... I was not at all prepared for the news I received when I arrived at Houston.” (Hines, W Star, 4/18/67, 1)
Esro II, first satellite designed, developed, and constructed by ESro under July 8, 1964, nasa—esro agreement, was launched from wtr by four-stage Scout booster but did not achieve planned polar orbit. NASA officials were studying telemetry in an attempt to determine cause of Scout’s failure. Primary NASA mission objectives were to place Esro II in planned orbit and to provide tracking and telemetry support. 153-lb satellite carried seven experiments for solar astronomy and cosmic ray studies representing six different organizations from U.K., France, and the Netherlands. ESRO was responsible for delivery of satellite to launch site, for equipment and personnel necessary to mate spacecraft to launch vehicle, and for testing spacecraft, (nasa Proj Off; UPi, NYT, 5/31/67, 1)
Satellite reconnaissance alone justified spending 10 times what U.S. had already spent on its space program, President Johnson told a group of Southern educators and Government officials in Nashville. Because of this reconnaissance “I know how many missiles the enemy has.” Before making his remarks on space, Mr. Johnson said he did not wish to be quoted on that section of his talk, but more them 100 persons not bound by press rules heard the statements. (Clark, NYT, 3/17/67, 13; Loory, WPost, 3/18/67)
American Astronautical Society’s (aas) 13th Annual Convention, “Commercial Utilization of Space,” was held in Dallas. msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun stressed the importance of space exploration to man’s general welfare: “The space program is providing us with new and valuable scientific information about our environment in this universe. The space budget cannot be justified, however, solely on the basis of expanding scientific knowledge, even though the discoveries may be regarded priceless by one segment of society. Space technology must continue and expand its contributions to the satisfaction of the needs and desires of society in general if it is to become a permanent outlet for man’s creativity and energies.” Dr. von Braun later suggested to the press that the lunar module (lm) might not be ready for the Apollo lunar mission as soon as the other launch vehicle and spacecraft elements. In that event, he said, NASA might decide to “fly the lunar mission [as a manned circumlunar flight], but just not activate one phase of it.” (Text; Av Wk, 5/8/67, 17) Future potentials of navigation satellites were outlined by Eugene Ehrlich, Navigation and Traffic Control Program Chief, OSSA. Navigation satellites could provide: (1) high-accuracy position determination service to craft, people, and shore stations; (2) communications service to pilots, traffic controllers, and passengers; (3) air traffic control and maritime coordination; (4) sst radiation warning; (5) search and rescue aid during emergencies; (6) weather routing for aircraft and ships; (7) iceberg warning; and (8) data on migratory habits of marine, land, and sea life. (Text) George S. Trimble, Director of Advanced Planning, omsf, called for increased industry responsibility in space exploration. NASA builds “the roads into space. It is beholden on . . . industry to make certain that we build the proper ones for . . . future use. ... As we look forward to missions of ever-increasing complexity, it is important that we continue to insure the most effective accomplishment of the most worthwhile experiments that this country can devise.” (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), describing industry’s attempts to capitalize on non-Govemment space business opportunities as “substantially insufficient,” urged industry to submit imaginative proposals for commercial development of space and to solicit Congress’ support for the effort. (AvWk, 5/15/67,67) A more realistic basis for determining space transportation costs should be devised to reflect actual use of the object in space, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus suggested. Although cost reductions were being studied, prospective commercial users of space should expect to spend about 10% of their overall program costs for launch operations, he said. He emphasized that more substantial savings could be realized in other areas such as reusable boosters and payload; increased life cycle of payload; reserviceable payload; and booster and spacecraft propulsion. (Text; Av Wk, 5/15/67,69) NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin noted that space program had to defend itself continuously to enlist international support: “In ten years of space development, no nation has been harmed in any way. We must point to this record constantly in order to improve the atmosphere and wisdom of international consideration . . . [and] emphasize the expansion of benefits rather than restrictions upon progress. The record makes clear that we can address the more complicated questions of international organization on an evolutionary basis with the advantage of growing experience. The needs of the developing world and the magnificent record of space applications so far combine to show that the issues of international organization are secondary to the task of accelerating benefits for the world.” (Text) mit Head of Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics Dr, Raymond L. Bisplinghoff and NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop discussed selection of technology and optimum conditions for its development. They pointed out how such development “. . . triggered vast areas of accomplishment in [its] wake [and] produced a sustained and long-term stimulus to education [and provided] influence [that is] one of spirit rather than power. . . .” Turning to discussion of impact of space program on engineering practices, they cited a major stimulus which was produced by “. . . the extreme environment of outer space combined with the requirements for low weight, small size, and exceptional reliability.” They pointed to the new stimulus to “imagination and creativity” among engineers. Among important reasons for having a space program they listed satisfaction of society’s needs; developing technology should serve as “. . . a solution to an existing or foreseeable social problem.” Calling attention to the international arena of technological development, the speakers urged “a balance of technologies in our favor [which] will . . . require wisdom in the selection of new tech324-801 0—69 nologies ... so vital to our national well-being and survival that [we] must, to the greatest extent of our ability, use imagination, good judgment, and energy in their planning and execution.” (Text) TRW Systems Group President Dr. Ruben F. Mettler suggested that space environmental characteristics could be useful and, in some ways, unique for certain manufacturing operations. He stated: “An environment so widely different from that to which we are accustomed suggests we [determine] whether the new features can be used for making conventional products of improved quality or performance or at lower cost, whether they can support new processes previously considered impractical, or if they can lead to new products of such characteristics that they create new and currently unidentified markets.” Mettler suggested these environmental characteristics for space operations which would be of interest to “possible specialized manufacturing operations”: low temperatures, approaching absolute zero with use of space cryostat; high temperatures with use of solar concentrator; near-perfect vacuum of infinite extent; weightlessness in orbit; low gravitational forces on moon; and radiation environment. (Text) Awards for achievement in 1966 presented at convention included: (1) aas Space Flight Award to msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth for “distinguished contributions to aeronautical and space research . . . direction of continuing investigation of man’s capabilities in space, and . . . active participation in the scientific community for the public good”; (2) aas Flight Achievement Award to Astronauts Charles Conrad and Richard F. Gordon for “their new space flight altitude record and the world’s first one-orbit rendezvous on Gemini XI”; (3) Melbourne Boynton Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, afsc, for exceptional accomplishments as the first flight surgeon in charge of astronaut medical operations; (4) W. Randolph Lovelace II Award to Dr. Robert M. Page, former Director of Research, Naval Research Laboratory, for pioneering work in rocket astronomy and contributions to radar development; and (5) aas Fellowships to msc Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry “for providing exceptional medical support for the NASA manned spacecraft programs,” and to msc Director of Engineering and Development Maxime A. Faget for “contributions to the basic conceptual design of the Mercury spacecraft and . . . subsequent engineering efforts” on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo Projects, (msc Release 67-15)
Science press briefing on Surveyor III was held at NASA Headquarters. Dr. Ronald F. Scott, Cal Tech, showed a movie composed of a time-lapse sequence of still pictures of the surface sampler digging a small lunar trench. The device also picked up a small rock in left side of scoop and tried unsuccessfully to crush it, exerting between 200-300 psi. Dr. Scott concluded that rock examined was at least harder than sandstone, which would have broken under impact of about 200 lbs. Surveyor III also confirmed that moon’s surface could support manned lunar landing. Consistency of surface was found to be comparable to wet sand with bearing strength between three and eight psi. Dr. Scott said of an exploring astronaut: “He’ll leave a definite footprint, that’s all.” Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said a series of 50 color photos taken by Surveyor Ill’s cameras using color filters indicated that lunar surface was gray. “The gray varies in shade from a pale to a very dark gray, but it appears to be basically all gray.” He said this color probably resulted from lack of moisture and of air on moon. Minerals on earth were brightly colored because of higher state of oxidation possible under earth environment. Dr. Shoemaker noted that some of the lunar material photographed by Surveyor III was very dark, suggesting that it had been coated with a darkening substance which he nicknamed “lunar varnish.” Among photos displayed were two pictures of the eclipse in which earth was depicted as a dark circle sitting between spacecraft and sun. Earth appeared to have partial halo of deep sunset color in one photo and orange areas connected by a faint purple halo in the other. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/24/67, A12; Clark, NYT, 5/24/67, 50; Hines, W Star, 5/25/67, A13)
Dept, of Agriculture scientists, in April testimony released by House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Agriculture, predicted that the application of remote sensing techniques developed in conjunction with U.S. space program, could revolutionize agriculture. They requested $340,000 for FY 1968 to adapt equipment to agricultural requirements. Equipment, currently flown in aircraft, was used to identify accurately and within minutes the soil conditions and moisture, crop yield, and incidence and severity of diseases. Dr. G. W. Irving, Jr., Agriculture Administrator of Agricultural Research Service, predicted: “Once we are in operation from satellite-type spacecraft, the possibilities for securing vast amounts of useful information within extremely short time periods are almost limitless.” (AP, B Sun, 5/29/67)
Lunar Orbiter III press briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. Leonard Reiffel, Apollo Program, omsf, said nasa had selected eight “candidate” locations along the moon’s equator as the smoothest and safest possible sites for first Apollo manned landings. Selection had been made after careful screening of photos taken by three Lunar Orbiters and Surveyor I. Detailed analysis of photos indicated that safest area might be a broad plain in the southeast part of the Sea of Tranquility—just east of Maskelyne D crater—where the surface was flat and there were few dangerous boulders and no deep craters. NASA officials emphasized, however, that no single site would be selected: each mission would have three possible sites along the equator-—one in the east, one in the center, and one in the west—to allow for launch delays. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, described evidence of “seismic erosion” as “one of the major processes on the moon’s surface that Lunar Orbiter has given us information about.” Several photos showed dunes of soil-like material that appeared to be debris from moon-quakes filling old craters. Some of the smoother plains on the moon might be caused in part by this process, Masursky suggested. (Wilford, NYT, 4/7/67, 1, 14)
Gerald J. Mossinghoff, Director of the Office of Legislative Planning at U.S. Patent Office, was named director of Congressional Liaison Div. in NASA’s Office of Legislative Affairs, (nasa Release 67—297) Dr. Hilliard V. Paige, General Electric Co. Vice President and general manager of Missile and Space Div., compared role of the space program in stimulating technological development to that of World Wars I and II. World War I, he said, marked real beginning of American'aviation activities. World War II led to current U.S. leadership in production of jet aircraft. Space program was current counterpart of this stimulus, he noted, but program was declining because of crippling budget and program cuts. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) described his experiences living in Sealab II [see Aug. 28, 1965] and plans for a larger Sealab III in 1968. In addition to Sealab experiment, series of special vehicles would be tested, he said: Deep Submergence Rescue Vehicle (DSRV—1) to rescue men from disabled submarines resting on ocean floor; Deep Submergence Search Vehicles (dssv) to conduct research on ocean floor, collecting and surfacing small objects; Nuclear Powered Deep Submergence Research and Ocean Engineering Vehicle (NR—1) which would run along ocean floor on wheels; and Large Object Salvage System (loss) to develop a variety of tools, from surface craft with strong lifting ability to equipment enabling swimmers to operate effectively in deep water. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/6/67, 35; 12/24/67, E3; NY Academy of Sciences pio)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee had died of “asphyxiation due to smoke inhalation” but cause of Jan. 27 flash fire was still unknown, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., reported in memorandum to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr. Seamans had met Feb. 2 with Apollo 204 Review Board at Ksc. “. . . clear identification of the source of ignition or of its possible source will depend upon detailed step-by-step examination of the entire spacecraft and its relative test support equipment.” Dr. Seamans said duplicate Apollo spacecraft had been flown to ksc from North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant to permit a “parallel step-by-step disassembly process.” In addition, Board was “defining a series of investigative tasks . . . and assigning these to teams for execution. . . .” Report confirmed that spacecraft had been operating on external power when fire occurred, but there was no evidence “up to this time that the source of power whether simulated internal or external was related to the accident.” Dr. Seamans emphasized that his statement was preliminary. nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller announced that nasa would proceed with launching of three unmanned Apollo flights scheduled for 1967: AS-206, AS-501, and AS-502. Manned Apollo missions were postponed indefinitely pending the outcome of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, (nasa Releases 67-21,67-22)
New Jersey Governor Richard J. Hughes proclaimed April 1, 1967, TirosEssa Day in New Jersey to,mark seventh anniversary of first Tiros launch and to pay tribute to NASA and U.S. space program. (Text)
Apollo 204 Review Board, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Key Board members summarized the Board’s findings and recommendations. Astronaut Frank Borman, asked if he believed U.S. decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been influenced by a desire to achieve first manned lunar landing, replied: “. . . never since I have been associated with NASA have I ever experienced any decision where a known detriment to crew safety was sacrificed to any operational requirement. And although I am willing to accept risk ... I am not willing personally to accept undue risk and I would not participate in any decision which I thought was expediting a program in an unsafe manner. And in the final analysis the crew is the Review Board because if we do not like the way the spacecraft is configured, we don’t have to get in.” Borman said if on Jan. 27 he had had the information accumulated by the Board, he would not have entered the Apollo spacecraft because: (1) the test had not been classified as hazardous; (2) the spacecraft contained too many combustibles; (3) the wire that provided the ignition source was vulnerable. Borman said he would be “willing and eager” to enter a 100% oxygen Apollo spacecraft which incorporated Board’s recommended improvements. (Testimony; Transcript, 181, 209—10, 258)
Astronaut Frank Borman objected to making anyone a scapegoat for Jan. 27 Apollo flash fire and said everyone connected with the program must be blamed. Interviewed on ABC television network with Chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Subcommittee on NASA Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Borman said he had “never . . . seen safety sacrificed for anything” in U.S. space program. Both men suggested that the greatest safety problem was tendency toward complacency about dangers inherent in tests. (W Star, 4/17/67, A2)
Most probable cause of Jan. 27 flash fire in which Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee died was a sparking short circuit in worn, defective, or poorly insulated wire, Apollo 204 Review Board concluded in its final report. Copies of report were distributed simultaneously to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, congressional committees, and the press. Board was unable to pinpoint exact ignition source, but identified conditions which led to the disaster: (1) a sealed cabin, pressurized with an oxygen atmosphere; (2) an extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin; (3) vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power; (4) inadequate provisions for the crew to escape; and (5) inadequate provisions for rescue or medical assistance. Having identified these conditions, the Board addressed itself to the question of “how these conditions came to exist. Careful consideration of this question . . . leads ... to the conclusion that in its devotion to the many difficult problems of space travel, the Apollo team failed to give adequate attention to certain mundane but equally vital questions of crew safety. “The board’s investigation revealed many deficiencies in design and engineering, manufacture and quality control. When these deficiencies are corrected the over-all reliability of the Apollo program will be increased greatly.” Board offered a total of 21 recommendations, including: (1) an “indepth” review of the entire Apollo life-support system; (2) an investigation of effective ways to control and extinguish spacecraft fires; (3) severe restriction and control of amount and location of combustible materials inside spacecraft; (4) reduction of time required for crew to egress and simplification of escape operations; (5) continuous monitoring of safety of all test operations to assure adequacy of emergency protections; (6) improved ground communications system; (7) continued studies of two-gas cabin atmosphere; and (8) full-scale mockup tests to establish fire safety of reconfigured command module. Board emphasized that its report was not intended as a criticism of NASA’s entire manned program: “The board is very concerned that its description of the defects in the Apollo program . . .will be interpreted as an indictment of the entire manned space flight program and a castigation of the many people associated with the program. Nothing is further from the board’s mind.” (Text; NYT, 4/10/67, 1, 28-9; W Star, 4/ 10/67, Al, A6-7; W Post, 4/10/67, Al, A8) .
Congressional actions in response to Jan. 27 flash fire at KSC in which three Apollo astronauts died: Sen. Harrison A. Williams, Jr. (D-N.J.), urged Senate to ratify space law treaty [see Dec. 8,1966] as a worthy tribute to the astronauts. (CR, 2/3/67, S1449-50; nasa lar VI/16) Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) and Rep. Edward J. Gumey (R-Fla.) introduced joint resolution (S.J. Res. 30) to establish a Commission “to formulate plans for a memorial to astronauts who lose their lives in the line of duty in the U.S. space program.” Astronauts Memorial commission would be composed of five Presidential appointees—one NASA representative, one dod representative, and three civilians. (CR, 2/7/67, S1657; nasa lar VI/17) Sen. Vance Hartke (D-Ind.) praised efforts of Mitchell, Ind., residents to erect a memorial to Apollo Astronaut Gus Grissom. “The memorial will preserve the memory of that record for future generations who might otherwise lose sight of the spectacular achievements of the few individuals who made the first forays into space.” (CR, 2/16/67, S2071)
The 20,000 concerns that work for NASA under contract have laid off employees at the rate of 4,000 a month, largely because of cutbacks in funds, James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, told an audience at the dedication of the Olin E. Teague Research Center, Texas a&m Univ., College Station, Texas. He said about 100,000 persons had been laid off and the figure might reach 200,000. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), in a short conference following the dedication, said lack of money would be the biggest detriment to U.S. space programs, (upi, NYT, 9/18/67; Bryan Daily Eagle, 9/17/67)
David S. Gabriel, former Program Manager for the Advanced Agena at Bell Aerosystems Co., was named Deputy Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo). (nasa Ann; NASA Release 67-131)
Washington Evening Star commented on Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ open hearing Feb. 27 on the Apollo fire: “The nation’s space officials evidently have managed to keep their heads in the midst of the emotional chaos that followed the tragic accident at Cape Kennedy. They have resisted pressures from semi-informed sources condemning the pure oxygen environment that supported all Mercury and Gemini astronauts in space. And there is mounting evidence that the arbitrary 1970 goal for a manned lunar landing is no longer a maj or consideration in the space program . . . [and] that the space planners are determined that they will no longer be prompted to act because of any arbitrary timetable or out of a competitive desire to beat the Soviets to the moon, “This is as it should be. This nation should move outward into space with all deliberate speed. And right now, the emphasis should be heavy on that qualifying word.” (W Star, 3/6/67, All)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, in interview with Aerospace Management, said: “The Space Program got off the ground ten years ago on a surge of apprehension and sensationalism. This year it became very clear that public acceptance or rejection will be a key factor in shaping the U.S. objectives in space for the years ahead. Having ushered in the second decade of space exploration, both NASA and the aerospace industry should now review their ‘ledgers’ to make the best use of their achievements to date, as well as learn from the mistakes and false-starts of the past.” He predicted: “I have no doubts that before this century is over, man will set foot on the near planets [although] it seems more reasonable to me to first find out more about the other planets by means of automated robots [and] I will be disappointed if ... we don’t couple the great capabilities of the Saturn V vehicle with those of a Voyager spacecraft.” He added: “However, be they the merits of the Voyager concept or the potential benefits of Earth Resources Satellites, the public and Congress must be honestly convinced of their values if space efforts are to be supported.” (Karth, Aerospace Management, Fall/Winter 67, 5—9)
Communist China charged that U.S.S.R. had betrayed Vietnamese people by signing space law treaty with U.S. and other nations Jan. 27. (Reuters, NYT, 1/29/67,9) Washington Evening Star: “There is bitter irony in the fact that the first disaster in our space program came during a simulated launch, a checkout in preparation for the real thing. From the beginning, it has been feared that some fatal mishap was inevitable. But most people had expected it during an actual launch, in space, during re-entry or in landing—hardly during a routine test with the rocket still on its pad....” (W Star, 1/28/67, A6) New York Times: “By chance, Grissom, White and Chaffee died on the day the space treaty was formally signed in Washington, London, and Moscow. Behind the unprecedented international cooperation represented by that treaty’s conclusion was the knowledge that space holds more than enough risks for men without adding the horrors arising from strife among nations. The tragedy at Cape Kennedy underlines that somber reality.” (NYT, 1/29/67,10E) Baltimore Sun: “They were brave men. When a man finally does put a foot on the surface of the moon, Grissom and White and Chaffee will be notable among those who assisted him in getting there.” (B Sun, 1/29/67,30)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described correction of “serious procedural deficiencies in the flow of timely information” from NASA to the Committee, J. V. Reistrup reported. A letter from Rep. Miller to Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) had explained the corrective measures, worked out with NASA Administrator James E. Webb. NASA would notify the Committee staff immediately of any accident involving death or serious property damage; NASA Oversight Committee would be briefed every three months on Committee-defined “critical problem areas”; NASA would report significant program changes and problems as soon as they occurred; and nasa would furnish budget data in October, updating the data monthly. (Reistrup,. W Post, 9/23/67)
The Nation mourned the deaths of NASA Apollo Astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee. President Johnson: “Three valiant young men have given their lives in the nation’s service. We mourn this great loss and our hearts go out to their families.” Vice President Humphrey: “The deaths of these three brilliant young men ... is a profound and personal loss to me. . . . The United States will push ever forward in space and the memory of the contributions of these men will be an inspiration to all future space-farers.” nasa Administrator James Webb: “We’ve always known that something like this would happen sooner or later, but it’s not going to be permitted to stop the program. . . . Although everyone realized that some day space pilots would die, who would have thought the first tragedy would be on the ground?” Former President Eisenhower: “The accident that took the lives of three of our highly trained, skilled and courageous American astronauts is a tragic loss to our entire nation. . . .” (upi, W Star, 1/28/67,1; AP, NYT, 1/29/67)
To clarify apparently conflicting statements presented during Congressional testimony, NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement regarding selection of North American Aviation, Inc., as prime Apollo spacecraft contractor. In separate appearances before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Webb had indicated (1) that NAA was the unanimous choice and (2) that Martin Co. had been recommended by the nasa Source Evaluation Board in 1961. Webb explained: “Dr. Robert Gilruth, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden . . . were unanimous in their judgment that of the five companies submitting proposals . . . [naa] offered the greatest experience in developing high-performance manned flight systems and the lowest cost. “In the selection . . . the work of the Source Evaluation Board was not rejected or discarded. It was used as the basis for a more extensive and detailed examination of all pertinent factors . . . necessary to determine whether the facts then available formed an adequate basis for our selection of a contractor. We decided in the affirmative and then proceeded to select the contractor the facts indicated offered the most to the government. ” (NASA Release 67-122)
NASA launches Apollo 4 into orbit from Complex 39A of Kennedy Space Center in successful first flight test of Apollo/Satum V space vehicle. gency Detection System (eds) in an open-loop configuration; and demonstrate mission support facilities and operations required for launch, mission conduct, and CM recovery. Saturn V was the most powerful space vehicle developed in U.S. space program; in launch configuration with Apollo 4, height was 363 ft, and weight, fully fueled, was 6,220,025 lbs. Saturn V’s 1st stage engines produced 7,610,000 lbs of thrust at liftoff, and the launch vehicle placed 278,699 lbs in earth orbit. This launch vehicle could place 96,000 lbs on the moon. Kerosene (RP-1) was the fuel used in the five 1st stage (S—1C) engines, while 2nd stage (S-II) engines used liquid hydrogen. The five S-II stage J-2 engines, developing total thrust of 1,000,000 lbs, were rated for operations to 117-mi altitude and to 935-mi distance down-range. Third stage (S-IVB) J-2 engine, using liquid hydrogen fuel, developed about 200,000 lbs of thrust. High-quality pictures of the earth were obtained from about one hour before to one hour after apogee on Command Module apogee camera film processed at MSC. Success for Apollo 4 (AS-501), according to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, had been achieved in terms of “pre-set primary objectives.” Heat shield design, S-IVB restart, structural/thermal integrity, compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft, and ground support had been proven. Direction of Apollo Program had been the responsibility of OMSF; development of Apollo spacecraft, flight crew training, and mission control the responsibility of msc ; development of Saturn launch vehicles the responsibility of MSFC; and Apollo/Saturn launch operations the responsibility of KSC. Under overall direction of OTDA, msfn had been managed by gsfc. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 67-275; msfc Release 67-226)
Edward R. Mathews, chief of ksc Saturn systems office, was named acting Apollo Program Manager at icsc, replacing m/g John G. Shinkle (usa, Ret.), who resigned May 18. (AP, NYT, 5/30/67, 44)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, would become nasa Associate Administrator Oct. 1, NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced. He succeeded Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., who became Deputy Administrator Dec. 21, 1965. In his new position, Dr. Newell would work closely with Webb and Dr. Seamans on the planning, development, and conduct of the space program. D. D. Wyatt, Assistant Administrator for Program Plans and Analysis, would report directly to Dr. Newell, (nasa Release 67—228)
Soviet failure to launch probe toward Mars during January Mars “window” supported reports that U.S.S.R. space program had “run into budget troubles,” Newsweek reported. (Newsweek, 2/13/67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed Edison Electric Institute’s 35th Annual Convention in New Orleans: “Our flight projects, both manned and unmanned, depend upon electronic links back to earth where their data are recorded and analyzed, where their actions are controlled, and where the new knowledge is put to use. We must therefore continue to provide and operate the tracking and data acquisition networks and their associated communications. Our technology utilization program will continue to provide effective means for making available the fruits of our technological progress to the scientific and industrial community at large. And, in every area of our program effort, we are continuing the underlying supporting research and technology which make possible the development of experiments, the implementation of ideas, and the advances in technology which culminate in meaningful aeronautical and space projects. . . . Research and development, scientific inquiry and technological advance, are the province of men working here on earth. New knowledge and new tools for its application are major elements of our total national power—political, military, and economic.” (Transcript)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) made public the full text of the Phillips Report which had been withheld by NASA. Full report contained no significant information that had not been included in the summary presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space. Sciences April 18. (upi, NYT, 4/30/67, 38)
Small fire in KSC building housing an astronaut training simulator damaged $1,200 worth of equipment, AP reported. Fire occurred in a rack of gear which provided electricity to the equipment, but which was not connected to the spacecraft simulator. NASA officials said no astronauts were inside simulator when fire broke out but even if they had been there would have been no damage. NASA issued no official announcement on the fire. (AP, NYT, 5/13/67,15)
The “Phillips Report”—report by NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips which “found insufficient competence in key management and technical positions” at North American Aviation, Inc., 16 mo before Apollo accident—was being suppressed by nasa, Rep. William F.	Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged in an AP interview. Representative Ryan said he would ask Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) to demand NASA’s submission of the full report for examination by the subcommittee. (AP, W Star, 4/19/67, A6)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
Former Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev made at least two offers in the early 1960’s to show to the U.S. photos of U.S. military bases taken by orbiting Soviet satellites “in return for certain favors,” Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, formerly an NASC staff member and currently at the Library of Congress, told an aiaa meeting in Atlanta. He declined to specify what favors Khrushchev wanted. Dr. Sheldon said frequent launchings of satellites into low circular orbits indicated strongly that U.S.S.R. was observing U.S. from space: “I think there’s little doubt they are in the observation business.” It was difficult to ascertain the status of the Soviet manned space program, he said, but U.S.S.R. might feel ready to attempt a manned orbit of the moon within the next year. Concerning reports that several cosmonauts had died during space flights, Dr. Sheldon said U.S.S.R. had definitely not lost any men in orbit and probably had not lost any men in the space program before the April 24 death of Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. He acknowledged the death of a man in a parachute accident and the death of a Soviet test pilot, but said he was not certain these deaths were involved in the space program. (AP, B Sun,
NASA Administrator James E. Webb presented the Distinguished Service Medal—nasa’s highest award—to former nasa General Counsel Walter D.	Sohier in special Washington, D.C., ceremony. Sohier was cited especially for his efforts on the space law treaty, patent policy, and nasa-university-industry relations, (nasa Release 67-39)
Dr. Roger W. Heyns, Chancellor of the Univ. of California at Berkeley, was named chairman of NASA’s Ad Hoc Science Advisory Committee, replacing Dr. Norman F. Ramsey of Harvard Univ., who resigned to devote more time to his new duties as president of the Universities Research Assn. Established in March 1966, the Committee advised NASA on the conduct of future space programs, including manned programs. (NASA Release 67-191)
End of the “space race” between U.S. and U.S.S.R. was nowhere in sight, Holmes Alexander speculated in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “As matters stand today, the space contest is pretty much a race between the Communist and capitalistic systems. . . . Percentagewise the Soviet government is investing 2.5 times as much of its gross national product in the moon dash as we are. Moneywise, the investment is about equal. But the Russian economy, being much more ‘managed’ than ours, permits the ordering of what our economists call an ‘internal brain drain.’ Russian consumer industries are raided in order to feed the USSR space programs, whereas . . . NASA must compete . . . [with other agencies]. “It is wishful thinking to believe that the Russians will make any substantive concessions to ease the cost of the space race. As in Vietnam, we are locked in an expensive contest against Communism. Nobody has yet found a way to the negotiation table.” (Alexander, P EB, 5/9/67)
Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller (D-Calif.), in a Letter to the Editor of the Washington Evening Star, commented on William Hines’ May 25 column criticizing Committee member Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) speech before the National Space Club May 17. “The article unfairly alleged that Rep. Joseph E. Karth ... by speaking out . . . was the ‘tool’ chosen by the administration to do a public relations job for NASA and the space program. . . . “What Mr. Hines failed to say was that Congressman Karth has led a number of hard-hitting congressional space investigations over the years for me. Both NASA and the contractors involved were ‘taken to the woodshed.’ The Apollo program is no exception. Mr. Karth has been critical—and made it clear that the accident responsibility falls squarely on NASA and the contractor. “Very simply, Mr. Karth said that perhaps the Congress, the administration and the press could do a better job of giving the public objective information on the space program. The wide swings from ‘everything is great’ to ‘everything is wrong’ must be confusing. . . .” (W Star, 6/6/67, A12)
Glennan Space Engineering Building in Cleveland at Case Institute of Technology was dedicated, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We need more men like nasa’s first administrator . . . Dr. Keith Glennan . .. men who are willing ... to seek out new facts, new concepts of reality as to the current human situation and [who] have the courage to base new and untried political, professional, industrial and technological ventures on information they test and learn to trust.” Recognizing the value of institutions who provide graduate education, he said: “There is little further room to doubt that a high level of basic research, an intellectual activity that must be closely associated with graduate education, is indispensable to an advancing front of scientific knowledge. . . .” Webb referred to a June 1957 speech of J. S. McDonnell of St. Louis who had made predictions to graduating students at Rolla’s Missouri School of Mines. Prediction No. 1 had a satellite circling earth and moon in 12 years. Webb said accomplishment was completed in three months for earth and in two years for moon. Prediction No. 2 had a satellite circling earth and Mars in 23 years. Webb said this was accomplished in seven years. Prediction No. 3 had manned space flight in earth orbit in 33 years. Webb pointed out this was done in four years. Webb continued: “If we look backward, we can easily see that it took 37 years to conquer the earth’s oceans ... by the Caravelle sailing vessel [and] after that 37 years, the mind of man was never the same again. Control of the earth’s ocean avenues by England through the maintenance of a favorable balance of ocean technology was a predominant force for stability in the affairs of men for over 400 years [but] no clear favorable balance of air technology was held by any one nation long enough to create world stability. It was, in fact, a predominant force in the affairs of men for less than 60 years. Space technology will be a dominant force far longer than was the case for those of ocean and air. Not limited as was the ship to the water or the airplane to the air, or by international boundaries, or to the fuel that its tanks can carry, spacecraft are today unlimited tools to explore and measure the environment within which the earth itself moves and has its being.” (Text)
In informal remarks at Kennedy Space Center, NASA Administrator James E. Webb predicted that congressional cuts in the space budget would slow up the launch rate and lead to the phasing out of Apollo equipment after man landed on the moon. Webb said that only nine of the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles could be launched before 1970, instead of 13 planned launchings. “I don’t think there’s any doubt that to absorb this cut for $500 million, after already having absorbed a $600 million cut back in 1964, means that we will have to slow up the launch rate,” he stated. The cut had also knocked out any new planetary missions before 1975. Space budget cuts would likely mean die elimination of the Saturn IB from the middle-term space program, Webb explained in a brief press conference. NASA was committed to the purchase of 16 Saturn IB launch vehicles. Three had been flown; the next one would propel the first manned Apollo into earth orbit in mid-1968. NASA planned to switch manned flights to the three-stage Saturn V as soon as possible. The first Saturn V flight, an unmanned test, was scheduled for Oct. 19. The Saturn IB had been planned for continued use on flights not requiring the huge power of the Saturn V, but Webb said that emphasis instead would switch to the Air Force’s Titan HIM launch vehicle, being developed for the military Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Webb listed several future checkpoints: (1) fewer orders for new Apollo spacecraft equipment after the moon landing, in such programs as Apollo Applications; (2) definition of the next system after Apollo, which could be a 100,000-lb space station, or something bigger, launched with Saturn V, or a new launch vehicle; (3) development of new and better concepts since planetary missions have been knocked out until 1975; and (4) massive reorganizational changes a possibility for NASA. Webb and West Germany Minister for Scientific Research Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, at the press conference, stated jointly: five West German scientists would participate in studying Apollo program results, and two research satellites and a solar probe would be launched in West German-U.S. cooperative program. Stoltenberg also said that West German industry would be main contractor for an ESRO satellite for 1969 launching, the “first German satellite.” Webb said Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell had been asked to examine question “How do we . . . decide whether a mission should use man or not use man?” (Text; upi, W Star, 9/21/67; Hill, H Chron, 9/22/67)
Earth had been cooling off rapidly since 1950 because of accumulation of atmospheric dust, Univ. of Wisconsin meteorologist Reid A. Bryson told UPI. Solid particles clogging paths of sun’s warming rays had caused earth to experience an average loss in temperature from %° to 140, he said. (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/9/67) May 8—June 1: NASA’s Lunar Orbiter IV became fourth U.S. spacecraft to circle moon when it entered lunar orbit following successful deboost maneuver which reduced its speed by 1,475 mph, permitting lunar capture. Orbital parameters: apolune, 3,797 mi (6,111 km); perilune, 1,681 mi (2,706 km); period, 72 hr 1 min; and inclination, 85.5°. Launched from etr May 4, spacecraft performed 670 attitude changes, responded to 7,067 commands, and recorded two micrometeoroid hits. Spacecraft performed normally except for five-day period when camera thermal door operated improperly, causing overexposure and fogging. Problem was solved, however, and 193 medium- and high-resolution photos—including coverage of 99% of moon’s front face—were taken with almost a hundredfold increase in discernible detail for most of the area covered. Final readout, underway since mission’s photo-acquisition phase was terminated May 26 because of an encoder failure, was completed June 1. By its telephoto coverage of eastern limb areas, Lunar Orbiter IV provided the basis for extending the cartographic grid system established for front-face mapping around to the hidden side, so that features there could be precisely located for future mission planning and operations. Initial photos, taken at 2,176-mi altitude, showed broad panorama of moon’s South Pole region—which had never before been photographed—with typical rugged terrain of craters and ridges. Closer, wide-angle pictures of this area revealed a 200- by 10-mi crevice which scientists speculated had been formed by volcanic action. Other photos transmitted included excellent pictures of the Alpine Valley and Mare Orientale, a large and relatively young impact crater whose center lay beyond the western rim of the visible face of the moon. (NASA Proj Off; nasa Releases 67-127, 67-143; W Post, 5/12/67, A10; 5/13/67; AP, NYT, 5/28/67,50) During week of May 8: A sandbox full of hundreds of thousands of bullet holes accurately simulates the crater-pocked lunar surface, U.S. Geological Survey reported. Dr. Henry J. Moore, one of Survey’s astrogeologists who fired projectiles of differing calibers into a sandtable at ARC, told upi that results of experiment supported theory that moon’s craters were, for the most part, created by the impact of meteorites, (upi, NYT, 5/14/67,29)
nasa Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., reporting on gravity of budget situation in the light of pending congressional action, said that study of program alternatives would continue while hiring of additional personnel would be suspended. He gave elements of NASA Hq. guidance on restricting activities, to provide maximum flexibility for future decisions when budget and expenditure limits were clarified. (Text)
TV coverage of space launches and press coverage of rising costs of space program had been almost the only source of public exposure of U.S. space effort, said Aerospace Systems Group Vice President J. Lynn Helms at Rotary International meeting during Michigan Univ.’s Ses-quicentennial Celebration. Speaking on “A Citizen’s Return on Investment,” he outlined many accomplishments of U.S. space program that affect daily life, stating that “money spent in the quest for new information keeps coming back to us again and again ... a society that continually invests part of its annual profits into the future is a progressive society. Progressive societies serve their people better, in living standards, medicine, and health, and consideration for and by other nations of the world.” (Text)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, called for “developing a greater public awareness of the benefits of the total space program and . . . driving home the point of how close we are to realizing magnificent achievements in bettering our lives.” Writing in Astronautics and Aeronautics he said the space program “is no longer insulated from the tough competitive struggle for resources. . . . More bluntly, the NASA part of the national space program no longer has a very high priority.” He explained that “scientific and technological programs are the least understood of our national efforts. Tracing national growth and prosperity directly back to research and development is admittedly a tough job, hut I am convinced that space technology stimulates social and economic progress.” On budget levels through early 1970s, he said, -“Compared with earlier forecasts, it seems that a considerably stretched-out program will he characteristic. ...” In spite of his pessimistic outlook for the present, Rep. Karth said: “This outlook should not cause despair because the long-range prospects for progress are enormous . . . [hut] prospects must be sold to the public and top policymakers in terms of what makes sense for the overall benefit of society.” (Karth, A&A, 10/67, 86-92)
For the Saturn V program NASA purchased nine S-IVB stages from McDonnell Douglas Corp. for $146.5 million, fulfilling requirements for currently approved 15 Saturn V and 12 Uprated Saturn I launch vehicles. Delivery would begin in April 1968 and end in May 1970. Purchase brought total S—IVB contract for both vehicles to $957,182,093. McDonnell Douglas also received a $24-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract extension for S—IVB launch services at ksc, which increased total value of contract to $34 million. Included were stage receipt, checkout, launch, and launch evaluation, (nasa Releases 67—258, 67259)
Request for stricter controls to prevent “instrument abuse” at ksc was made by R. L. Wilkinson, chief of Measurement Systems Div. at ksc, in memorandum to NASA employees and contractor officials. An increasing number of instruments were requiring repairs because of tampering, “simple carelessness,” and apparent thievery, Wilkinson noted. He said he had instructed technicians in his instrument calibration shop to report all “cases of obvious instrument abuse or missing rechargeable batteries”; reports would be “reviewed and forwarded-through appropriate management channels for corrective action.” (Hines, W Star, 3/27/67, Al, A8)
Surveyor VI briefing was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL Surveyor Project Scientist, said Surveyor VI had discovered or confirmed that: (1) lunar maria were covered primarily with very fine, 0.001-in-dia particles but also with “some coarse particles and rocks up to a yard across”; (2) particles stuck together weakly and were not suspended above lunar surface; (3) radar return was from surface and not from subsurface layer; (4) strength of lunar maria was three to eight pounds psi at one- to two-inch depth; (5) composition of rock was basic and basaltic with very little meteoritic iron on the surface; (6) surface was extremely uniform; and (7) particles were cohesive and adhesive, but there was “no need for concern” about manned spacecraft’s sinking or being covered by sticky soil in maria sites investigated. Simultaneous operation of Surveyors V. and VI would permit measurement of moon’s “wobble” or physical libration by obtaining spacecraft’s range and range rate, Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief of gsfc’s Laboratory for Theoretical Studies, explained. “The moon has a sort of a nose [Sinus Medii, landing site of Surveyor L7] that sticks out in front. The earth’s gravity takes hold of that nose and wiggles it . . . back and forth as the earth slightly moves either way.” Although scientists had a fairly good idea of the size of the “nose” and how firmly earth could grab it, they did not know how the moon responded to the pull, he said. Response depended on whether lunar mass was concentrated toward the center, in which case it would yield easily, or toward the outside, in which case moon’s inertia would be much stronger. Dr. O’Keefe also showed Surveyor VI photos of lunar surface lit by sunshine. In one, corona was traceable out to a distance of 30 solar radii from the sun—furthest ever traced. Another revealed persistence of a line of light after the instant of true sunset. Line, which had appeared less clearly in previous Surveyor photos, he said, could be explained either as a layer of 0.001-inthick particles or as lunar material floating a short distance frcm surface because of electrostatic charges. Surveyor VI mission represented “the completion of two major milestones of lunar surface exploration—the investigation and certification of four prime candidates for future manned landings and the scientific evaluation of four . .. widely separated regions in the moon’s equatorial belts,” Surveyor Program Manager Benjamin Milwitzky asserted. To maximize the scientific value of the last Surveyor mission in the series, NASA had established a group of scientists to study and recommend possible landing sites for Surveyor G. As a result of group’s recommendations, NASA had selected Tycho crater, south of the equator, as primary target, and Fra Mauro, north of the equator, as an alternate. Highland Tycho area was “risky as a landing site,” he said, because it was covered by ridges, grooves, and rocks, but it would provide scientific data for comparison with data from previous lowland maria landing sites. Surveyor G, scheduled for launch Jan. 7, 1968, would be equipped with surface sampler, TV cameras, alpha-scattering instrument, and minor payload items such as magnets on footpads and surface sampler scoop and special mirrors. (Transcript; Reistrup, W Post, 12/15/67, A20; W Star, 12/15/67, A7)	_
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller appeared before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight to submit Apollo project reprogramming plans presented to the Senate May 9. Dr. Seamans assured the Subcommittee that schedules could be met and urged that Congress continue to support NASA: “We have confidence in the ability of our technical and adrrdnistrative teams, both in government and industry, to meet the challenge before us. But that is not sufficient; the Congress, representing the people of the Nation, must
NASA-Smithsonian Institution agreement providing for transfer of NASA’s historical artifacts to the Smithsonian for display in National Air and Space Museum became effective. Agreement also specified that Smithsonian would establish a Committee on NASA Artifacts, which would include the NASA Administrator or his designee, to make curatorial decisions on aeronautical and space artifacts “with regard to their significance, preservation, and ultimate disposition.” (nmi 1052.85)
Congressional role in space program and possibilities for improved international cooperation in space was discussed in General Electric Forum interview by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee. Congress’ role, Rep. Teague said, was “to examine periodically how well the work is being done and what return we are gaining in new knowledge and practical utility from the space program. . . . Each decision . . . involves the setting of a relative order of priorities for the use of the Nation’s resources for science and technology.” Expressing conviction that international cooperation in space would increase, he noted that there was “great potential in the use of space for human betterment. . . . More than 60 per cent of the world’s people, for instance, are protein-deficient today. If, by earth orbital surveys, in cooperation with the less-developed countries, we can improve that situation, our entire space program will have paid for itself many times over.” (GE Forum, Autumn 1967, X/3, 11-12; CR, 10/19/67, H13719-20)
Frank J. Magliato, Special Assistant to the nasa Administrator, was appointed NASA Executive Secretary, replacing John R. Biggs, who became Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Ann, 12/1/67)
Apollo Command Mod ole at Launch Complex 34, Kennedy Space Center, is a silent, grim reminder of the dash fire that took the lives of the three-man crew when it swept through the spacecraft during launch rehearsal. 204) died, apparently instantly, when flash fire swept through their Apollo I spacecraft mated to an Uprated Saturn I booster 218 ft above the ground. Crew was Virgil I. Grissom, one of seven original Mercury astronauts; Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space; and Roger B. Chaffee, preparing for his first space flight. Accident, worst in the history of the U.S. space program, occurred at 6:31 p.m. est at ksc’s Launch Complex 34 during first major rehearsal for scheduled Feb. 21 . mission. Immediately after tragedy, msc Director Dr. Robert Gilruth, Chairman of the Board of North American Aviation, Inc., Lee Atwood, and NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips flew to Ksc from Washington, D.C. General Phillips described the accident at a press conference Jan. 28: “The facts briefly are: at 6:31 p.m. (est) the observers heard a report which originated from one of the crewmen that there was a fire aboard the spacecraft . . .” At T-10 and holding in the countdown, observers saw a “flash fire” break out inside the spacecraft, penetrate its shell, and surround its exterior with smoke. Rescue workers rushed to the pad area but could not open the hatch for five minutes. Phillips said astronauts’ only hope of escape would have to open hatch manually with a crank tool. He refused to speculate on how long accident would delay the Apollo program or on source of the fire but admitted that “if there is an ignition source ... in pure oxygen this, of course, has flash-fire potential.” His statement that spacecraft was operating on internal power when fire broke out was corrected Feb. 3 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans: “The fuel cells in the service module were not in use, and the so-called internal power was being supplied by batteries having the same characteristics as the fuel cells but located external to the spacecraft.” NASA immediately appointed a board of inquiry (see Jan. 28) and announced that all data had been impounded pending its formal investigation. Unmanned Apollo flights would proceed on schedule, but manned flights were postponed until board’s inquiry was completed. Apollo I backup crew—Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham—were expected to be named prime crew for rescheduled mission, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-16; NYT, 1/28/67, 1, 18; 1/29/67, 1, 48, El; W Post, 1/28/67, Al, A7; 1/29/67, Al, A18; WStar, 1/28/67, A1,A4; 1/29/67, Al, A6)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Washington, D.C., women’s club that Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would report to icsc Feb. 2 to meet with Apollo 204 Review Board investigating Jan. 27 accident which killed three Apollo astronauts. Dr. Seamans would report Board’s preliminary findings to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said NASA’s decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been made after “a long series of tests and evaluations. Any change would be made only after a most careful examination of all alternatives.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., BSun, 2/2/67; W Post, 2/2/67)
Secretary of Agriculture Orville L. Freeman and . six other Government officials visited msfc. nasa Administrator James E. Webb had invited cabinet members and representatives of other agencies to visit NASA centers to become more familiar with NASA activities, (msfc Release 67—45)
Average U.S. taxpayer would not help finance any space program beyond manned lunar landing unless he could understand it and identify with its purpose, m/g John B. Medaris (usa, Ret.) told aas Symposium in Huntsville. “Putting a man on the moon was a good objective. People can see the moon. They can understand communication and weather information and possible defense benefits from a moon landing. “But after the astronaut puts an American flag on the moon’s surface and satisfies the public, what will happen to our program then? We have to have a steady commitment of great resources to keep this program going. We have got to convince the public that there is a link between them and our next objectives . . . [and] give them some sort of objective they can identify with their own welfare.” Noting that “people recoil in fear from the concept of the endlessness of interstellar space,” General Medaris suggested that public would approve of an objective such as establishment of a lunar colony. “We better forget the spectacular and use a public relations approach like the soap companies do and figure out what the public will pay for.” (Houtz, B News, 6/14/67)
In a prelaunch press conference at Launch Complex #39, ksc, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., referred to high points of Nov. 9 scheduled launch of Apollo 4: “. . . Apollo 4 launch is . . . most difficult and significant milestone to date [and] tomorrow we’ll be flight testing the Saturn V for the first time. We’ll be flight testing on Apollo spacecraft entering the atmosphere at lunar return speeds for the first time. We’ll be five-testing our launch and operational facilities for the first time, and we’ll be testing our development and operational team in its first major mission attempt for the first time. I am certain, this team . . . will not be found wanting.” (Text)
In response to charge by Harry Schwartz in the New York Times that “the costs to both countries [U.S. and U.S.S.R.] of . . . ten years of space rivalry have been enormous” and prediction that “the economic and technical problems ahead will force the space race to stop at the moon with cooperation replacing rivalry,” aiaa Executive Secretary James J. Harford defended space program in letter to New York Times: “The modest scientific dividends which he [Schwartz] credits the space program with producing are puny, indeed, compared to the effects space technology will certainly have on civilization in eons to come. . . . Technologically, both the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. are enormously stimulated. . . . Politically, the space program has produced the first international treaty in history. . . . Philosophically, the space program has made the world vividly aware that it is, itself, a spacecraft with three billion passengers, traveling in a solar orbit, in a vast universe.... “Everyone is for international cooperation, but two nations with icbm’s aimed at each other have understandable problems working out cooperative programs. . . . Perhaps the time for serious joint effort is coming. ... In the meantime, a peaceful program costing less than 1 per cent of the G.N.P., which has produced new technology at a rate that only wars have equaled in the past, . . . should not be diminished because of serious domestic problems.” (Schwartz, NYT, 10/2/67,47; NYT, 10/14/67,26)
nasa contract awards: (1) Brown and Root-Northrop Corp. were selected for negotiations of a one-year, SI0-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide jointly operational support services to msc’s laboratory and test facilities; (2) Graham Engineering Corp. and ltv Range Systems Div. were selected for competitive negotiations of a one-year, $ 10-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract for facility support services at msc. (nasa Releases 67—180, 67—181)
Minor fire broke out during an unmanned vacuum chamber test of Lunar Module (lm) descent stage mockup at wsmr. nasa officials said vehicle was under a vacuum soak condition when fuel escaped into the vacuum chamber; fire apparently developed from spontaneous combustion. It was extinguished immediately by the water deluge system, and damage was believed to be minor, (wsmr Release)
At dedication of Georgia Institute of Technology’s Space Science and Technology Center, NASA Administrator James E. Webb reviewed nasa-Georgia Tech relationships: “In the first year of the NASA Traineeship program, Georgia Tech was one of the ten original schools. It is one of five schools . . . that started NASA’s new program of Systems Design Traineeships in September. . . . Thirty-eight NASA regular trainees and five design trainees are enrolled at Georgia Tech this fall. “The . . . Center we are dedicating is one of 36 such facilities that nasa has helped to build and support on university campuses ... in a very real sense a new and valuable kind of ‘capital asset’ that will pay dividends to our nation—and to the states in which they are located— for many years to come. Here . . . for example, in the past few years nasa has invested $6.5 million for research, training, and the facility dedicated today. . . . “Even under our reduced budget nasa is sponsoring sustaining research here at a level of some $300,000 annually. ... In project research, nasa has funded a cumulative total of some $2.1 million at this university. . . . The total picture of cooperation . . . would also include a cooperative student program . . . started with . . . naca, in 1952. There are currently 31 Georgia Tech cooperative students at [msc] and six at [LaRc]. More than 125 Georgia Tech alumni are employees of [msc], and 60 alumni are at [LaRc]. . . .” (Text)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, told AP he did not think “we will ever know what caused that fire” in which three Apollo astronauts died. Thousands of NASA and industry technicians responsible for Apollo I spacecraft would always wonder whether they contributed to the accident, Teague suggested. Asked if he believed NASA officials had taken unnecessary risks to land a man on the moon by 1970, Teague said: “Maybe we were a little bit careless.” He said some of the safety checks probably should have been more thorough, but did not elaborate. (AP, W Star, 3/30/67)
A restructuring of the Nation’s space program was outlined by NASA Administrator James E. Webb in testimony on proposed nasa FY 1968 operating plan, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Decisions had reflected fiscal, resources, and time factors. The national fiscal situation required minimum expenditures on space for the next two years. Primary emphasis on completion of Apollo program and other financially important ongoing efforts would be carried out to avoid major losses. Decisions on nasa’s space posture for the 1970s would be postponed until “fiscal year 1969 budget or later.” According to Webb’s planning, “Our allocation of resources in fiscal year 1968 must hold open for later decision the most promising future aeronautical and space options which our past large investments will support.” FY 1968 operating plan figures, presented by Webb, showed nasa’s
Displeasure with NASA’s administrative officials was voiced by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of the House, “nasa continues to evade the serious responsibility of candor,” said Rep. Ryan while inserting a series of documents in Congressional Record, including Feb. 15 letter from msfc Director Wernher von Braun to S. K. Hoffman, naa Rocketdyne Div. president, on “. . . hardware failure, most . . . traceable to human error, inadequate manufacturing, quality control, or test procedures.” NASA Hq. news conference, called at 5:00 pm same day by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by key NASA and industry officials, responded to Rep. Ryan’s charges and explained that letter to Hoffman had been a case of normal Government-contractor business. Webb pointed out that subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were kept informed each month so that emergency matters could be brought to their attention. Dr. von Braun explained how inspection and quality control procedures were continued as rocket engines were processed at contractor’s plant and at Government test sites. He stated that NASA-Rocketdyne coordination on inspection continuity and quality control were applied to both the rocket engine as an entity and the rocket engine/launch-vehicle-stage complex. As trend of news conference discussion turned from quality control to Saturn/Apollo weight problems, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, said the heavier Lunar Module resulted from fire-hazard-type design changes. He stated that lm was now 31,500 lb against a 32,000-lb control weight. Referring to weight-lifting capability of Saturn V, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said lunar payload had increased from 90,000 to 100,000 lb by increasing engine efficiency. Similar improvement was expected in lm’s propulsion, which would ease the weight problem. (CR, 10/5/67, H13046-8; Transcript)
NASA contract activity:	Negotiations were initiated with McDonnell Douglas Corp. on a 121-million contract for Improved Delta launch support services. Contract would cover 20 launchings from WTR and ETR during 21-mo period beginning Jan. 1, 1968, and would provide for inspection, checkout, and actual launch. Negotiations were concluded with North American Rockwell Corp. on a $812-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for continuation of Apollo Command and Service Module Program from Dec. 4, 1966, through program completion. Contract covered engineering, design, manufacture,-analysis, and testing for Apollo spacecraft and related equipment, including production of four additional spacecraft through S/C 115A; contained improved plans for quality, reliability, assurance, and safety; and provided for an award fee based on achievement of specified management objectives. (nasa Releases 67-298,67-299)
The U.S. should expect “an early Soviet attempt to send a large payload around the moon and recover it on earth,” Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in releasing committee report: “Review of Soviet Space Program,” prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Library of Congress’ Science Policy Research Div. This 1957-67 review drew comparisons with the corresponding program in U.S. Rep. Miller commented: “At the same time that space efforts in the United States appear to be slackening, the pace of Soviet space flight has picked up by about 60 percent this year over the corresponding ten months total of last year. The strong technological base the Russians are building through a sustained, longterm commitment to space [assures them] sophisticated and intricate planetary probes . . . unmanned or manned space platforms . . . [application of] aerospace technology systems management to a great variety of industrial and social purposes here on earth.” Committee report gave “no simple, direct answer” on “whether there is a space race” but suggested “at the present time both the Soviet Union and the United States have put large resources of somewhat similar size into very broadly based programs of great strength.” Competition in overall space capability, especially on weight lifting and thrust of launch vehicles used by U.S. and U.S.S.R., was illustrated: “In connection with the nasa Administrator’s August 1967 pronouncement on the expected large Soviet vehicle [Saturn V class], he made a plea for support of an American nuclear stage to mount on Saturn V in order to leapfrog the Russians. A month later, Leonid Sedov in Moscow stated his belief in the importance of nuclear propulsion for the very large rockets which will soon be needed.” (Text; nasa SP-4007, 212; Committee Release, 11/20/67)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Armed Forces Reserves Joint Assembly at nasa Hq. “It is a mistake to think of the space program only in terms of the * rockets and spacecraft we launch. These are the focal points of our attention, but we are also developing the ability to organize and manage vast scientific and technical enterprises that involve large segments of our economic, social, and political decision-making process. This complex interdevelopment of technological power and of the social organization necessary to control, direct, and exploit it... is a central element of the space age.” (Text)
Object, believed to be “probable” 10th moon of Saturn discovered by French astronomer Dr. Audouin Dollfus of Meudon Observatory in December 1966, had been sighted by Richard L. Walker of the U.S. Naval Observatory, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. New moon, believed to be a 150-mi-dia “snowball” of very light, frozen material, was in orbit 52,000 mi from Saturn with a period of 18 hrs. Confirmation was uncertain, however; Walker, in a telephone interview, said the object was so close to the rings of Saturn that it could be a lump . in the rings, rather than a moon. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/5/67, C17) January 6: Harold B. Finger, Director of Nuclear Systems and Space Power in NASA Hq. oart and Manager of AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, temporarily assigned additional duty of heading group of NASA officials who would analyze needs for procedural revisions and functional alignments within NASA Hq. (nasa Release 67-2)
NASA’s Pioneer VIII (Pioneer C), third in series of five spacecraft designed to provide continuing measurements over the solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space, was successfully launched from etr by Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta booster into orbit around the sun. Orbital parameters: aphelion, 1.0080 astronomical units (au) or 101.2 million mi (162.8 million km); perihelion, 0.9892 au or 91.5 million mi (147.2 million km) ; period, 386.6 days; and inclination, 0.057°. Primary mission objective of the 145-lb, drum-shaped satellite was to collect scientific data on interplanetary phenomena, including magnetic field, plasma, and cosmic ray measurements for two or more passages of solar activity. As secondary mission Pioneer VIII would: (1) investigate continuously characteristics of the magnetosheath, investigate the geomagnetospheric tail, and acquire data when a highly significant solar event occurred; (2) refine primary determinations of earth and moon masses, the astronomical unit, and osculating elements of earth’s orbit; (3) provide synoptic study of solar-interplanetary relations; and (4) provide target for checkout and training of msfn equipment and operations personnel by launching a Test and Training Satellite (tts) as secondary payload. The 40-lb Tts I, carried pickaback on 2nd stage, was successfully ejected after 3rd-stage burnout, and entered orbit with 303-mi (488-km) apogee, 187-mi (301-km) perigee, 92-min period, and 33° inclination. Pioneer VIII separation, boom deployment, and initial solar orientation occurred as planned; all seven experiments— including an interplanetary dust detector and a radio propagation experiment—functioned satisfactorily; and on Dec. 15 spacecraft successfully completed maneuver which orientated the spin axis perpendicular to ecliptic plane. Pioneer VI (launched Dec. 16,1965) and Pioneer VII (launched Aug. 17,1966) were currently 144 million mi and 68 million mi, respectively, from earth and were still returning excellent data. Pioneer program was managed by ARC under ossa direction. (NASA Releases 67—293, 67—310; nasa Proj Off; W Post, 12/14/67, A17; AP, B Sun, 12/14/67,1)
Press commented on Congressional hearings on Apollo accident. Philadelphia Inquirer: “With both the House and Senate conducting their own investigations of the Apollo tragedy, in the aftermath of the exhaustive inquiry by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s own review board, there is a danger that what will result is a negative witch hunt instead of constructive criticism of benefit to the space program. Congress should strive to protect the Nation’s investment in this critically important and expensive venture and that is not to be accomplished by laboring the deficiencies of Apollo I. Above all, the concern should be for the safety of future space voyagers. It should be to certify that no unnecessary risks will be taken that might invite another lethal disaster.” (P Inq, 4/12/67) New York Times: “It is a new, and rather shocking, NASA image that is being projected by the current Congressional investigations into the Apollo tragedy. One would have expected that NASA would make available every possible bit of relevant information. . . . The Space Administration cannot afford even to raise the suspicion that it may be covering up evidence relevant to the deaths of the three astronauts . . . [and] certainly does not want to reinforce the view of cynics who insist that NASA actually stands for ‘Never A Straight Answer.’ ” (NYT, 4/19/67, 40) Washington Post: NASA “has merited the reproach of the investigators of the Apollo disaster and the searching scrutiny of the congressional committees reviewing the program. . . . What must not be overlooked however, are the risks of the space program that cannot be eliminated altogether without abandoning it___When these catastrophes take place, the Government and the people must and should react as they reacted to the Apollo fire, by demanding new and further precautions, even more careful and complete protection. But there will not be much bold venturing in a society that visits a sanguinary fury upon those unfortunate enough to preside over calamity. For in that kind of society, more and more men will discover that the way to avoid getting any reproach is to avoid taking any risks.” (W Post, 4/19/67)
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey told the National Space Club’s 1967 Goddard Memorial Dinner that U.S. space program would continue to move forward despite the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. “On behalf of President Johnson, I assure you . . . that we have not lost heart—that we will not falter—that we shall move forward with renewed determination in our exploration of space.” The Vice President said the first obligation was to “come as close as humanly possible to determining the cause of the Apollo 204 accident, so that we can make sure it will never happen again.” He said he was impressed with the “tough-minded way the Review Board is going about its work.” (Text; AP, NYT, 3/3/67, 31)
Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) expressed concern on Senate floor that the Nation’s space program suffered from a “serious lack of centralized leadership within the administration. Leadership is needed to weigh and decide on the merits of proposed space projects; to coordinate program requirements and development efforts of civil and defense agencies; and to establish long-range national space goals and to seek the resources necessary to achieve them. “I believe that this failure to assert administrative responsibility has resulted in the costly and needless development of two families of launch vehicles—one for NASA and one for the Department of Defense. Currently, NASA and the Department of Defense are each separately undertaking manned space programs having similar, if not identical, basic objectives—to determine whether man can effectively operate in space. . . .”	. Criticizing President Johnson’s support of NASA FY 1968 budget cuts recommended by House Appropriations Committee [see Aug. 21], Sen. Smith said: “I am mindful that some significant budgetary decisions must be made because of our commitments in Vietnam and social strife at home. But is the Congress to supply the initial decisionmaking power for the executive branch? Is so little consideration and concern given to determining the required resource level for space technology programs that across-the-board reduction recommended by a legislative committee can be accepted so lightly ? “There are many of us who feel that science and technology may well be the key to our future existence—to the very survival of freedom in the world of tomorrow. In the past, I believe that the administration also held this to be true. However, the present lack of responsible action in regard to our space program leads me to wonder whether the administration plans and manages the future course for our country with any foresight or merely reacts to events with fear and trepidation.” (CR, 8/29/67, S12399)
Letter to President Johnson from Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, assessed U.S. space program after Apollo/Saturn flight of Nov. 9: U.S. had captured lead in space race with the U.S.S.R. Rep. Ryan urged the President to renounce the space race, and “to make a serious request for the beginning of far-ranging international cooperation to reduce the costs and increase the benefits of space exploration—to remove the wasteful duplication of two great nations.” (Text)
United States exhibits spacecraft at Expo ’67 in Montreal: Lunar Orbiter (top left). Surveyor (center), and Apollo Command Module suspended from parachutes (right). G.	Shinkle (usa, Ret.), Apollo Program Manager at ksc, resigned for “personal reasons.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, commented: “I deeply regret the decision of General Shinkle to leave the program. Throughout his association here, his experience has been of major assistance in our contribution to the Apollo program.” (nasa Releases 67— 128, 67-129; AP, NYT, 5/20/67, 2) * NASA announced it would negotiate three-month $500,000 fixed-price contracts with Martin Marietta Corp. and McDonnell Aircraft Astronautics Co. for preliminary design studies (Phase B) of planetary entry capsules for the Voyager program. Phase B contractor efforts were the responsibility of jpl in conjunction with LaRC. Responsibility for system design and hardware development subsequent to Phase B would be divided between jpl and LaRC with jpl responsible for surface laboratory and LaRC responsible for capsule bus system, which included entry and landing equipment. (NASA Release 67—126)
erc Director James C. Elms announced appointment of Dr. Richard M. Head, Manager of ERc’s Aeronautics Programs Office, as erc Chief Scientist. In his new position Dr. Head’s responsibilities would include research in erc aeronautics and space programs and on solar flares. (erc Release 67-44)
U.S. should measure its return on space technology in terms of such things as the development of communications, meteorological, and simulation systems, rather than in dollars, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in the Second Annual Cortez A. M. Ewing Lecture at the Oklahoma Center for Continuing Education in Norman. “The marginal
NASA Administrator James E. Webb had been encountering a “storm of criticism” since the Jan. 27 Apollo accident, but “odds are he’ll see his job through,” Business Week concluded in an article summarizing Webb’s career. It noted some of Webb’s accomplishments as NASA Administrator: “. . . Webb has steered steadily growing budgets—from $l-billion in 1961 to this year’s $5-billion—among the Congressional reefs. He runs a NASA organization of nearly 35,000 people in 16 facilities that stretch from Boston to Cape Kennedy, from Houston to the West Coast—and a worldwide network of tracking stations. At the same time, he has had to deal directly or indirectly with nearly 21,000 contracting companies, which employ about 400,000 people. . . .” Article concluded that Webb had been “bruised, not beaten” by the controversy surrounding the Apollo accident. “. . . odds-makers in Washington are betting that when the smoke clears Webb will emerge still at the helm of NASA. Further, they think NASA still may meet its deadline of a moon landing before 1970.” (B Wk, 5/27/67, 71—7)
Report by House of Commons Estimates Committee urged U.K. to appoint a space minister and initiate a five-year national space program at a cost of $84-$98 million annually. Program should be directed toward the 1971 launch of a comsat which could be used for both commercial and military operations. Report criticized U.K.’s current space effort for lack of purpose and organization, noting that money “had been poured into international projects without a properly conceived national program.” {W Post, 8/9/67, A16; SBD, 8/10/67, 205)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices. Asked by Sen. Spessard Holland (D-Fla.) to make a choice between a substantial cut in funding for the Apollo Applications (aa) program and the Voyager program, Webb replied that both were vital to the U.S. space effort. “The Apollo application is a small investment to expend on something you have already spent $15 billion to get and it seems to me that this is important. “On the other hand, the United States, if it retires from the exploration of the planetary field, in my view . . . [will face] the most serious consequences because the Russians are going to be moving out there and our knowledge of the forces that exist in the Solar System can affect the Earth and can be used for many purposes to serve mankind or for military power. . . .” Criticized by Sen. Holland for refusing to make a choice, Webb said he did not want “to give aid and comfort to anyone to cut out a program. I think it is essential that we do them both.” (Transcript, 2382—3)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., visited msfc and MTF to discuss progress in AA and Saturn launch vehicle programs. He would visit msc June 28. (msfc Release 67-132; Marshall Star, 6/28/67, 1)
Engineers check the United Kingdom’s Ariel III before successful launch by mas a from wtr for U.K, Science Research Council, to investigate atmosphere and ionosphere. return on the investment in the space program is greater than in any other area. . . . One must take into account the value of the services rendered.” Asserting that U.S. investment in the space program served as “a message to the world that we do not expect to be behind the world in the area of effective use of energy,” Webb noted the success of U.S. space efforts. “We have accomplished in a decade what most informed sources in 1957 thought would take several decades.” Webb presented the Cortez A. M. Ewing Foundation with several photographs of the moon taken by Surveyor spacecraft, two atlases of the moon made from photos taken by Rangers VIII and IX, and color photos of India and Saudi Arabia taken by Gemini astronauts. (Norman Transcript, 5/7/67, 3; Howard, Oklahoma Daily, 5/9/67)
Lunar Orbiter news briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. Leonard Reiffel, Apollo Program, omsf, said that 635 Lunar Orbiter I and II photos of the 1,000-mi Apollo strip near moon’s equator had “removed any doubt that there are numbers of suitable places for Apollo to land satisfactorily.” Of the regions photographed, 10 sites appeared to have smooth areas; detailed analysis of three of these had revealed two areas that were only about 6% crater-marked. Dr. Reiffel said Apollo landing site should be 3- to 5-mi-dia oval area, relatively free of craters and boulders, with 30 mi of smooth terrain approaching it and no more than 7° slope. In addition, since moon’s optimum light ranged from 7° to 20° and sun moved across moon 13° per day, landing sites ideally should be spaced 26° apart at this longitude to allow for launch delays. “We . . . need not one site or a couple of sites ideally, but we would like, in order to make life as simple as possible, to have a number of sites. Then at the specific time of the launch ... we will pick a set of three....” Dr. Lawrence Rowan, U.S. Geological Survey, said Lunar Orbiter photos had shown that moon’s dark mare was smoothest terrain; bright rays had variable roughness and upland plains appeared very rough. He said photos indicated that mass movement on the moon modified both mare and upland. LaRC Lunar Orbiter Project Manager Dr. Clifford H. Nelson, discussing future Lunar Orbiter missions, said Lunar Orbiter 3 would be “site confirmation” flight to photograph areas already determined by Lunar Orbiter / and II as promising for Apollo landings. Spacecraft 4 and 5 might be used to photograph 400 lunar sites of primary scientific interest. Capt. Lee R. Scherer, Lunar Orbiter Project Manager, ossa, noted that one Lunar Orbiter in polar orbit around the moon could survey 80% of moon’s front face with 10 times resolution of earth-based photos. “These types of missions would provide a framework upon which to base major decisions concerning our total lunar exploration program after these initial manned landings,” Scherer said.
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying at Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ hearings on aeronautical r&d, recommended establishing a “civil aircraft technology” to counteract growing divergence between requirements for civil and military aircraft systems. Webb observed that most modern military aircraft could not be readily redesigned into economical commercial systems: “When unit costs were low and interaction between the elements of the design were small, a manufacturer could afford a substantial element of uncertainty to developing a new airplane, since it was not too difficult or costly to correct deficiencies exposed during flight operations. . . .” With the complexities of modern aircraft, however, deficiencies would lead to “major escalations in cost and could mean financial disaster for a commercial venture. . . . Economics thus require the designer to take an increasingly conservative approach in applying new and advanced concepts. . . .” This conservatism was causing an increasing gap between “the advanced technology that research indicates is possible and the technology actually being used in commerce. To assure pre-eminence in aeronautics, advanced technology must continually be incorporated into new designs. . . .” Webb said NASA was working closely with Dept, of Transportation and faa to identify and solve critical and specialized civil aviation technology requirements. He cited major efforts in supersonic transport field, including work on second-generation propulsion, sonic boom phenomena, and aircraft handling qualities; and study of jet engine noise-suppression problems. (Testimony)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences voted to report $4,851 billion NASA authorization bill (S. 1296)—$249 million less than $5.1 billion NASA had requested for FY 1968. Committee reductions included $120 million from Apollo Applications (aa) program and $71.5 million—total amount requested—from Voyager program. Responding to Committee report, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., issued a statement saying that the affected programs were of “first-rank importance to mankind. The scientists of this country have expressed deep concern that the United States is not making enough progress in the exploration of the planets. “We feel that many members of Congress will want to give further consideration to the President’s recommendations” for the aa program. (Reistrup, W Post, 6/24/67)
usaf named four usaf pilots to train for DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program: Maj. James A. Abrahamson; L/Col. Robert T. Herres; Maj. Donald H. Peterson; and Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr., the first Negro selected for a mission in the Nation’s space program. All were completing training course at Edwards AFB Aerospace Research Pilot School. They would join 12 previously selected pilots in September to begin project training, (usaf pio; NYT, 7/1/67, 1, 8)
NASA personnel changes: (1) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, resigned effective Aug. 1 to become a vice president of Polaroid Corp.; (2) b/g Carroll H. Bolender (usaf), omsf, was named manager for the Lunar Module (lm) at msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, replacing Dr. William A. Lee, who resigned for personal reasons. Bolender would be responsible for management of the lm program including design, development, and fabrication of the vehicle by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor; (3) Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, became Director of Program Control, omsf, replacing William E. Lilly, who was appointed Assistant Administrator for Administration March 8. White would be responsible for the total financial, administrative, and business management support services for omsf and the administration and direction of approved facility projects in support of the manned flight program, (nasa Releases 67-196, 67-198; O’Toole, W Post, 7/26/67, A10; AP, W Star, 7/26/67)
U.K.’s Ariel III (uk—e) scientific satellite was successfully launched from WTR by nasa four-stage Scout booster into orbit with 373-mi (600-km) apogee, 306-mi (492-km) perigee, 95.6-min period, and 80° inclination. The 198-lb satellite, which had a one-year design lifetime, carried five experiments for the investigation of earth’s atmosphere; four were operating at liftoff and the fifth was turned on after third orbit. All five were functioning normally. Third in a series of U.S.-U.K. cooperative space projects, Ariel III was designed to supplement and extend atmospheric and ionospheric investigations conducted by Ariel I (launched April 26, 1962) and Ariel II (launched March 27, 1964). Primary nasa mission objectives were to place satellite into planned orbit and provide tracking and telemetry support. NASA supplied Scout booster, conducted launch, and provided tracking and data acquisition services with stadan facilities, under overall management of GSFC. Mai or portion of the technical effort on Ariel III, including design and fabrication of spacecraft and five experiments, was accomplished in U.K. under management of Science Research Council’s Space Research Management Unit (srmu). (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 67—96, 67—115)
The overall national security significance of space, in both tactical and strategic terms, were discussed by Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, in General Electric Forum,. “The Department of Defense does not view space as a mission, but rather as a place,” he said, explaining broad Air Force responsibilities and goals in space. He cited representative features of the military unmanned space programs: (1) ballistic missile warning; (2) antisatellite defense; and (3) nuclear detonation detection. (Brown, General Electric Forum, Autumn 1967)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before the House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries’ Subcommittee on Oceanography, summarized nasa’s activities in national marine science program. NASA’s activities, primarily exploratory, were aimed at ascertaining what potential benefits could be gained in oceanography through the application of space techniques and equipment, he said. Major areas included: (1) investigation of the applicability of existing space technology to problems of oceanography; (2) studies of remote sensing of oceanographic phenomena, including analysis of data obtainable from space missions not originally conceived for oceanographic purposes such as Gemini, Tiros, and Nimbus photos; and (3) development and test of remote sensors for viewing and discrimination of oceanographic phenomena. Spacecraft, Dr. Seamans said, “will not supplant surface, subsurface, and airborne research and monitoring systems; rather they will supplement them. The absolute accuracy, three-dimensional capability, and selective resolution of these conventional systems will continue to be necessary and must be utilized as a part of the overall system to their best advantage. However, Earth-orbiting spacecraft have unique advantages for obtaining certain types of marine data as follows: repetitive worldwide coverage, greater frequency of observation (once or twice daily for polar orbiting satellites and continuous lor geostationary satellites), ability to observe remote areas at will, and an ‘all-weather’ capability for certain parameters.” (Testimony; SBD, 12/20/67,257)
