U.S.S.R. would increase pace of its space program in preparation for manned circumlunar flight, John N. Wilford reported in New York Times. Although no official Soviet flight schedules had been announced, informed sources speculated that U.S.S.R. would conduct manned earth-orbital flight, possibly within three months, during which cosmonauts in redesigned Soyuz spacecraft would practice rendezvous with another vehicle; unmanned circumlunar flight during summer 1968; and manned flight in fall 1968, in which cosmonauts or animals would circle moon in Soyuz spacecraft and return to earth. (Wilford, NYT, 2/18/68, 18)	_
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, discussing implications of FY 1969 budget reductions at AAS Symposium in Denver, Colo., said he did not find public support for space program declining. Rather, “many people who in the years following 1961 ascribed to the space program a separate, special, top priority status are now realizing, as the national leadership in the space program has understood all along, that the space program must be regarded as only one of a number of essential activities of high priority to which the country must devote substantial resources. . . . The investments made in NASA may well add greatly to the value of investments we will have to make in these other fields.” NASA was “very much in business, and it will stay in business. We are accepting the challenge of the time and will continue a hard-hitting, technically sound program aimed at the most important objectives of the future.” But he described cutbacks as well as elements of strength. “We are doing all we can to avoid terminating completely such important activities as the unmanned planetary exploratory program, but it is not likely that we will be able to proceed with the Titan/Mars 1973 missions.” Saturn I Workshop would be delayed and, “for a number of years to come, missions to use the manned space flight capabilities developed in the Apollo program will be very limited.” Reductions to a budget already “sharply reduced will have many very serious effects on the U.S. position in aeronautics and space. They are only the most recent in a series of cutbacks and, in effect, constitute something like final ratification of a decision . . . that the United States will not, at this time, take the steps necessary to continue the advances of the recent years.” Outlining NASA’s program, Webb said two flyby missions to Mars in 1969 were largely paid for. “Even at our reduced levels, I believe we can follow the 1969 missions with two orbiter missions in 1971, but will probably have to postpone for another year the start of work on the two Titan-launched orbiter and lander missions which we had hoped to fly in 1973.” The 1969 missions “were initiated three or more years ago. We are approaching the end of our approved flight programs. The number of new projects started each year has sharply dwindled since 1966 and we will soon see years go by when we will have very few flights. We may see a gap of 2 years in our manned flight program after the landing on the moon, and a second gap, equally long, after the Saturn I Workshop. “Perhaps the most fundamental decisions ahead lie in the field of large launch vehicles. Can we gap the production of Saturn V or will we have to terminate it?” Question required reexamination of uses of Titan III and of possible development of new, less costly launch vehicles. “Especially important” in this period was continuation of broad program of advanced research for future national needs, including broad university program. (Text) Sen. Gordon Allott (R-Colo.) told aas Symposium: “. . . in the thirty minutes I spend talking about the space program this morning four Tiros satellites . . . will have monitored 10 cloud covers above 40 million square miles of the earth’s surface. . . . During this same period, the Goddard Space Flight Center . . . will have received 340 minutes of data from 37 active satellites; and the NASA communications network around the globe will have sent and received over 750 messages dealing with information obtained from these satellites. . . . “Already the beneficial changes wrought by man’s incredible inventive genius have made their mark. When NASA launched Early Bird for Comsat three years ago, for example, it boosted the capacity of the transatlantic telephone system by 50%. The AIAA has already estimated that this new industry will be grossing $200 million by 1975. . . . “Obviously, this is not all. Too often, it seems, those interested in giving an accounting of the $30 billion invested in the space program stop once they have demonstrated technological spin-off or . . . unmanned communication and weather satellites. The crowning achievement of the space program has really been what man himself, in space, has accomplished during this past decade. For man has ventured into the hostile, mysterious world of space.” (CR, 7/18/68, S8901—3) Martin Marietta Corp. planetary scientist Allan R. Barger, who was doing theoretical work on balloon-borne Venus probe, told AAS that U.S.S.R. data released after Oct. 18, 1967, Venus probe was incorrect. Soviet report had set planet’s surface temperature at about 520° F and surface pressure at about 18 times that on earth. Barger said his conclusions, based on analysis of Soviet report and on data gathered by NASAS’s Mariner V space probe as it flew by Venus’ upper atmosphere, set planet’s surface temperature at about 890° F and pressure at 100 or more times that on earth. (Denver Post, 7/15/68)
In statement to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Milton Klein, Manager of nasa—aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, summarized progress of nuclear rocket program. Major milestone has been achieved with “operation in late 1967 of a single reactor for 60 minutes at its design power of 1,100 megawatts, a duration capability adequate for most missions.” Technology phase of nerva program was nearing completion and next step was to develop engine to flight capability, funds for which were included in FY 1969 budget request, he said. No action deferring this step could be taken without losing a major portion of capability in this field. Nuclear rocket was “a focal point for pushing forward frontiers of technology . . . [and] only major advanced propulsion program in the Nation.” High performance of nuclear rockets had been demonstrated in nine consecutive power reactor tests. Solid base of data and underrating had been built for development of flight-rated NERVA engine. “Development of the nerva engine at this time,” Klein stressed, “would capitalize on this investment and provide a major fundamental advance in propulsion capability. Its high specific impulse will provide a broad mission versatility for the high-payload, high-energy missions . . . inevitably included in a viable space program.” (Testimony)
Washington Post article by George C. Wilson logged significant changes in U.S.S.R. space program: Cosmos CCVIII and Cosmos CCXXVIII, launched March 21 and June 21, had been first Soviet “spy” satellites to stay up for 12 days instead of usual 7 or 8. U.S. space experts had said they would have to watch pattern of future satellites before concluding whether purpose of longer-lived satellites was peaceful. Launches had been logged without comment in GSFC Satellite Situation Report but West had evidence that U.S.S.R. had recovered photographs taken by them. U.S. analysts also had noted overlapping by U.S.S.R. of reconnaissance flights, possibly to ensure backup if one failed. Cosmos CCXXXIV marked 100th Soviet reconnaissance launch July 30. Cosmos CCXXXI had been launched July 10 at time appropriate for photographing French nuclear tests in Pacific near Tahiti. (W Post, 8/6/68,2)
Explaining decision to develop flight-rated nerva engine at 75,000-lb rather than 200,000-lb thrust level, NASA Manager of Space Nuclear Propulsion Milton Klein told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee that lower level would be suitable for most missions in which nuclear rocket was significantly advantageous. It was “substantially off-optimum for manned planetary landing missions,” but with manned exploration delayed, “less emphasis is now properly placed upon that mission, and the 75,000-pound-thrust nerva class is appropriate. . . . The 75,000-pound-thrust nerva gives somewhat better payload performance for orbital operations missions which start from low Earth orbit and involve a single Saturn V launch,” but its use for manned planetary missions “entails a significant performance penalty.” Further development might be required “to extend operating time and to accommodate more extensive clustering and staging if such a mission were to be undertaken.” (Testimony)
NASA announced that Astronaut Brian T. O’Leary had withdrawn from astronaut training program because he disliked piloting aircraft. Dr. O’Leary, who had completed 15 hr flying time in training program at Williams afb, Ariz., hoped to remain with space program as researcher in planetary astronomy. Astronaut F. Curtis Michel had received special permission to spend 80% of his time teaching and studying at Rice Univ. and 20% in astronaut training for one year, (msc Release 68—32; AP, W Star, 4/24/68, A2; W Post, 4/24/68, 4)
nasa issued summary of combined findings of Accident Board and Review Board appointed to investigate May 6 accident which destroyed Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) at Ellington afb. Pilot, Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, had to eject few seconds after loss of helium pressure in propellant tanks caused premature shutdown of attitude control rocket system. Helium had been inadvertently depleted earlier than usual in flight. Armstrong incurred minor injuries. Review Board, appointed by then nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Thomas 0. Paine to study accident’s possible impact on Apollo program, discovered no unfavorable effects on lunar landing project, particularly lunar module. It agreed with Accident Investigation Board in calling for improvements in design and operating practices in LLRV and urged more stringent control over such flying programs and greater attention to all NASA lunar landing simulators, (nasa Release 68—182)
NASA 10th Anniversary: National Space Club presented special award to President Johnson at White House citing his legislative and executive leadership of national space program. At Space Club dinner in Washington, D.C., Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) presented retiring NASA Administrator James E. Webb award for his outstanding contributions to national space effort. In telegram tribute to Webb, President Johnson said, “The Nation is in his debt. He will be deeply missed but gratefully remembered as his dreams continue to become reality in the years ahead.” Telegram from Vice President Hubert Humphrey said, “The span of achievement which measures a decade of space progress is one which should be a source of pride to all of us. Now a new decade beckons, with new challenges, and new opportunities. And, such is the nature of the space age that we dare not become complacent about our rate of progress or the scope of our past accomplishments. It is unthinkable that we would allow ourselves to be surpassed in technology by any other nation. I have never questioned that space endeavors have contributed significantly to the strengthening and enrichment of our whole society, through a teamwork approach by private industry, our universities, and the Federal Government. By means of this program we have vitalized our economy, developed improved methods of management, stimulated our educational system, produced new goods and services, added to our store of scientific knowledge, and buttressed our national security.” Telegram from Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said, “The space program must continue to be one of our national imperatives, and it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress.” Anniversary ceremonies also included open house and annual awards presentation at msfc Sept. 28—29. (nsc Newsletter; Texts; Marshall Star, 9/25/68,4) In anniversary statement issued by White House President Johnson said: “. . . not all of nasa’s accomplishments have been out of this world. Satellites have given us a new look at the world’s weather. . . . They have given us intercontinental television broadcasts, and broken down the technical barriers to worldwide communications. NASA has brought us advances in medical science, education, mapmaking, geology, transportation, and a host of other areas that promise a better life for us here on Earth. Its intensive research and development efforts have given us new materials, products and processes; raised our standards of reliability and advanced managerial techniques. These advances, together with the useful facilities it has built, will be lasting national assets long after the Moon landing is ancient history. . . . “In the years ahead—as in the past decade—our foremost motive is to make men wiser and life on earth more meaningful. And on the mile
In Washington Sunday Star, William Hines reported results of query of eight eminent scientists on most important single decision related to science and technology which faced President-elect Richard M. Nixon early in his administration. Consensus was: shaping of long-term science policy. Also cited were need for reexamination of priorities and goals, with firm decision on extent to which science and higher education should receive Government support; creation of Dept, of Science in cabinet or stronger Science-Government communication lines; reassessment of space funding and other “big science” projects, including proton accelerators; greater emphasis on social goals; vigorous antipollution efforts; and more imaginative use of science and technology as instruments of national policy. None of eight scientists advocated abandonment of space program after culmination of Apollo project. Alvin M. Weinberg, Director of Oak Ridge National Lab., said of space program, “This thing takes so very much money that it’s hard to get excited about any other decision in science until this one has been made. What should be its level in the 1970s? We have become accustomed to something like four or five billion dollars a year, but I doubt very much that this is a level the new President is likely to concur in.” (W Star, 12/29/68, C3)
At White House press conference nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced his resignation, effective Oct. 7, his 62nd birthday. He wished to retire to devote his time to interests in education and foreign and urban affairs after 25 yr in Government and nearly 8 yr as nasa chief. President Johnson would name Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator, to succeed him as Acting Administrator. Webb would remain as consultant to Dr. Paine until Jan. 20, 1969. Webb told press: “I leave NASA well prepared and with a conservative financial structure to carry out the missions that have been approved. They will go forward. What we have not been able to do under the pressures on the budget has been to fund new missions for the 1970’s. So, there is going to be a period when there will be fewer flights than would, in my view, have been important to do. . . . We planned with the President’s leadership in 1961 and his recommendations to President Kennedy to develop an ability to fly six Saturn V’s per year and six Saturn I’s per year. . . . Under the reductions in the budget beginning in 1964 ... we have reduced that anticipated flight schedule, or production schedule, [until] we have now cancelled the production lines on both these boosters. . . . what we will have to do is develop a new base of technology for the next generation of boosters [and] . . . the country will have to look with great care into what it is it wants to do with those boosters that will be in storage.” Answering query, Webb said, “I am not satisfied with the program. I am not satisfied that we as a nation have not been able to go forward to achieve a first position in space. What this really means is that we are going to be in a second position for some time to come. ... I am satisfied with what we have developed in every field and that we have been flying three successful generations of spacecraft. ... I think now the question is what will the fourth . . . be. We have a vast amount of capability. As the U.S.S.R. proceeds to fly and remains in the number one position, we will have the capability to start new programs as the need is clearly indicated. . . . We have worked up to a work force of 420,000 people. At the end of this fiscal year, we will be down to just over 200,000. So we have shown the administrative capability to build up and then to reduce without losing pace in the program.” Webb said NASA had decided to man third Saturn V flight in December. “We did calculate that we needed 15 Saturn V’s in program to make sure we would do the Lunar landing. We have funded eight. . . . Now we can only fly seven. So the real question is can we make the landing by number seven?” A good many people, Webb said, have tended to use space program “as a sort of whipping boy. . . . But in essence, if it were not for the fiscal problems faced by the President and the Director of the Budget I would believe that the program would have been supported in the Congress and in the country at a higher level than it has been.” Webb thought U.S. had reached parity with U.S.S.R. 2y2 yr earlier except in large boosters and spacecraft. If U.S. could have had 12 Saturns a year in late 1967 or 1968, “I think we would have forged ahead.” Instead, “while we are reducing down to half to two-thirds of our program, they are still increasing.” Webb said current U.S space program had created capability that could be used for major efforts in exploration if adequately funded. “Any danger to the United States that would come from the Russian program would be visible in time to use this capability to start out. But they are going to have the reality and the image of being out in front for a number of years to come. How dangerous that is, you will have to judge yourself.” (Transcript; Sheehan, NYT, 9/17/68, 1; Kilpatrick, O’Toole, W Post, 9/17/68, Al; Dobbin, B Sun, 9/17/68, A9)
nasa appointed Jerome Freibaum, Assistant Executive Secretary, Office of the Administrator, to succeed l/c Wayne Mathews (usaf, Ret.) as Program Manager of ComSatCorp-related activities in Space Applications Programs Office. Col. Mathews had joined Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (nasa Ann)
President Johnson reads citation before presenting NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal to fames E. Webb, who retired as NASA Administrator Oct. 7. Medal was given for outstanding leadership of America’s space program. * Business Week commented on results of “two bad decisions by agencies of the federal government.” Boeing Co. was scrapping swing-wing concept on SST in favor of fixed-wing and “word seeped out of the Pentagon that a real fight has developed over whether to cut back production of . . . F—111.” How were such mistakes to be prevented in future? “One lesson that emerges ... is that the government must learn to avoid premature commitment to any huge-scale project. , . . Another lesson is that in such major decisions, an independent, technologically competent judgment should be brought to bear on the issue. On the F—111, the President’s Science Advisory Council did not even look at the design features of the aircraft. On the SST, a Special Presidential Advisory Committee was set up, but it was chaired by [then Secretary of Defense Robert S.] McNamara and was dominated by top Administration officials. Such changes in procedures may not wipe out all mistakes, but they could greatly reduce the chances of astronomically costly blunders.” (Bus Wk, 11/2/68)
In statement on dod FY 1969 budget released by Senate Armed Services Committee, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said dod was requesting $79 million more for r&d in FY 1969 than in FY 1968 to “support more vigorously many scientific fields that show great promise and clear relevance to our future security.” dod would continue working closely with NASA to ensure maximum interchange of personnel, ideas, technology, and hardware and to avoid wasteful duplication of effort in national space program. Under new budget work on mol development would be increased substantially. “FY 1969 is expected to be a peak year of activity in the MOL program, including the completion of a major portion of the structural test programs on flight hardware, continued fabrication of hardware for the first three flights, developmental test firings of the seven-segment solid motors for the Titan III—M, and installation of the ground equipment in the launch complex.” (Text)
Edward Wenk, Jr., Executive Secretary of Marine Resources Council, told new American Oceanic Organization in Washington, D.C., “We are ready for the next step in Federal management of marine affairs—creation of an independent civilian operating agency.” Chairman of new group, Rep. George E. Shipley (D-Ill.), member of House Appropriations Committee, said, “I think that we will see the time that this country will spend as much in oceanography as we are spending in the space program.” (Corrigan, W Post, 11/17/68, Kl)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced organizational changes: Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Assistant Director for Launch Vehicles, was named Chief of new Special Projects Div. for jet noise and v/stol aircraft study and to new post of Assistant Director for Aeronautics. Newell D. Sanders, Chief of Chemistry and Energy Conversion Div., would assume additional duties as Assistant Chief of Special Projects Div. Milton A. Beheim, Chief of Aerodynamics Branch, Advanced Systems Div., was appointed Chief of new Wind Tunnel and Flight Div. Edmund R. Jonash, Chief of Centaur Project Office, was named Chief of new Launch Vehicles Div., which would include previously separate Centaur, Agena, and Atlas Project Offices. William R. Dunbar would become Project Manager for Centaur. H. Warren Plohr and Edward F. Baehr continued as Agena and Atlas Project Managers. (LeRC Release 68-29)
Commenting on retirement of James E. Webb as NASA Administrator, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) on House floor said: “I share with Mr. Webb his continuing concern that the Soviets are determined to be the No. 1 power in space. Jim Webb has counseled us often and with great clarity on the seriousness of such a situation. We must heed Jim Webb’s warning that the United States should be first in space. . . . [He] is to be congratulated for his unselfish dedication and great skill in leadership. ... It will be difficult for any man to fill those large and capable shoes.” (CR, 9/20/68, E8135)
First flight test of Apollo lunar module (Apollo 5) Jan. 22—23 was adjudged success, nasa officials were gratified with maturity of spacecraft’s hardware; studies indicated LM showed more maturity in its first flight than many previous spacecraft, including some designed to be manned. Although overly conservative programming of guidance computer caused early shutdown of first descent propulsion system burn, data indicated no problems with computer or system’s engine. (nasa Release 68—19)
MSFC announced it had requested proposals from 11 aerospace companies for six-month design and definition study for dual mode lunar roving vehicle (lrv) capable of transporting astronauts on lunar surface and of performing automated, long-range scientific traverses across moon under remote control from earth. Vehicle was to permit manned sorties of up to 6 mi from landed spacecraft, with total round trip of more than 18 mi. After astronauts left moon, lrv would be placed in remote control mode for automated long-range (600 or more mi) geological and geophysical trips for one year. It would collect up to 200 lb of lunar samples and measure terrain, then rendezvous with manned spacecraft for return of samples to earth, (msfc Release 68—274; SBDf 12/3/68, 134; Marshall Star, 12/4/68, 1)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent five hours in briefings at ksc, ascending to spacecraft level of Apollo 8 moon rocket, performing simulated rendezvous and formation flying inside mock spacecraft, and lunching with NASA officials and Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. During visit, he said: “The space program has contributed greatly to the structure of our nation. ... I have felt it has been underfunded at times and we will pay the price. I feel it is a wise investment on the part of Congress and the public. I’ll do what I can as a private citizen and a former chairman of the space council to see it is funded.” (ksc Release ksc—496—68; AP, W Star, 11/20/68, A8; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, Cl; Today, 11/20/68, 1) _
President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget was presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. At $4.37 billion, authorization request was $700 million below FY 1968 request, almost $500 million less than FY 1968 authorization, and $200 million below FY 1968 appropriation. Webb stated: “nasa’s expenditures for FY 1969 will be down $230 million from this year, $850 million below last year, and $1.3 billion less than in FY 1966. The nasa program has been cut. I hope you will decide it has been cut enough and will approve the full amount recommended by the President. “The FY 1969 request does not meet at all our Nation’s needs in aeronautics and space. It is a compromise—one which I fully support— between needed work toward advances in aeronautics and space which we can and should make, and other overriding requirements. . . . During this period when we are reducing our effort by one-third the U.S.S.R. is still increasing its effort. ... In terms of scientific advance and in applications of immediate economic use, such as meteorological and communications systems, our program has contributed more than theirs. But in terms of the use of large launch vehicles and in the rate of which future greater capabilities are being developed they are and will remain ahead, at our 1969 budget level. The hard fact we now face is that just as we have begun to catch up in large-scale booster operations ... we are cutting back our program while they continue to advance.” He listed guidelines within “necessary fiscal constraints,” which determined decisions on FY 1969 program and budget estimates. NASA would continue 1968 operating plan for Apollo program while using all-up test concept for Saturn V and Apollo. Complete success in all remaining eight Saturn V flights would be needed for manned lunar landing by “end of 1969.” nasa would reduce numbers of Saturn IB and V and work out with dod future requirements for large launch vehicles under “sharply limited” launch program. Launch of Saturn I Workshop in 1970 would be interim step toward Saturn V Workshop and would be coordinated with later launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. “Practically all” programs had been stretched out, and a number of projects would be phased out. Scope of new starts would be reduced, with nerva i replacing larger nerva n and “less costly Mariner class spacecraft” replacing Voyager mission. Urgent activities would be expanded in aeronautics and in space applications; for example, noise reduction, vtol and stol, aircraft for remote measurement of earth resources, and Nimbus D for charting atmosphere parameters. nasa Centers would be reorganized “to retain . . . after reductions [in work force] are made, a limited but strong and well-balanced team of scientists, engineers, program and project managers.” Webb responded to questions: “There are no signs that the Soviets are cutting back as we are. New test and launch facilities are steadily added . . . and a number of spaceflight systems more advanced than any heretofore used are nearing completion.” Webb forecast Soviet booster with thrust greater than that of Saturn V, resumption of manned space flights, and landing of Soviet instrument packages on Mars in 1969 and 1971. Budget reductions in FY 1968 had compelled revisions, reductions, delays and cancellations in NASA programs. “We can conduct a viable and useful program at these lower levels, hut it will be a sharply reduced one.” Despite reductions allowing almost no flexibility to work around problems, “we still have the possibility of making the lunar landing before 1970.” (CR, 2/7/68, H926-7 ; 2/12/68, E708-9)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, told World Affairs Council in Pittsburgh, Pa.: “The U.S. space program was undertaken in 1958, and accelerated by three Presidents and six Congresses who considered it basic to our national strength and essential to our continued leadership of the Free World. It is . . . significant to note that this has been a bipartisan effort, with Republican as well as Democratic support. . . . Space expenditures contribute significantly to the national power of the United States in a world where military and economic security increasingly rest upon technology.” U.S. space program “has been deliberately oriented toward cooperation with other countries. It is providing opportunities for foreign scientists to contribute and develop their talents and, at the same time, gives other nations a chance to share not only in the published results of space research, but in the accomplishment of these achievements as well. . . .” (Text)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed Ninth National Conference of United Press International Editors and Publishers in Washington, D.C.: “For the conception and construction of the equipment necessary to the safe transport of men into space and for their accomplishment of productive tasks in that new atmosphere, a new mix of professional and scientific disciplines has been created which has forced cooperation between engineers and medical doctors. Many of the technologies which are essential to our sending three men to the moon and back did not exist a few years ago. They had to be invented, adapted or developed. . . . “We now have the giant boosters which have released man from his atmosphere, and . . . life support systems that can maintain him in space. As a result of the cleanliness requirements of the space program wre have the largest ‘clean rooms’ in the world—rooms which hospitals are now emulating. . . . Over 600 computers now comprise the largest and most advanced communications system in the world. The fuel cell, which had Iain dormant for many years, was activated to power spacecraft in orbit. Thirty public utility companies now have a $27,000,000 program for the adaptation of the fuel cell for home power units. We had to know on a real-time basis how fast the hearts of the astronauts were beating while they were in space . . . how much oxygen they were using, and how their muscles were responding ... so we invented another new system, biosensor to computer to data gathering equipment, and through communications network to the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston—from 100 ... or 800 ... or from of a million miles out in space. And a half a dozen newly formed companies are now manufacturing these adapted space-created instruments for the use of doctors and hospitals here on earth.” In conclusion Dr. Mueller quoted the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first Deputy Administrator: “None of us knows what the final destiny of man may be—or if there is any end to his capacity for growth and adaptation. Wherever this venture leads us, we in the United States are convinced that the power to leave the Earth-—to travel where we will in space—and to return at will—marks the opening of a brilliant new state in man’s evolution.” (Text)
Associated Press roundup of comment by space authorities on U.S.S.R.’s Zond V mission: NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “The most important demonstration of total space capability up to now by any nation.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: Hoped U.S.S.R. achievement would “cause some stir in Congress. . . . The Russians again did something we have not done. We slept until the Sputnik. That may be what we’re doing now.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station: “I think it is a very considerable achievement and I expect that a human being will be placed in a similar spacecraft in a matter of months.” Heinz Kaminski, Chief of West Germany’s Bochum Observatory: “Still in this year or at latest in first quarter of 1969 a three-man spacecraft of the Soyuz type will circle the moon. After that [in a later flight] they will land on the moon.” In Moscow, unidentified Western expert on U.S.S.R.’s space program said that, because of seasonal factors, best time for Soviet manned lunar circumnavigation would be no later than early November—or spring 1969. “They are now in a position to send a man around the moon and back to earth, without landing him on the moon. They might try one more unmanned shot, just to be sure, and then they could send up a man.” (AP, NYT, 9/23/68, E8)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony in support of NASA FY 1969 budget from U.S. scientists. Dr. Harry H. Hess of Princeton Univ. presented statement for record by National Academy of Sciences President Dr. Frederick Seitz. Space program, Dr. Seitz said, was “the latest and one of the greatest human exploratory adventures in a long sequence that has enriched mankind. It offers us the promise of extending the range of our domain ... to the entire solar system. We can expect many benefits along the way, some of conceptual and some of direct material value . . . but those which will prove to be the most rewarding are probably, in the main, still hidden from us over the horizon.” Dr. John A. Simpson of Enrico Fermi Institute and Univ. of Chicago noted: “Researches in space have made, through the bold programs which NASA established with universities in the early 1960s, major contributions to the critical problems of generating, developing and retaining first-class scientific manpower. . . . The great fear at present ... is that the momentum established will be dissipated by the preferentially deep budgetary cuts made by NASA in those areas which most affect the universities.” He stressed “deeply felt conviction” that U.S. was “in danger of unwittingly destroying what we wish to save and need . . . pre-eminence in science and technology which is crucial for each major problem of the nation, from poverty to war.” Actions taken in Congress in 1968 might “largely determine whether the U.S. will retain its leadership in the space sciences.” Dr. Simpson urged early start of Pioneer concept since it was “absolutely clear that discoveries important for the progress of science and technology may be made by . . . experiments and observations on spacecraft moving outward from the orbit of the Earth . . . the program is not a gamble and a hope, but an objective of high importance and certain to produce fruitful results.” (Testimony; NYT, 4/24/68, 24; W Star, 4/24/68, A21)
Republican Coordinating Committee released statement on U.S.—U.S.S.R. relations, including policy on space: “Outer space should be seen as the focus for ever increasing United States-Soviet collaboration rather than as the site of an endless series of increasingly expensive prestige races. Because our society is open, so much is known about our space program that inviting Soviet participation in the nonmilitary projects would be unlikely to endanger national security. By insisting upon reciprocal privileges we would acquire much additional knowledge about their space efforts, thus achieving a net gain for United States security. At the same time, we must not intimate that the Soviets and ourselves have an exclusive role to play in this area. We must constantly reiterate our willingness to collaborate with NATO and other Allies in space technology.” (Text; upi, NYT, 4/30/68, 95; Unna, W Post, 4/30/68, A5; SBD, 5/1/68, 2)
In National Observer, Peter T. Chew criticized Americans as “uncertain, timid farers in space.” During “19-month interregnum in manned space flight” occasioned by Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, “Americans have become obsessed with the race question at home and the Vietnam Wai abroad. ... If some doomsayers are to be believed, the vast U.S. space science and technology establishment put together during the last decade will be systematically dismantled once the manned Apollo landing has been accomplished because nasa has ‘no clear mandate’ to go on; cornfields will reclaim the great rocket and spacecraft-testing sites . . .; the solar system will become the exclusive playground 'of Soviet cosmonauts.” Yet NASA’s mandate to explore space “for the benefit of all mankind” had been set down in legislation establishing the agency and did not end with the moon. If anything, “the moon is the first stepping stone.” Dr. Wernher von Braun “stands almost alone among the country’s leaders in his ability to express in understandable terms just why we are going to the moon—and beyond. ... To critics of the space program he replies, ‘Man was born with an insatiable nosiness about his natural environment. ... it seems to pay off handsomely, but often in the most unexpected way, to keep satisfying his curiosity about the world around him.” (Natl Obs, 10/7/68)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator whom retiring Administrator James E. Webb had said would be named Acting NASA Administrator by President Johnson, represented “new breed of scientist-administrators making their way into government,” said John Lannan in Washington Evening Star. Unlike Webb, he was new to Government, having come up through “the scientific ranks of the sprawling General Electric Co. over a period of 19 years.” As Webb’s chief deputy since March, Dr. Paine had been authorizing and signing major announcements but had yet to confront Congress. He and Webb saw eye-to-eye, he had said, on agency’s current program emphasis, which had been criticized as too heavily oriented to manned flight. “I am a very strong supporter of doing as much as we can in planetary areas.” Dr. Paine said, “but it’s one of those cases where you’ve got limited resources and you’re trying to do all the things you can. You’ve got to do things in aeronautics; we’ve got to finish up the Apollo program; and we’ve got to do more in earth resources (surveying them from space) here on this planet.” A lot of NASA’s future “is in the questions that we’ll be raising as we continue to probe the planets.” On balancing space needs against problems of cities, Dr. Paine felt U.S. suffered from “what I would call almost a national hypochondria ... in many ways crippling some of the forward-looking things we’re able to do. ... I feel that one of the very highest priority matters is the war on poverty and the problems of the cities. But in the meantime, we’re making . . . a lot of progress in the civil rights area and really, this nation is a good deal healthier than we’re giving it credit for today.” He was confident of a resurgence of public interest in space once the Apollo program got underway. (W Star, 9/17/68, A4)
Earth Resources Satellite System, report by Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications for Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was transmitted to committee and subcommittee, ers system “unquestionably presents NASA with . . . perhaps the best possible opportunity to achieve tangible economic returns from the substantial investment already made by the American taxpayer in the U.S. space program.” Pace of program to date had been “much too leisurely” and financial support, “inadequate.” Report recommended “NASA concentrate a much larger portion of its efforts and resources on this project” and “give the most serious consideration to the recommendation of the National Academy of Sciences’ summer study to the effect that funding for the applications satellite program should be at least doubled, perhaps tripled.” (Text)
In Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial Robert Hotz said, “The national space program is approaching a critical watershed at about the same time the Nixon Administration will assume stewardship. ... It is obvious now that space technology has demonstrated its ability to provide a wide range of benefits for better living on earth. It would be a national tragedy, if this country failed to capitalize on the substantial investment it has already made in developing space technology. It will fall to the Nixon Administration to make the critical decisions during the next few years that will determine the future course of the national space program.” (Av Wk, 11/25/68,11)
President Johnson announced appointed of David D. Thomas, Deputy Administrator of faa, as Acting Administrator, {PD, 8/5/68, 1190)
Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) told American Astronautical Society meeting in Los Angeles: “In evaluating space spending as a budget priority, it is vital to consider the relationship of space to defense. . . . Both Russia and the United States have advance surveillance capacity. ... As long as the threat of nuclear war from any source continues, Russia and the United States will be producing ever more sophisticated orbital ‘spies in the skies’. . . . That is why the space program of the United States never is going to be abandoned. It will always be high on the list of spending priorities. The reason is not charming, but basic. We need to be in space to protect ourselves. ... In the somewhat more distant future the harvest of human rewards . . . now only beginning . . . will prove that space research and space applications justify a continuing high priority.” (Text; Aero Daily, 10/29/68)
During visit to msfc, Republican presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said of space program, “I would have this clearly understood: that I consider this program as one of our national imperatives, that it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress, that the ups and downs ... in planning, programming and financing must be brought to a halt, and that as President I will make certain our country retains leadership in this great endeavor. ... It is an inescapable fact of our national life today that we cannot afford to do all we wish. But we must do all we can. ... I assert my conviction that among the claimants for Federal support I consider the space program both indispensable and of major importance to our country. . . . In every area of science—in every area of knowledge—the United States must continue to probe the unknown. In terms of our long-range security and growth, the most critical gap which we could allow to develop would be a research gap.” (Text; NYT, 9/7/68, 1; upi, W Post, 9/7/68 [photo]; B Sun, 9/7/68)
Commenting on reductions in NASA authorization bill, Kansas City Times editorial said: “We have supported the space program in the past, not as a window dressing but as an expression—and a catalyst— of the inventiveness and technical energies of the American people. We still support it, and believe it is beneficial. “We recognize, nonetheless, that it is but one of many costly and sometimes competing activities. Congress has decided that in a time of burdensome military expenditure, and of pressing domestic needs, the space budget is one logical place to apply the knife of economy. NASA planners will simply have to find creative ways to live with that decision.” (KC Times, 6/20/68)
At closed meeting at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. in July, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had said contractors’ disregard of planned delivery dates for Apollo equipment amounted to a “disease” in the project, New York Times reported. Apollo Program Director l/g Samuel C. Phillips was quoted as saying, “The lunar landing next year is within our grasp, but we don’t have a hold of it because of the disease Dr. Mueller cited.” Project was running two years behind schedule, with first manned Apollo flight expected no earlier than mid-October and earliest lunar landing in a year. Dozens of contractors in $24-million program, urged to meet tough specifications for mission safety and success at same time, were obsessed with checking and double checking all systems as result of Jan. 24, 1967, Apollo fire. Lunar module (lm) regarded as pacing item of project, had undergone only one flight test. First lm for manned flight had developed problems in rendezvous equipment. Dr. Mueller had said rate of changes in lm was three times that of Apollo command module, whose rate of changes, in turn, was four times that of Saturn V rocket. He said changes placed added burden on technicians who should be concentrating on launching operations, not on vehicle modifications. (Wilford, NYT, 8/15/68,16)
John N. Wilford described in New York Times front page article decline in U.S. space expenditures since 1966: “Under pressure from the war in Vietnam, civilian space spending has dropped from $5.9-billion in the peak year of 1966 to $4.8-billion this year, and it is expected to drop much lower in the fiscal year starting in July. Employment in space work at private companies, universities and Government centers has declined from 420,000 in 1966 to fewer than 300,000 today, and it is still dropping at the rate of 4,000 a month.” Signs of decline were clearly visible, in “ghost towns” that were once test sites, and in removal of numerous projects from NASA’s post-Apollo plans. Fortunately, impact of cutback was softened because NASA had not replaced many personnel who ordinarily left agency each year and because personnel dismissed were absorbed by growing aircraft industry and expanding military space program. But there was a growing feeling “that once astronauts have landed on the moon, they will have no other place of significance to go for several years because of sharp budget cuts. These cuts have trimmed to the bone all preparations for future missions. It is as if the astronauts are heading for a dead-end on the moon.” (NYT, 4/16/68, 1)
nasa Manager for Space Nuclear Propulsion Milton Klein explained to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that aec’s nuclear space power work would “establish technology in advance of missions, with specific system development undertaken as mission requirements dictate.” He presented a sampling of aec’s activities as it worked closely with nasa and dod “to keep in focus the types and likely timing of future mission needs.” (Testimony)
Noting what he called “curious conspiracy of silence on Russia’s capabilities and intention” for almost eight years, William Hines in Washington Sunday Star said: “One of the many small acts of positive statesmanship which Richard M. Nixon could profitably perform early in his administration would be to tell the American people fully and frankly just what the United States government knows about the Soviet space program. ... It would lend credence to Mr. Nixon’s professed policy of openness. It would compromise no significant secrets. And it would enable the American public to make judgments about the future of the U.S. space program at a time when vital decisions along this line would be coming due.” (W Star, 12/29/68, C4)
Dr. Robert H. Guest, professor of organizational behavior in Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College, was sworn in as consultant by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting nasa Administrator. Dr. Guest would serve on Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—220) At 10:42 am est 3rd stage burned for second time, injecting spacecraft into lunar trajectory, and astronauts began journey to become first men to leave earth’s gravitational field. Stage and instrument unit separated as planned and service module propulsion system was fired to increase separation distance from 3rd stage, which was trailing 500—1,000 ft behind spacecraft, spewing unused propellants. Crew fired service propulsion system (sps) engine for 2.4 sec, correcting trajectory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. Second midcourse maneuver, scheduled for second day, was canceled because trajectory was already so accurate that burn would have required velocity change of only 0.7 fps. Borman reported illness, apparently from 24-hr intestinal virus or from reaction to sleeping pills being used during space flight for first time, and Lovell and Anders reported nausea. Crew took navigation sightings and conducted first TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior and earth from 138,690-mi altitude and demonstrating food preparation and movements in weightlessness. Signals were received at ground stations and transmitted to NASA Mission Control Center in Houston before release live to commercial networks. Second TV transmission, on third day, showed excellent pictures of earth from 201,365-mi altitude, including view of Western Hemisphere in sunlight. Crew pointed out North Pole, South America, Cape Horn, and Baja California and noted that U.S. East Coast was very cloudy. Earth, they said, was beautiful; water looked royal blue, land areas brown, and clouds bright white. Reflection off earth was much greater than off moon, sm reaction control system’s four rockets were fired for 12 sec to reduce velocity by 2 fps and to make approach to moon closer to 60 mi at nearest point. On fourth day, Christmas Eve, communications were interrupted as Apollo 8 passed behind moon and astronauts became first men to see moon’s far side, sps engine was fired for 4 min 2 sec, reducing speed by 2,994 fps and placing spacecraft in lunar orbit with 193.6-mi (310.6-km) apolune and 69.1-mi (111.2-km) perilune. In third telecast Anders described lunar surface as “whitish gray, like dirty beach sand with lots of footprints on it. Some of these craters look like pick-axes striking concrete, creating a lot of fine dust.” After spacecraft passed behind moon at end of second revolution, SPS engine burned for 10 sec to reduce speed by 135 fps and to circularize orbit with 70.0-mi (112.6-km) apolune and 69.6-mi (112.0-km) perilune. Lovell said astronauts had “a grand view” of the lunar surface and confirmed that prospective landing sites were satisfactory. He reported that at about two minutes before sunrise a fan-shaped white haze appeared just behind moon’s limb. Crew continued landmark sightings and named numerous unnamed lunar features after other astronauts, NASA officials, and friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed that radio signal from earth to Apollo 8 and back to earth took three seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. Third TV transmission during ninth revolution showed heavily impacted mountains described by Anders as “a vastness of black and white, absolutely no color. The sky up here is also rather forbidding, foreboding extents of blackness with no stars visible when we’re flying over the moon in daylight. You can see by the numerous craters that this planet has been bombarded through the eons with numerous small asteroids and meteoroids, pock-marking the surface of every square inch. And one of the amazing features of the surface is . . . that most of the craters . . . have a round mound type of appearance instead of sharp jagged rocks. All, only the newest of features have any sharp definitions to them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment of small meteoroids.” The moon is “a very dark and unappetizing place. . . .” Crew read verses from first chapter of Genesis and wished viewers “good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good earth.” On fifth day, Christmas Day, while spacecraft was behind moon completing its 10th revolution, SPS engine was fired for 3 min 23 sec, increasing spacecraft velocity by 3,523 fps and propelling Apollo 8 back toward earth. Spacecraft left lunar gravity at 201,807 mi above earth. At 104 hours mission elapsed time 14-sec reaction-control-system burn increased velocity by 5 fps. Fifth TV transmission showed spacecraft interior, controls, and food preparation. Data analysis revealed sixth midcourse correction would not be necessary because of accuracy of course. Astronauts reported they had slept well and were in “very good shape.” Sixth TV transmission showed earth from 112,125-mi altitude. On sixth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from cm on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events were nominal and Apollo 8 splashed, apex down, in Pacific about 5,100 yd from recovery ship U.S.S. Yorktown at 10:51 am est Dec. 27, 147 hr after launch and precisely on time. According to prior planning, helicopters and aircraft hovered over spacecraft and pararescue personnnel were not deployed until local sunrise, 50 min after splashdown. Crew was then picked up and reached recovery ship at 12:20 pm EST. All primary ApoUo 8 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved and, in addition, five not originally planned. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan. Engineering accomplishments included use of ground network with onboard navigational techniques to sharpen accuracy of lunar orbit determination and successful use of Apollo high-gain antenna, four-dish unified S-band antenna that deployed from SM after separation from 3rd stage. Mission proved capability of Apollo csm and crew, as well as ground support and control systems, to operate out to lunar distances and return through the earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 8 was fifth Apollo mission to date, second manned Apollo mission, first manned mission on Saturn V launch vehicle, and first manned operation of Apollo system under conditions for which it was designed. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with the spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 Oct. 11—22, had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—208; NASA Special Releases; W Star, 12/21/68, Al; W Post, 12/21-28/68, Al; NYT, 12/21-28/68, 1; B Sun, 12/21-28/68, Al; MSC Roundup, 1/10/69, 3) December 21: President Johnson sent congratulatory message to Apollo 8 astronauts: “I am confident that the world’s finest equipment will strive to match the courage of our astronauts. If it does that, a successful mission is assured.” {PD, 12/30/68,1738)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb began testimony on President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He outlined significant NASA achievements and said “remarkable series of successes shows how far we have come since the beginning of the Space Age ten years ago. . . . Today . . . success is treated almost routinely, no matter how difficult the task or how significant the achievement.” Describing budget as “a compromise,” he said President “was forced, in spite of his conviction as to the importance of a larger effort in aeronautics and space, to accept reductions. . . . This means that for NASA 1968 and 1969 are . . . years in which we will be completing programs started in previous years and endeavoring to make limited further advances. Under these conditions we will devote a major effort to stabilizing our organization and the resource base we have built.” (Testimony)
Edgar M. Cortright, former nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, assumed duties as Director of NASA Langley Research Center. He succeeded Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, who was serving as Special Assistant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Cortright had served at Lewis Research Center from 1948 to 1958 and at NASA Hq. since 1958. {Langley Researcher, 5/17/68, 1)
nasa Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, presented NASA FY 1969 interim operating plan to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Although President Johnson had not yet signed appropriations bill, Bureau of the Budget had indicated nasa’s share of $6 billion .expenditure reduction might amount to $350 million. This meant limitation of use of FY 1969 appropriations to $3.85 billion, Dr. Paine said. “Our actions also have had to be constrained by our current instructions within the Executive Branch to hold expenditures to a minimum in 1970 as well as in 1969, and to be prepared for the eventuality of budgetary limitations in FY 1970 even more restrictive than those in FY 1969. I am personally convinced that the nation’s space program requires an increase in funding in FY 1970 and I am hopeful ... we will succeed in establishing the need for a significant increase. Until this decision is made ... we have no alternative but to proceed with an interim operating plan . . . which, where possible, holds open options we can exercise in FY 1970 if the budget is higher but which does not overcommit us if the FY 1970 budget is lower.” Plan retained $2,025 billion authorized for Apollo program—$14 million below budget request. It reduced authorized $253.2 million for Apollo Applications to $150 million, amount “required to work toward the important but sharply limited and deferred Apollo Applications program we now propose.” This would include cessation of Saturn IB launch vehicle production after completion of 14th (Saturn 214) and discontinuation of Saturn V at completion of first 15 vehicles. Single Saturn I workshop and single Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) would be launched in early 1970s. Authorized $5 million for advanced missions would be cut to $2.5 million, for continued studies related to manned earth-orbital and lunar missions. Authorized $136.9 million would be reduced to $132.1 million for physics and astronomy, with level of effort in supporting research and technology and data analysis approximately 10% lower than in FY 1968. The $92.3 million authorized for lunar and planetary exploration would be cut to $75.8 million, with $6.8 million for lunar and $69 million for planetary—to support Mariner-Mars 1969 mission, reacquisition of telemetry from Mariner V, and Mariner-Mars 1971 mission. Plan also supported in FY 1969, at reduced funding level, capability to conduct Mars mission during 1973 opportunity in keeping with NAS recommendation [see Sept. 19]. Overall scope of mission would be reduced and schedule compressed. Operating plan provided for construction of two 210-ft antennas for Mars and other missions during 1970s. Launch vehicle procurement authorization of $115.7 million would be cut to $100.2 million and bioscience from $33 million to $32,7 million, which was $15 million below budget request and required slip of 6—12 mo in 21-day Biosatellite missions. Space applications authorization of $98.7 million would be retained; program change necessitated by May 18 destruction of Nimbus B would result in launch of replacement, Nimbus B2, in spring 1969. Aeronautics r&d budget would remain at authorized $74.9 million, while FY 1969 effort in nuclear rockets would be limited and nerva development deferred until 1970, when $7.5 million withheld in FY 1969 could be added to allow total of $39.5 million. Interim plan.would provide $178.4 million for basic research, space vehicle systems, electronics systems, human factor systems, space power and electric propulsion systems, and chemical propulsion—at reduction of $21.5 million from NASA’s budget request. Work in long-endurance life-support-equipment technologies would proceed as planned but in other areas research and technical development would be reduced, especially efforts in support of advanced space missions. Tracking and data acquisition budget would be reduced from $289.8 million authorized to $280 million, providing full Apollo schedule support but limiting support for spacecraft aloft and on future missions. Construction of facilities funds had been reduced from $39.6 million authorized to $21.8 million appropriated. Operating plan would increase figure to $35.7 million by transferring funds from R&D appropriation. Facility planning and design funds were reduced from $3 million requested to $1 million. Interim operating plan anticipated transfer of $20.1 million from R&D to administrative operations, bringing total to $623.3 million instead of $603.2 million in authorization and appropriations acts and $648.2 million requested by NASA in budget. Dr. Paine emphasized that administrative operations appropriation did not cover only “administrative” expenses; it covered direct costs of operating NASA laboratories, research centers, development centers, and launch centers. nasa Administrator James E. Webb told Committee: “. . . when you use words such as ‘Congress consistently has supported the Apollo program,’ you must add ‘at a minimum level.’ We have clearly indicated in every budget that the basis on which we were going forward with this support by Congress was one that did not take into account unusual risks and happenings and was, in effect, based on success in all these efforts.” Webb said NASA Apollo funding was related to success on various operations and did not include “a return to test flight on the Saturn IB should we not be able to make the shift to the big rocket after this next flight.” From 1961 to 1969, Webb said, “we have not had the funds to proceed except in a manner that would permit us, within the total budget, to do this lunar landing within this decade and on an all-up systems test basis. So the excruciatingly painful period of all-up testing on the Saturn V is yet ahead of us.” (Testimony; Transcript)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C., U.S.S.R. in 1968 had been surpassing its 1967 payload successes numerically and, “what is more significant . . . surpassing substantially the number of successful payloads launched this year by the United States. While our activity curve is moving down . . . theirs is headed up.” U.S.S.R. had “orderly, persistent, and well planned space program, including a vigorous project for a manned landing on the lunar surface.” U.S. had operational lead in communications, navigation, and meteorology but U.S.S.R. showed “considerable activity” in those fields. U.S. had been generally more successful in unmanned lunar and planetary performance, but U.S.S.R. was more active. (Text)
Four navsats (satellites resembling comsats) in synchronous equatorial orbit could control entire air traffic of U.S. and 18 could handle entire world’s air traffic, according to trw Systems Div., which demonstrated system during Air Force Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C. Satellites would serve as reference points for aircraft in flight, ships at sea, or mechanized ground equipment and could locate user’s longitude and latitude to accuracy within 60 ft and his altitude to within 120 ft. They would operate like comsats but, instead of relaying messages from point to point, would beam signals to aircraft. By taking bearings on any two satellites, computerized unit in aircraft could pinpoint aircraft’s location by radio. Militarily, system could lead to accurate allweather bombing capability and armored column movements in poor terrain or weather, or help infantrymen in the field. For civilian air traffic control, it could overlap existing equipment and eventually phase it out. (Lannan, W Star, 9/18/68) Boeing Co. confirmed it was most likely to submit conventional fixed-wing design resembling large F—4 Phantom fighter as design for U.S. SST when firm’s final proposal became due at faa, no later than Jan. 15. If approved, aircraft'would start moving from paper to titanium, Boeing President T. A. Wilson told Air Force Assn, seminar, m/G Jewell C. Maxwell, faa’s sst Program Director, said aircraft could fly in first half of 1972 and be ready for passenger service as early as 1974 (1976 if Government decided to test prototype before starting production line). A. H. C. Greenwood, Assistant Managing Director for British Aircraft Corp., said Anglo-French Concorde would fly in 1968 and be in commercial operation by summer 1972. (Wilson, W Post, 9/19/68, Dl)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published Survey of Views of Leading Industrial Executives on the National Space Program. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, had queried 750 U.S. senior executives; 449 had replied. Majority considered $5 billion annually for nasa funding to be “about right”; 54% favored maintaining goal of manned lunar landing in this decade; 96% ranked national defense high-priority assignment; 69% felt nasa had made “much” scientific and utilitarian contribution. In context of Vietnam War, 47% favored same level of funding for space program on basis of contribution to national security. (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed joint meeting of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) and Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute (casi) in Montreal: Systems engineering concept applied to management “was pioneered and developed in aerospace programs and is being increasingly applied as a powerful tool in the management of other major enterprises.” In NASA most extensive application was in Apollo program. Factors unique to manned space flight had contributed to management approach, including “sheer size of Apollo program, larger in . . . lead time, money, organization and technological development than any previous program.” Special feature was high reliability and safety required. And space program had been executed under scrutiny of press, public, Congress, and scientific community. Weight and volume budgeting were critical. High cost of flight-testing space vehicles made maximum ground testing necessary, as well as all-up (concurrent rather than sequential) flight testing. Vehicle was as complete as practicable for each flight, to obtain maximum information from minimum number of flights and provide earliest possible system readiness. Open-ended mission concept was used to accomplish as many flight objectives per vehicle as consistent with safety and mission success. Review of status throughout mission determined length of mission. Redundant, or alternate, means of operation reduced ability of single failure to endanger crew or mission. Prime design consideration in all manned space flights was safety. (Text; UPl, H Chron, 7/10/68)
Dr. Stephen B. Sweeney, governmental administration professor at Univ. of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School and Executive Director Emeritus of Univ.’s Fels Institute of Local and State Government, and Dr. Harold Asher, manager of General Electric Co.’s tempo section and former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, had been sworn in as consultants to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr Sweeney would specialize in university affairs, public administration, and application of science and technology to urban problems. Dr. Asher would review and analyze NASA’s systems for resource management. (NASA Release 68-124)
Washington Post editorial noted total cost of space program to date was upwards of $20 billion: “The expenditure of sums of money like these cannot be justified in terms of the military or civilian spinoff, although both have been substantial, or of the knowledge we have gained about the atmosphere surrounding our planet. But they can be justified in terms of the national prestige that is to be won or lost in space and of the inevitable fate of man to pursue knowledge towards its ultimate end in hope of some day achieving a better understanding of what the earth and universe are all about. It is in this latter hope that we cheer the astronauts on, wish them well in their planned 163 orbits of the earth, pray for their safe return, and urge those who make the crucial decisions about the future space program to proceed with all deliberate speed to reach the goal President Kennedy put before us.” (W Post, 10/12/68, A12)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb conferred with West German Science Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg in Bonn on U.S.-German space projects. (AP, Min Trib, 8/28/68)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Special Consultant to NASA Administrator and former NASA Deputy Administrator, had been elected to board of trustees of Aerospace Corp. (Aerospace Release; SBD, 7/8/68, 10)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator in NASA Hq. ceremony. Nomination had been confirmed by Senate Feb. 7. (nasa Ann)
Aerospace sales reached record high of $30.1 billion in 1968, an increase of almost $3 billion over 1967, Aerospace Industries Assn. President Karl G. Harr, Jr., told Washington, D.C., meeting of Aviation/Space Writers Assn. Commercial aerospace sales increased 39%, to record $6.4 billion; aerospace exports rose 32%, to $3 billion. Military space programs in 1968 rose 3%, from $1,088 billion in 1967 to $1,121 billion, reported AlA’s “1968 Aerospace Industry Review and Forecast,” which Harr released. N'onmilitary space sales declined 3.7%, from $4,202 billion in 1967 to $4,047 billion in 1968. Sales of products and services for use of aerospace technology in nonaerospace areas—such as marine science, water desalination, crime control, and rapid transit—increased from $2,579 billion to $2,726 billion. Harr predicted slight decline in total aerospace sales to about $29.6 billion during 1969 because of 25% drop in jet transport sales before deliveries of new high-capacity aircraft; continuing increase in helicopter, executive, and utility aircraft sales; modest increase in defense and nonaerospace sales; and decline in civil space sales. He noted that in third quarter of 1968 backlog of Government aerospace orders was less than that of other customers for first time since before World War II. (Text: aia Release 68—60; W Star, 12/19/68, A19)
NASA personnel changes: Thomas B. Shillito of LeRC’s Office of Development Evaluation and Management Review was appointed Supersonic Transport Program Coordinator for nasa in Washington, D.C. He would have offices at faa and would “stay abreast of technical progress in the sst program [and] inform nasa ... of any impending requirements.” Shillito would report to nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology (Aeronautics) Charles W. Harper. Harvey Sherman and James M. Beggs were named consultants to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Sherman, Port of New York Authority’s Director of Organizations and Procedures Dept., would be member of senior group of advisors on management matters. Beggs, Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Assistant Director of Purchases and Traffic, would advise on management concepts and policies. (LeRC Release 68—7; nasa Release 68-22) During January: New knowledge of movement and state of electrons in Van Allen radiation belts that explained movement of electrons into and out of belts and trapped electron activity was reported from three new discoveries. Bell Telephone Laboratories used energetic particle collectors aboard NASA’s Ats I, launched Dec. 6,1966, to show that high-energy outer Van Allen belt electrons exhibited bunching phenomenon as they drifted around earth in its magnetic field. Bell scientist Charles S. Roberts presented theory that “radio noise in the charged particle gas” surrounding earth was “responsible for the loss of electrons from the Van Allen belts, rather than the mere presence of lightning-bolt-initiated whistlers alone, as previously believed.” At Nov. 16, 1967, meeting, Dr. James A. Van Allen had presented satellite-collected data suggesting that “both electrons and protons enter the outer Van Allen radiation belt” drawn by high voltage generated across earth’s magnetic field, caused by earth’s spin between dawn and evening sides of earthsurrounding magnetic envelope. (Strasser, Aero Tech, 1/29/68, 18-20)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial said: “The principal criticism of the proposed cuts in the space budget is that they aren’t deep enough. NASA will be left with an expenditure of nearly $4 billion in the current fiscal year. With the nation in a financial bind and the Administration pledged to prune $6 billion from the federal budget, it seems that a good deal more than now suggested should be lopped off the space program.” (St. Louis G—D, 8/7/68)
Chicago Tribune criticized “ridiculously small” congressional cuts in NASA FY 1969 authorization bill: “Of all the ways in which the government has found to spend taxpayers’ money, the space program is the most expendable. ... It is irrelevant to the war in Vietnam . . . irrelevant to the problems of poverty, crime, violence, and urban decay.” It could be “scrapped in its entirety without Seriously affecting any of the critical problems we face today.” However, “today’s space research does have a bearing on tomorrow’s defense. It is better to keep the machinery running in low gear than to shut it down and then try to start it up again.” (C Trib, 6/13/68)
Science editorial on NASA administration: “In terms of numbers of dollars or of men, NASA has not been our largest national undertaking, but in terms of complexity, rate of growth, and technological sophistication it has been unique. . . . Keeping all of [its] parts—often working right at the edge of technological knowledge and capacity—finely tuned and in close harmony has been an organization achievement of high order. . . . Ever since the space program began to take shape there has been talk of technological spin-offs. It may turn out that the most valuable spin-off of all will be human rather than technological: better knowledge of how to plan, coordinate, and monitor the multitudinous and varied activities of the organizations required to accomplish great social undertakings.” (Wolfle, Science, 11/15/68, 753)
NASA’s Apollo 5 (AS—204) unmanned earth orbital mission, delayed for nearly four hours because of ground equipment malfunctions, was successfully launched from ksc Complex 37 at 5:48 pm est in fourth flight of Saturn IB and first flight of 31,700-lb lunar module (LM—1), designed to land two astronauts on the moon. Primary mission objectives were to verify operation of LM ascent propulsion system (aps), descent propulsion system (dps)—including restart—and spacecraft structures; evaluate LM staging; and evaluate 2nd-stage (S—IVB) and instrument-unit (iu) orbital performance. Launch phase occurred as planned; S—IVB ignited to insert spacecraft into orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 101-mi (163-km) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 31.63° inclination; nose cone jettisoned; spacecraft coasted for 43 min 52 sec; and LM separated from spacecraft LM adapter. LM entered orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 104-mi (167km) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 31.63° inclination. Initial 39-sec dps burn, designed to simulate deceleration for descent to lunar surface, was automatically shut down after only 4 sec because of overly conservative computer programming. Ground controllers switched to minimum requirement sequence, an alternate flight plan with shorter total dps firing time and no provision for lunar landing simulation. Second dps engine firing occurred successfully, with 26-sec burn at 10% thrust level and 7 sec at maximum thrust. Third DPS engine firing 32 sec later consisted of 26-sec bum at 10% thrust, 2 sec at maximum thrust, and ascent stage fire-in-the-hole (fith) burn during which the two stages separated and aps engine was ignited simultaneously while dps was being shut down, simulating abort during landing phase. Duration of initial aps burn during abort staging was 60 sec, aps engine fired second time for 6 min 23 sec until fuel was depleted. At end of 11-hr 10min test period, both stages of the lm were left in orbit eventually to reenter and disintegrate. Apollo 5 mission, adjudged successful by NASA in spite of premature dps engine shutdown, proved out structural integrity of lm; verified in-space operation of dps and APS; and proved value of contingency planning, lm was last major piece of Apollo hardware to have its first test in space. Command module (cm) had been tested during AS—203 mission (July 5, 1966) and with service module (sm) on AS—202 (Aug. 25, 1966) and Apollo 4 (AS-501) (Nov. 9, 1967). Final decision on whether Apollo 5 results justified omitting second unmanned test and scheduling next mission to be manned would be deferred until March, pending final mission review, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—6K, 68—19; msc Release 68-4; AP, Strothman, W Post, 1/23/68, 1; Fahnestock, W Star, 1/23/68, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/24/68, 20)
Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) criticized general public’s “let it wait” attitude toward science and technology in Dandridge M. Cole Memorial Lecture before aiaa Greater Philadelphia Section: Poll after poll showed “strong inclination to slow down or cut back r&d—particularly the space program- • . . Indeed, sentiment has grown that drastic cuts should be made in r&d to finance a variety of requirements—Vietnam to urban renewal. ... In April Senate turned down “by only two votes” move to .reduce DOD R&D budget half million dollars on top of committee cut of $240 million. In House, space budget was cut to $4-billion level, $1.25 billion less than 16 mo before. Technology seemed major factor in economic and social progress and was essential to maintaining international position, but it needed to be more responsive to urgent social problems. “A strong case can be made to continue supporting vigorous R&D efforts in the U.S., although directions and priorities must change to suit our needs from time to time.” (A&A, 7/68, 4-5)
NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Oran W. Nicks described applications of Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter techniques to Mars exploration before aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. Two 1971 Mariner Orbiter missions would provide new tools for survey of dynamic Mars, arriving when most striking seasonal changes were evident in Southern Hemisphere. Their combined orbits and life expectancies would allow observations of dynamic changes in clouds and surface features over several months. In 1973, two additional orbit-ers would survey Mars from different orbits during different seasons, with support of landing mission as prime requirement. Also planned for 1973 was survivable landing spacecraft to make local measurements of environment, photograph surface and topography, and analyze soil. “Burning question of immediate concern to you and me will be addressed by use of our new tools,” Nicks said: “Is there life elsewhere? Has life existed on nearby planets and disappeared for any reason? Can nearby planets be made suitable for life?’ Together, orbiters and landers form a powerful team for the study of Mars and for seeking answers to these questions. Together, they will continue to extend our capabilities in what is probably the most challenging, open-ended arena for expansion of science and technology in the decade ahead.” (Text)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, was sworn in as consultant by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Webb said Dr. Seamans would “lend his talents and experience to the complex problems we face as the space program moves into its second decade.” (nasa Release 68-7)
Rep. Silvio 0. Conte (R-Mass.) inserted in Congressional Record results of questionnaire mailed to his constituents which showed 3,857 out of 8,145 would reduce Government spending on space program. Second and third most popular candidates for cuts were public works (2,298) and poverty program (2,070). (nasa LAR VII/55)
In Washington Post Rudy Abramson of Los Angeles Times described retiring nasa Administrator James E. Webb as “a huckster. A good one. Maybe the best Washington has ever seen.” Even when he could talk politicians into putting up $5 billion in a year for civilian space program, “he left many of them feeling a little guilty because they had not done enough.” Congressional opponents had charged he was overzealous to point of dishonesty in protecting his empire at NASA. “Space buffs were piqued because Webb continued calling the Apollo spacecraft a ‘capsoole’ and publicly seemed to view the astronauts with childlike adoration. But Webb had it where it counted. President Johnson ranked him with Robert S. McNamara as an administrator. Influential Congressmen sided with him against their colleagues who challenged the wisdom of the space program and the quality of the Webb management. . . . “If Richard Nixon is elected President, it is a dead certainty that he would not want to keep Webb on as NASA Administrator. Hubert Humphrey might also want his own man. But even if Webb could stay in the job, it’s probably all for the better that he quit now. The investigation following the Apollo accident permanently soured his relations with some members of Congress. One has to suspect that Webb is leaving the space program because the country seemed less and less interested in listening to its evangelist.” (W Post, 9/26/68, K4)
James C. Elms, Director of ERC, discussed “the NASA Biomedical Program in Perspective” before Third Annual Meeting of Assn, for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation in Houston. “Despite the rapid advance of biomedical techniques since World War II, the main thrust of the activities was directed toward studying sick individuals in a normal environment. The manned space program has provided the opportunity for intensive controlled study of a select group of normal and healthy individuals in an abnormal and stressful environment. By so doing, we have achieved a better definition of the range of normality of the healthy organism which, in turn, is useful in the study and understanding of disease.” Interaction of space and medicine had led to many medical applications of aerospace hardware. Application of electron probe microanalyzer—used for chemical analyses of microelectronic circuits—to study of red blood cells had led to unexpected clues in study of blood cancer. System to monitor heart rate, respiration, and galvanic skin response was being considered for use in measuring efficiency of dental anesthetics on children and in training teachers for retarded children. Accomplishments of bioelectronics research in interdisciplinary electronics environment included remote measuring technique for eyepointing direction, meaningful measurement of aerosol concentration and size distribution, and automatic tracking system to identify thresholds of mental alertness. (Text)
President Johnson—watching world’s largest aircraft, USAF C—5A Gallaxy jet, roll off production line—called event “a long leap forward in the effective military might of America.” President praised USAF, Lock-heed-Georgia Co., and General Electric Co. for carrying out “a great new adventure” in aviation and completing the job “on time.” (AP, NYT, 3/3/68, 1; afsc Neivsreview, 3/68, 1) tions of magnetosphere. Secondary objectives were to demonstrate technological capability of OGo’s three-axis stabilization system in highly eh liptical orbit for extended operations of 135 days or more and to conduct electric-field, gamma-ray, and radioastronomy observations. On March 16, second of two 30-ft-long extendable antennas was deployed to complete post-launch checkout and NASA reported Ogo V was operating satisfactorily. All experiments except one, low-energy electrons and protons experiment, which had stopped operating March 11 when input power apparently failed, were acquiring data effectively. Data provided first observations of hydrogen cloud surrounding earth (geocorona), first detailed measurements of electric fields at shock and magnetospheric boundaries, and first spark chamber observations of gamma rays. . Ogo V was fifth spacecraft in NASA’s six-mission OGO series, last OGO planned for highly eccentric orbit, last spacecraft to be launched by Agena launch vehicle, and last to be launched from Complex 13. Agena would be replaced by Atlas-Centaur, and Complex 13 would revert to usaf. Scientific instrumentation for Ogo V’s 24 experiments had been provided by six U.S. universities; four groups from U.K., France, and the Netherlands; four Government centers; and two private companies. Ogo V joined three other operational OGOs—Ogo / (launched Sept. 4, 1964), Ogo III (launched June 6, 1966), and Ogo IV (launched July 28, 1967)—in providing data for studies of earth’s environment and solar-terrestrial interactions during period of maximum solar activity. Ogo II, launched Oct. 14, 1965, had been turned off in November 1967. Of 85 experiments assigned to four missions still operating, 68 were still obtaining useful data, including 12 for which instrumentation was working after 42 mo in space. OGO program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. LeRC was responsible for Atlas-Agena launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—38, 68—53; LeRC Release 68-14; upi, M Her, 2/25/68; W Star, 2/27/68, A9; NYT, 3/5/68, 17; W Post, 3/6/68, A7)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., announced he would retire as NASA astronaut after commanding Apollo 7 mission. At 45, Schirra would be world’s most experienced astronaut, having flown six orbits Oct. 3, 1962, on Sigma 7 in Mercury mission and having commanded two-man Dec. 15—16, 1965, Gemini VI mission, which had participated with Gemini VII in first rendezvous of spacecraft in space. He would remain ^ in space program, he said, “until we effect the job we set out to do”— to land men on moon and return them. (W Post, 9/21/68, A7; W Star, 9/21/68, A2)
President Johnson announced his intention to nominate Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, manager of General Electric Co.’s Technical Military Planning Operation (tempo), as NASA Deputy Administrator to succeed Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., who resigned Jan. 5. (PD, 2/5/68, 176)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued order dissolving Apollo 204 Review Board established Jan. 27, 1967, to investigate accidental Apollo fire of that date. (Text)
nasa FY 1970 budget request, totaling $4,698 billion, was submitted to Bureau of the Budget. Subsequently, Acting Administrator Thomas 0. Paine met with bob Director Charles J. Zwick, and bob staff members held budget hearings with nasa officials, (nasa Off of Admin)
Resignation of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as Deputy Administrator of NASA, announced Oct. 2, 1967, became effective. (NASA Release 67-257)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced personnel changes for new Apollo Lunar Exploration Office [establishment announced Dec. 19, 1967]: Capt. Lee R. Scherer (usn, Ret.), Assistant Director for Lunar Programs and Lunar Orbiter Program Manager, ossa, would transfer to omsf to direct new office; Capt. William T. O’Bryant (usn, Ret.), Program Manager for Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package, ossa, would head Flight Systems Development Div.; and Dr. Richard J. Allenby, Jr., Deputy Director of Manned Flight Experiments, ossa, would head Lunar Science Div. (nasa Release 68—5)
NASA would ask industry to submit proposals on $50-million “quiet jet engine” development program, said Hal Taylor in American Aviation. Contractor would be selected early in 1969 with fabrication of components to begin shortly after. Development would take three years. While engine would have takeoff thrust rating of about 23,000 lb, larger than JT3D engine in Boeing 707 and McDonnell Douglas DC—8, NASA officials had emphasized technology used would be applicable to all sizes of jet engines. Allison and Pratt & Whitney had performed preliminary design contracts and NASA felt General Electric Co. had facilities and personnel to undertake the advanced technology. Initial objective was minimum noise reduction below existing turbofan engines of at least 15 pndb on takeoff and 20 pndb at landing. Once engine was developed and run successfully, technology would be turned over to industry to be incorporated into future jet engines. {Am Av, 8/19/68, 23)
President Johnson transmitted NASA’s 15th, 16th, and 17th Semiannual Reports to Congress covering July 1, 1966, to Dec. 31, 1967. President wrote, “I commend these reports to your attention. They contain, I believe, concrete evidence that NASA is moving forward, and that America is contributing mightily in the worldwide effort to conquer space for the benefit of all mankind.” In letter accompanying 17th report, NASA Administrator James E. Webb wrote, “This period was overshadowed by the Apollo fire which took the lives of three of our astronauts. The thorough investigation of the accident and the steps that were initiated to improve safety by changes in design and procedures have previously been made matters of public record. This report shows that the same period was also one of progress in aeronautics and space as evidenced, for example, by the successful flights of Surveyor, Lunar Orbiter, and many other spacecraft. It was a difficult time for NASA, but one in which the agency showed, I believe, that it could react maturely to failure as well as success, and continue to deserve the confidence and support of the nation.” (Text; nasa LAR VII/III)
With task of designing equipment for U.S. space program largely over and because of cuts in NASA-spending, hundreds of scientists and engineers were losing their jobs or getting out “while the getting is good,” said Peter H. Prugh in Wall Street Journal. Boeing Co. was laying off several hundred at New Orleans and Cape Kennedy; its Huntsville work force was down from 4,600 in 1966 to 3,000, with more cuts coming. Chrysler Corp. had cut employment at New Orleans from 3,300 to 1,500 and most of its 900 Cape Kennedy employees faced layoffs or shifts to other cities. Huntsville office of Alabama State Employment Service said area employment had declined 3,500 in past year with biggest drop in aerospace field. Space scientists and engineers were finding even mundane jobs difficult to land because of their specialized skills and relatively high salary demands. Exodus was worrying space experts, “who fret that a new emphasis on U.S. space efforts or new military needs would leave companies hard pressed to fill the rows of desks being vacated now.” (WSJ, 11/6/68,1)	>	_
LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson was appointed Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb and head of NASA Hq. Interim Working Group to evaluate future manned spaceflight projects. LaRC Deputy Director Charles J. Donlan would serve as Acting Director in Dr. Thompson’s absence, (nasa Release 68—41; W Post, 3/1/68, A7) During February: nasa published 1967 Summer Study of Lunar Science and Exploration (nasa SP—157), results of July 31—Aug. 13, 1967, conference at Univ. of California in Santa Cruz. Conference recommended nasa: (1) develop lunar flying unit (lfu), Saturn V dual-launch capability, and dual-mode local scientific survey module (lssm) for lunar surface mobility; (2) make available in 1970—75 Block II Surveyor or another system capable of deploying numerous experiments; (3) increase total returned payload to 400 lb so that at least 250 lb of lunar samples could be returned on Apollo Applications (aa) missions; (4) increase flexibility of alsep stations’ design, possibly by adopting modular concept; (5) provide for continuous telemetry coverage of all payload elements and operations; (6) develop subsatellite system for deploying instruments in close lunar orbit; (7) implement any extension of Apollo science program by open solicitation of experiments from scientific community; (8) undertake strong programs in scientific instrument definition and development and in lunar supporting research and technology; (9) establish position of Project Scientist within manned spaceflight program; (10) include ability in field geology as a major requirement for astronauts who would land on moon; (11) conduct immediate and intensive program of detailed mission analyses for prime lunar landing sites and traverses suggested by the conference; and (12) include in lunar surface studies observations of micrometeoroid environment, radio-frequency noise levels, surface impedance and conductivity, lunar ionosphere, gamma rays and x-rays, soil mechanics, thermal effects, and contaminants, (nasa SP—157; AP, NYT, 2/19/68,
Dr. George Kozmetsky, dean of Univ. of Texas College of Business and of Graduate School of Business, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, NASA announced. Specialist in system analysis, organization theory, quantative methods, and system management, Dr. Kozmetsky would serve on NASA’s Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—153)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb delivered first of three McKinsey Foundation lectures, “Reflections on Government Service,” before Columbia Univ. Graduate School of Business: “Our society has reached a point where its progress and even survival increasingly depend upon our ability to organize the complex and do the unusual. We cannot do the things we have to do except by employment of large aggregations of power in highly specialized forms.” Present technological revolution was “the most decisive event of our times.” Great issue of the age was whether U.S. could, within framework of acceptable institutions, “organize the use and development of advanced technology as effectively as the USSR with its totalitarian system of allocating and utilizing human and material resources.” Webb believed capabilities of U.S. system had “immense advantage over all other systems.” (Text)
President Johnson presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest award, to recently retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb at ceremony in Johnson City, Tex. He also awarded cluster to NASA Exceptional Service Medal held by Apollo 7 commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Exceptional Service Medals to Apollo 7 Astronauts R. Walter Cunningham and Donn F. Eisele. President said U.S. was “ready to take that first great step out into the solar system and on to the surface of the nearest of the many mysterious worlds that surround us in space.” Noting that Apollo 7 had logged more than 780 man-hours in space—more than had been logged “in all Soviet manned flights to date”—and had accomplished 56 mission objectives, as many “in this one flight as were accomplished in the first five manned flights of the Gemini spacecraft,” he said: “This is not important as either a game or a contest. But it is important because the United States of America must be first in technology if it is to continue its position in the world. I believe today, as I did when we had our original hearings that created the Space Administration, that the United States must be first.” President read citation, presenting Medal to Webb for “outstanding leadership of America’s space program from 1961 to 1968. . . . More than any other individual he deserves the credit for the great achievements of the United States in the first decade of space, and for helping man to reach outward toward the stars.” Webb responded: “The citation and medal . . . should, in my view, be converted into some kind of holographic substance so it could be divided into thousands of parts . . . and each part should really go to an outstanding person in NASA, in our scientific group, Working in our universities, and in the great industrial organizations of this country that have really done the work.” (Transcript; Citation; PD, 11/8/68, 1568-71)
Col. Albert J. Wetzel (usaf, Ret.), Director of Sponsored Programs at Tulane Univ., was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Former technical assistant to Director of Defense Research and Engineering and former Titan icbm program director, Col. Wetzel would advise Webb on NASA Project Management System and other technical and personnel management activities, (nasa Release 68—156)
Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.) on Senate floor said: “President Johnson is properly called the principal architect of America’s space program. As Senator and Vice President he worked unceasingly to assure this country a role of leadership in the exploration of space. . . . Under President Johnson’s leadership in the Senate the Space Act was passed in 1958, creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . . . setting up a charter to win for this country a preeminence in the peaceful exploration of space. NASA pulled together widely scattered efforts in space and built an organization unique in this country’s history. It has contributed to the technological competence so vital to modern industrial society.” (nasa LAR VII/108; CR, 10/10/68, S12423)
Washington Sunday Star commented on resignation of NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “The abrupt announcement, which was notably lacking in the customary ceremonial niceties, was the final confirmation that NASA’s honeymoon is definitely over. The relationship between the space agency and Congress must rank as perhaps the longest, and in many ways the happiest, official honeymoon on record. For six years, hardly a frown or a cross word came between the blossoming agency and the guardians of the nation’s treasure. The amiable and loquacious Webb proved himself an able administrator who knew his way around in the bureaucratic jungle. Through Mercury and Gemini programs, NASA virtually had only to ask, and Congress was ready to give. Then came the Apollo tragedy.” But Jan. 27, 1967, fire did not cause the change of heart. “It was ... a catalyst that speeded the process. But a growing coolness was bound to develop . . . for the basic economic fact is that America simply cannot continue to meet NASA’s ever-expanding economic demands—not, at least, without a critical weighing of those demands against the nation’s existing domestic, diplomatic and military obligations. . . . “Long before the tragedy that threw the timetable into a shambles, the conflict between America’s technical ability to move men into space and America’s ability to pay the freight could be seen by those who cared to look ahead. . . . Congressional reluctance to commit the nation to further, open-ended expenditures in manned space flight is therefore inevitable. But equally inevitable is the dismay—and in some cases the bitterness—of NASA officials. Webb and his lieutenants can take justifiable pride in what has been accomplished in the brief span of the space age. . . . They have solved problems quickly and accurately that men have never faced before. In the process, they pulled together a scientific and technical team unequalled in the peacetime history of this country. Now they are watching that massive army disband. . . . “Man will someday go to the planets and beyond. But that day must wait until the breakdown of nationalistic barriers makes possible a truly united world space program. Meanwhile, the United States should concentrate on the development of more sophisticated machines, less costly rocket systems and closer cooperation between the military and civilian space programs to avoid wasteful duplication. America’s space effort must not end with the Apollo program. It must be diverted into equally exciting and frequently more rewarding channels of unmanned space exploration.” (W Star, 9/22/68, Cl)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former afsc Commander, delivered Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture to National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He warned the U.S.S.R. had moved forward steadily with new and more diversified strategic threat highlighted by development of orbital missile and sophisticated space systems. U.S. comparative missile strength, he noted, was declining steadily, with emphasis still on updating existing force. “What is missing so far in our military space program is the necessary high priority research and development aimed at protecting us in the high ground of space. In space, as elsewhere, the Soviets say one thing—even sign agreements—but consistently do whatever is in their own self-interest. The orbital missile is merely the latest example of their policy. In light of their development of an orbital missile, it would be totally irresponsible ... to assume that we do not need to initiate any r&d to prepare us to meet a Soviet space threat.” Attributing loss of endorsement of national space program to change in national value scale because of Vietnam and domestic problems, Gen. Schriever said: “The old criteria, national security and national prestige, are no longer the only justifications for our space efforts, important though they are.” If public understood “the practical, dollars and cents worth of the program to this country and to the world,” they would support it. U.S. was on verge of receiving annual return larger than its annual investment in space, and within one decade, “those returns should be several times our annual investment.” (Text; Aero Tech, 3/11/68, 16)	.
Scientific team headed by Nobel Prize winning physicist, Dr. Charles H. Townes, announced discovery of ammonia molecules in direction of Sagittarius toward Milky Way center, 30,000 light years away from earth. Finding was made through spectrographs at radioastronomy observatory of Univ. of California at Berkeley during studies supported by nasa, Office of Naval Research, and nsf. Ammonia was considered chemical ancestor of organic compounds and necessary step toward origin of life. Team said discovery “marks the first time that a relatively complex molecular compound has been definitely identified in the vast regions between the stars.” It would spur intensified search for additional combinations of life-essential elements detected in space. Former mit provost and inventor of maser, which led to development of laser, Dr. Townes had been named Dec. 3 to head President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s task force to make recommendations on space program. Report would be published in Physical Review Letters of American Institute of Physics, (upi, NYT, 12/16/68, 93; AP, W Post, 12/16/68, Al)
In policy statement on science New York Governor Nelson B. Rockefeller, campaigning for Republican presidential nomination, had recommended that U.S. postpone manned space program after Apollo. He warned against treating space program as contest between U.S. and U.S.S.R. and advocated use of unmanned satellites for direct benefits on earth, to explore planets, and to study sun. Gov. Rockefeller said if he were President he would appoint commission “to review the whole field of government science.” He recommended President make annual report to Congress on science and technology. (SBD, 8/6/68,149)
Surveyor Project Office at jpl officially closed after directing one of U.S.’s most successful space exploration programs. Program director, Howard H. Haglund, recipient of 1968 Astronautics Engineer Award, had been accepted as Alfred P. Sloan Fellow and would attend Stanford Univ. (jpl pio; SBD, 7/8/68, 10)
Lawrence A. Hyland, Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was selected by naa to receive Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics in 1967 as Hughes Surveyor program director. Trophy would be presented May 7. (naa Release; AP, W Post, 4/16/68, A3)
nasa announced that Dr. Mac C. Adams, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, would resign July 1 to return to private industry. He would be succeeded by James M. Beggs, Director of Purchases and Traffic, Westinghouse Electric Corp,, who would join nasa June 1. Bruce T. Lundin, Associate Director for Development, LeRC, was named nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. Commenting on Dr. Adams’ departure, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said, “He brought to NASA strong management and engineering competence . . . [and] gave us brilliant leadership in critical times.” (nasa Release 68-92)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, defended space activity before St. Louis, Mo., section of aiaa: “There are . . . those who are trapped by the illogical proposition that if the money involved were not spent on space, it would automatically flow into projects in which they are more interested. ... I do not agree. It is not an ‘either/or’ situation. In my judgment, if this country is great—and I know it is—it has the will, the ability, and the responsibility to handle both a vigorous space program and the social and economic problems which confront it. In fact, our competence to solve the issues of the city is greater because of the space program.” {CR, 6/17/69, S7314)
In last of three McKinsey Foundation lectures NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed “Executive Performance and Evaluation.” NASA program at peak level had employed more than 400,000 full-time workers and 20,000 contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers and drawn on more than 150 universities, in addition to 8,000 NASA-supported professors, scientists, and technicians. It had worked with urban communities on problems, reclaimed wasteland, constructed massive buildings, and developed new transportation means. NASA would not be viewed in history as unique but was likely “to prove a prototype.” As Administrator, Webb said, his purpose was to work toward environment within which NASA could be as innovative in the management of all its activities as it was in its scientific and technical work. Large-scale endeavor required executives of unusual type and had to be designed to enable executives to perform in an unusual way. (Text)
msc officials announced resignation of Astronaut John S. Bull (L/Cdr., usn), third astronaut to leave space program because of medical problem. Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Chief of Medical Programs, told news conference Astronaut Bull had rare respiratory disease for which there was no known cure and no medical name. It was characterized by chronic sinus difficulties, lung obstruction, and sensitivity to aspirin. (upi, W Post, 7/17/68, All)
President-elect Richard M. Nixon named Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, retiring President of Cal Tech, as his Science Adviser and announced formation of task force under Dr. H. Guyford Stever, President of Carnegie-Mel-lon Univ., to make recommendations in general science field. Task force headed by Dr. Charles Townes, Nobel Prize winning physics professor at Univ. of California at Berkeley, would recommend in space field. Dr. DuBridge described as a “very critical matter” loss of momentum in U.S. space program because of appropriations cuts and said reducing activities in basic and applied research damaged nation’s future. Later, National Science Board Chairman, Dr. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., said of Dr. DuBridge, “He has one rare attribute . . . wisdom, an unusual commodity. He is knowledgeable about the role of technology in our society and has a deep belief in the importance of fundamental research to the health and welfare of the country. And he is usually understanding of the problems of the private universities.” Homer, W Star, 12/3/68; Cohn, W Post, 12/3/68, A7; SBD, 12/4/68, 141; W Star, 12/4/68, A13)
Committee on Resolutions of 1968 Republican National Convention meeting in Miami Beach, Fla., proposed platform plank on science: “In science and technology the nation must maintain leadership against increasingly challenging competition from abroad. . . . We regret that the Administration’s budgetary mismanagement has forced sharp reductions in the space program. The Republican party shares the sense of urgency manifested by the scientific community concerning the exploration of outer space. We recognize that the peaceful applications of space probes in communications, health, weather, and technological advances have been beneficial to every citizen. We regard the ability to launch and deploy advanced spacecraft as a military necessity. We deplore the failure of the Johnson-Humphrey Administration to emphasize the military uses of space for America’s defense.” (NYT, 8/5/68, 25)
nasa’s 10th anniversary was celebrated with appropriate fanfare, but the 11th anniversary of the Space Age, which came during the same week, slipped by with barely a nod of recognition,” James J. Haggerty, Jr., charged in Armed Forces Journal. “It should have been given more attention. The U.S. needs a continual reminder that we were dragged kicking and screaming into space exploration, that the U.S. space program was born only out of reaction to the accomplishments of another nation. . . . “The summary for 11 years of space launchings shows a total of 881 launches through the Oct. 4 anniversary date. About 400 of all the spacecraft launched still are in orbit. “The U.S. enjoyed a considerable quantitative lead at the end of the 11-year period. It sent into orbit 564 spacecraft, or 64% of the total, compared with 298 spacecraft, or 33%, for the USSR. . . . “Manned flights, of course, were confined to the U.S. and the USSR. Through the anniversary date the U.S. had launched 14 flights involving 24 astronauts and 1,993 man-hours; the USSR had made nine flights with 12 cosmonauts piling up 532 man-hours.” (AFJ, 10/12/68, 13)
President Johnson transmitted to Congress his annual report, United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, 1967. “The fruits of . . . technology have not been limited to space exploration alone. The knowledge built through our space program has benefited our earthbound lives. It has: revolutionized communications throughout the world; given us better weather information and more accurate navigational and geographic data; brought improved medical instruments and techniques, advanced education, and added to our store of scientific knowledge; spurred the development of more sophisticated aircraft and improved flight safety; [and] strengthened both the security of this nation and our leadership in the search for a peaceful and secure world.” The President was heartened to see that the space program had “moved forward in a spirit of international cooperation, giving new
NASA Administrator James E. Webb delivered John Diebold Lecture on Technological Change and Management at Harvard Univ. Graduate School of Business Administration. Speaking on “nasa as an Adaptive Organization,” he emphasized “how as well as what” in nasa’s buildup of capabilities and learning to “apply new ways of organizing and administering human and material resources.” ' Capabilities demonstrated during one week—second week of November 1967—in launching Ats III, Surveyor VI, Saturn V, and Essa IV represented “better than 90% of everything we would need to carry out almost any mission that even the most daring have placed on our space agenda for the next decade.” Measurements made by experimental spacecraft plus essa’s 24-hr-per-day operations were providing handsome returns in understanding and predicting weather. “This is one way our country says to every other country, every day, that we as a people want to use our new power over the forces of nature in a joint effort with them, with benefits to both of us, and not to threaten or to coerce them to follow some pattern laid down by us.” Magnification capability of Ranger and Surveyor opened way “for lunar and planetary investigations of a type and scope undreamed of before we learned to use the rocket technology.” Saturn V launch “demonstrated that we can have . . . the big-booster capability and the launch rate capability in which we have been behind the U.S.S.R.” Utility of Essa IV was “far beyond any we can achieve in any other way. It works ... all around the world, and feeds information into something like 296 stations in the United States and about 86 in 45 other countries. It is truly a working bird. . . . “I do not believe our Nation could have long continued as a great power if we had not built up the means to conduct operations in space. ... I believe we would have sacrificed our chances to keep pace in the technological competition that is the crucial test of our times. . . . We would have denied to ourselves the tools and the knowledge necessary . . . [for] problems that beset us and the rest of mankind the benefits that surely will follow from the full development of space applications.” (Text; W Post, 10/13/68, B5)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, as Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, had asked bob to place $20 million in FY 1969 nasa authorization for Earth Resources Observation Satellite (eros). White House budget-cutters had eliminated eros from new budget, George C. Wilson said in Washington Post. Secretary of the Interior Stewart L. Udall and NAS scientists also were expected to press for restoration of funds. NAS report to nasa would urge eros funding as “one of the potentially big pay-offs for the national space program.” (Wilson, W Post, 1/10/68, B7)
Former NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., became visiting professor in mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and at Sloan School of Management. He would continue as part-time consultant to nasa. (Boston Globe, 3/6/68; SBD, 3/11/68, 51)
Major administrative events affecting NASA and its role in space were resignation of Administrator James E. Webb in October, after 7% yr as NASA’s head, and budget cuts necessitating program and personnel reductions. Press marked Webb retirement with praise for many accomplishments of U.S. space program during his leadership. Webb, planning to devote time to interests in education and urban and foreign affairs, continued to serve as consultant to Acting Administrator Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. NASA FY 1969 budget request of $4.37 billion, already smallest since 1963 and $700 million below FY 1968 request, was further trimmed by Congress because of urgent national needs in other areas, particularly Vietnam war and urban problems. Authorization of $4,013 billion was lowered to appropriation of $3,995 billion-—$375.12 million below original request. Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968 again reduced NASA funds, as well as funds for dod and other agencies. Dr. Paine in October announced NASA interim operating plan limited to $3.85 billion for FY 1969. Cutbacks included “sharply limited and deferred” Apollo Applications program, end to Saturn IB and V booster production, 50% cut in advanced mission studies, reduced lunar and planetary exploration program, one-year delay in NERVA development, slips in Biosatellite program, and reductions in astronomy, physics, and basic research. In November Dr. Paine said that below $4-billion level NASA could no longer “hold together our hard-won capabilities and utilize them effectively in critical programs; some of them would have to be dropped entirely.” (EH)
Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.), President of Schriever and McKee Associates, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, NASA announced. Former faa Administrator and former NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, Gen. McKee would advise NASA on management, aeronautics, and coordination with other Government agencies. (NASA Release 68—169)
Newsweek said nerva project had “become one more casualty of cutbacks in the space program.” Workers at Nevada test site “say only a skeleton staff will be left on the project by spring.” (Newsweek,
In Washington Evening Star Carl T. Rowan wrote: “Some disenchanted Americans shake their heads as they note the poverty, the hunger, the sickness, the ignorance that plague the earthlings about them, and they ask what logic provokes our government to ignore critical problems at hand while investing vast sums in space ventures of doubtful value. ... we have become an ‘either/or’ society. . . . Even though our gross national product is now running at a fantastic level of $871 billion a year, it is absolutely inconceivable to most taxpayers that we can have guns and butter, space spectaculars and dramatic domestic change. . . . Well, no man of vision, imagination, or hope can possibly believe that we are wrong to search the darkest reaches of outer space. . . . Who can say that contributions to medicine, to weather control, to science in general, to the problems of feeding man, to national defense, and ultimately to peace may flow from the space program?” Space program was “inherently and intrinsically, justification enough for spending $340 for every man, woman, and child in America. But are we not wise to ask: what is man profited if he harness the universe and yet fail to conquer the meanness . . . the hatreds, that dog those who inhabit the earth? . . . Much of the public is not in a mood to finance anything else. So we shall be stuck with the ordeal of setting priorities where there is scant room for making choices.” (W Star, 10/25/68, A15)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines commented on James E. Webb’s resignation as NASA Administrator: “Yes . . . there was a James Webb. He had his faults, God knows, and a peculiar style. Most people would have done the job differently. But, on balance, it is difficult to see how anyone could have done it much better.” (W Star, 10/6/68, C4)
nasa announced award to Bendix Corp. of $1,567,550 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for development, test, and delivery of one prototype and five flight-model atm star trackers in 15-mo period, atm, part of Apollo Applications program, would be launched into earth orbit and docked with Saturn I Workshop being developed by msfc for 28- to 56-day astronaut stays in space. Astronauts would use atm to study sun from above earth’s atmosphere, (msfc Release 68—196) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, asserted U.S. could afford multibillion dollar space program; “at least as much as President Johnson proposed this year—nearly $7,000,000,000—and perhaps an appreciable amount more.” (Figure included all Government spending, not just NASA funds.) Persons advocating big cuts in space program were “doing this country a disservice.” Much of high U.S. gross national product was result of prior investment in r&d. “This Nation invests more per capita in research than any other nation in the world and that is a major reason why we have a higher standard of living. The space program is the most active, economical, and productive stimulus to research and development in history. We cannot afford to slow it down . . . unless we think we can afford less investment in the elimination of poverty, less expenditure for health improvement, less income for an expanding population, and less readiness in the realm of national security.” Space program cost, though large, was “not really so expensive when we figure that we are spending less than 1% of our Gross National Product for a technological capability that increases the rate at which this Nation becomes wealthier and more powerful by many times 1%.” (Text; B Sun, 8/29/68, A5; AP, LA Times, 8/29/68) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Library of Congress Research Specialist, said U.S.S.R. was launching more military espionage satellites than any other spacecraft and therefore had softened complaints about U.S. espionage satellite activity. Tracing political and social implications of Soviet space program, Dr. Sheldon said U.S.S.R. accepted “importance of basic research on the cosmic scale” and vigorous exploitation of space applications for civil purposes was definite goal. In long-term outlook, U.S.S.R. talked of “future automated, cybernetics-aided industrial state ... in which space applications, space travel, and use of extraterrestrial resources play a vital part.” He also credited NASA program of international cooperation with some influence on recent Soviet shift toward increased cooperation within and without Soviet bloc, though joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. program for space exploration would probably prove inoperable even if it could be established. (AIAA Paper 68-900; AP, NYT, 8/30/68, 7) m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf) , director of faa sst development, said cost of designing and developing two prototype commercial SSTs would amount to $1,587 billion. Government share in total spending from 1963 through 1972 would be $1,239 billion, or 78%. Contractors, Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., would pay $287.8 million, or 18%, and customer airlines would contribute $59.5 million, or 4%. Principal problem in financing, he said, was protection of manufacturers against catastrophic failure. This would require “some limitation of recourse of creditors ... in event of program failure.” In addition, Gen. Maxwell forecast $2.5-billion to $5-billion market risk for period starting in 1972 and $15 billion commercial risk for period between start of sales and end of century. (AIAA Paper 68—916; AP, NYT, 9/1/68,22)
Entire thrust of Soviet space program pointed to circumlunar flight by cosmonauts before U.S., according to former astronaut Cdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn). Speaking at Beloit College symposium on oceanography, he predicted NASA might try to send crew around moon in autumn as counter to Soviet manned space spectacular. (Lewis, B News, 5/19/68)
House Committee on Government Operations’ Special Studies Subcommittee, chaired by Rep. Porter Hardy, Jr. (D-Va.), ordered NASA to make every effort to cut escalating costs of its June 16, 1967, contract with Boeing Co. for technical integration and evaluation in assembly of Apollo spacecraft’s three modules with Saturn V launch vehicle. Contract, negotiated by NASA in drive to improve safety after Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, had been listed tentatively as costing $20 million; NASA officials now placed cost of carrying work through 1968 at $73.4 million. (Transcript; UPI, W Post, 7/16/68, A6)
Oakland Tribune editorial, “Space Race Has Big Stakes”: “The orbital bomb is one chilling example of the potential military threat posed by the Soviet space program. Yet, so far, the only officially announced U.S. reaction . . . has been reports of plans for an over-the-horizon radar to lengthen the warning time against orbital devices and missiles. “It would be more reassuring to the nation if the Pentagon were given the authority to devote whatever resources it requires to counter the orbital bomb threat, not simply with defensive measures but with an offensive military capability of our own. . . . The ultimate prize in the space race may be national survival.” (Oakland Trib, 5/1/68)
President Johnson presented Goddard Memorial Trophy for 1968 to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former nasa Deputy Administrator and now NASA consultant and MIT visiting professor, in White House ceremony. National Space Club award named for the late Dr. Robert H. Goddard, “father of American rocketry,” was given Dr. Seamans for helping “develop the policies, plans and programs that have led to the outstanding achievements and United States leadership in the field of rocketry and astronautics.” President Johnson had received trophy in 1966. {PD, 3/1/68, 475; Program, Goddard Memorial Dinner, 3/5/68; W Post, 3/6/68)
Boeing Co. in Washington, D.C., displayed scale model of new fixed-wing design for SST with downward-bent wings inboard toward fuselage and vertical tail placed well forward of horizontal tail. SST Program Director m/g Jewell C. Maxwell said in interview, “I think we have a much greater feeling of confidence than we have had in some time. We now have a design in hand that seems able to do the job.” Boeing would submit new design to Government in mid-January but, said New York Times, “there is some nervousness about the receptivity of the new Congress for a budget request that will probably come close to $300 million for the fiscal year ending June 1970.” Current estimates of overall sst cost were $1.5 billion. {NYT, 11/18/68, 93)
nasa announced appointment of Dr. Henry J. Smith, Deputy Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs, ossa, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Science), replacing Dr. John E. Naugle who was named Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Oct. 1, 1967. Dr. Smith would be Chief Scientist for ossa, responsible for obtaining and implementing scientific advice for the national space program, (nasa Release 69—70)
Republican candidate Richard M. Nixon was elected President of United States, with 302 electoral votes from 32 states and popular vote of 30,041,582, or 43.42%. Democratic candidate Hubert H. Humphrey polled 191 electoral votes from 14 states and 29,817,385 popular votes, or 43.10%. American Independent Party candidate George C. Wallace won 45 electoral votes and 9,242,950 popular votes, or 13.36%. While space had not been major issue in election, candidates had made statements in support of space program in campaign speeches, (nasa eh; CQ Weekly Rpt, 11/8/68, 3071)
nasa’s Pegasus I, II, and III meteoroid technology satellites launched Feb. 16, May 25, and July 30, 1965, were turned off by ground command after more than three years successful operation. Designed for 18-mo lifetime, Pegasus satellites, by detecting meteoroids, had confirmed protective adequacy of Apollo spacecraft for manned lunar missions but indicated that spacecraft for longer missions might encounter protection design problems. Spacecraft also provided data on Van Allen belts, earth reflectivity, solar constant, orbital and gyroscopic motions of rigid bodies, degradation of surface coatings in space, thermal control systems, and lifetime of electronic components in space operations. Pegasus program had been managed by MSFC under OART direction, (nasa Releases 68—149, 68—149A, 68—149B; Marshall Star, 8/21/68,1)
Apollo Program Director, b/g Samuel C. Phillips, told post-launch press conference at KSC early portion of Apollo 8 mission had been perfect: . . Apollo 8 is now on its way to the Moon. And ... I certainly envy the crew the magnificent views that they might have at this point as they were describing it to us. . . . To he able to see the entire earth. I think by this time in their flight, they are something over 10,000 miles high and moving at about 25,000 miles an hour. . . . The countdown . . . was—during most of the night actually a hit, and even into the late minutes of this morning, the count was proceeding with comfortable margins of time. The flight of the Saturn V was flawless in all of the maneuvers it was expected to make. The performance of the spacecraft . . . has similarly been flawless.” (Transcript)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences he was greatly concerned about future of entire space program without propulsion capability of nuclear rocket program. Nuclear propulsion was “a must for our future space needs.” Failure to proceed into development phase would result in “losses of experienced personnel and cost-increase effects on the total program. ... A one-year delay in funding could result in as much as two years delay in having an operational nuclear engine.” Nuclear vehicle as 3rd stage on Saturn V could significantly improve payload and mission versatility, and improved capability could be utilized “to improve mission effectiveness, to increase the mission and payload reliability, and to extend the spectrum of potential missions in the late 1970’s and the 1980’s. Equally important . . . for high energy missions requiring the launch of two or more Saturn V’s, with subsequent rendezvous in earth orbit, we will be able to reduce the number of Saturn V’s needed through the utilization of a nuclear vehicle,” at substantial cost savings. In response to questions by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.), Dr. von Braun said space program was “cutting edge of our technology advancements and of many advances in the applied sciences . . . [because] no other program . . . involves so many branches of technology and science.” Reduction in NASA’s S60-million NERVA request to $11 million recommended by House would be disastrous because to make manned space operations useful, “plenty of payload” was required. AEC funding for NERVA had been approved, hut if cuts were made in NASA funding, program would be nonexistent. (Testimony; Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 5/1/68, A3)
Republican presidential contender Richard M. Nixon told group of Southern delegates to nominating convention U.S. must restore balance of power in missile and space programs. “This Administration has allowed it to deteriorate. That is why I am opposed to any kind of program—such as defensive missiles—which allows the United States to take second place to the Soviet Union. We are going to restore our strength in the missile program.” In the space program, he said, “We have sort of a budget problem . . . and we may have to trim it in some places. But as far as these great and important objectives that involve national defense . . . [and] prestige, we have got to be sure that the United States is first and never second in space . . . [for] any great nation, to remain great, must explore the unknown. ... As far as I am concerned . . . there is a research gap at the present time. We aren’t putting enough money into basic research to keep ahead of the Soviet Union. We are going to close that gap—and then create one where they are behind us all around the world.” (M Her, 8/7/68, A22; Cocoa, Fla., Today, 8/7/68; SBD, 8/8/68,162)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced resignation of Edmond C. Buckley as Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, and Buckley’s appointment as his Special Assistant and Vice Chairman of nasa Post Apollo Advisory Group (headed by LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson). Gerald M. Truszynski, Deputy to Buckley for seven years, would succeed him. Webb said Buckley had been “one of the architects of this nation’s great competence in tracking and data acquisition.” (nasa Release 68—17)
Survey by AIA predicted decline in aerospace industry employment from l,43l million in March to 1,400 million by December because of continuing decline in space program and leveling off of employment requirements in aircraft production and R&D programs. Employment was expected to remain at December level through March 1969. Aircraft production and R&D employees were expected to decline from 854,000 to 833,000, or by 2.5%. Missiles and space employment was expected to drop from 517,000 to 507,000, or 1.9%. Scientists and engineers would continue to form 16% of aerospace employment, with technicians making up 6% of aerospace industry employment, (aia Release 68-56)
International comment on Apollo 8 mission:	, In statement distributed by Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., Boris Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, hailed “hardware” and “courage” of Apollo 8 astronauts but called attention to “considerable accent” placed on “automatic devices” in Soviet space program. He said, “The Soviet Union is engaged in a large-scale program of planned studies and exploration of outer space, which provides for the investigation of the earth’s upper atmosphere and of near-earth outer space and studies of sun-earth relationships and of our closest space neighbors—the moon, venus and mars, and later, on more remote planets.” Cuban National Radio called mission “a total success.” Toss: “Due tribute should be paid to the courage and mastery of Frank Borman, William Anders and James Lovell who have accomplished this outstanding scientific and technical experiment. The successful flight of Apollo 8 ushers in a new stage in the history of space exploration.” Ten Soviet cosmonauts telegraphed Apollo crew congratulations for “another milestone in scientific and technical progress.” Pope Paul VI, in message to President Johnson: “Giving thanks to God for the successful completion of the magnificent enterprise of the Apollo 8 mission, we congratulate you and the people of the United States of America and particularly the intrepid space travelers, and invoke divine blessing upon all contributing to this noble achievement.” U.N. Secretary General U Thant: “The powerful thrust of the rocket engines, the awesome speeds attained in flight, the vast distances traveled, the precision of navigation and the fidelity of communications, aural and visual, all stagger the imagination and defy the comprehension of man.” Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia: “a great milestone in man’s continued search of the unknown.” Gov. Gen. Roland Michener of Canada, in message to President Johnson: Canadians had followed astronauts’ flight with “admiration for their courage and the technical skill of all who have a part in the enterprise.” Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan to President Johnson: feat showed America’s “courage and the high level of scientific technology.” In Kaduna, Nigeria, New Nigerian said Apollo 8, “Apart from being the supreme technological achievement ... of all time,” was “another exciting chapter in man’s eternal quest to triumph over his own natural environment.” Same skills and resources which were helping to conquer space ’’could easily be diverted to giving man a better life on earth itself—if only all of us would allow the good that is inherent in all mankind to assert itself.” (AP, B Sun, 12/28/68, 1; New Nigerian, 12/27/68, 1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, at dedication of Grissom and Chaffee Halls at Purdue Univ. said, “The pressing sociological problems besetting this nation will require a high order of technological skill to solve.” Space program was contributing to “fundamental solution” of problems of poverty and human welfare by bringing “advancement in economic and technological growth.” Space flight would help public understand ability of industry, science, and government to-work together to mobilize .resources. Honoring late astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee, Dr. Mueller predicted space program would “help to shape our future” and U.S. would continue “to rely upon the vision and dedication” of such men. Conquest of space would be “our most enduring memorial to these men.” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb shakes hands with Dr. Thomas O. Paine {left) after swearing him in as Deputy Administrator of was A, but questioned whether there would be enough missions for booster to justify high development costs. {Text; Aero Tech, 3/25/68, 12)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics decided on $153-million cut in NASA’s authorization request of $4.37 billion for FY 1969. Reductions included cut from $48.3 million to $11.7 million for nuclear rocket program [Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee had recommended cut of entire $48.3 million], $36.5 million from unmanned space program, and $60.3 million from request of $2.8 billion for manned space flight program. (AP, W Star, 3/2/68, A3; W Post, 3/2/68, A10; HR 1181, 3/19/68)
Apollo 7 editorial comment: Washington Post: “. . . as the men in the space program go over the data on Apollo 7 and consider the alternatives of manned or unmanned flight on Apollo 8, they must not allow anyone’s desire to heat the Russians, or to get around the moon by the end of 1968, or to fan public interest in the future of space exploration to enter into their calculations. Only if they are convinced that our knowledge is sufficient, our spacecraft is totally adequate, and our men are ready should they give the go to Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders for a Christmas trip into space.”(IF Post, 10/23/68, A24) Washington Evening Star: “To those who have made a close study of the space program, [Walter M.] Schirra is the astronaut’s astronaut; the man whose ability stands out in that company of the superable. To those in the know, Schirra is the mischievous perfectionist, the naval officer who lives by the book w'hen he isn’t too busy carrying out an elaborate practical joke. But Schirra will surely be remembered by the public as the astronaut who caught cold, who growled when the alarm clock rang, and who blew up when he was pushed too far. And it may be that Schirra’s greatest contribution to the space program is that he, the most superlative of the supermen, forcefully demonstrated to the world that his is completely and refreshingly human.” (W Star, 10/23/68, A20) Baltimore Sun: “The toting up and analysis of all the information brought home this time must be left to the teams of experts. So must the decisions as to what comes next, and the planning such decisions call for. The public is content to know that three men in a spaceship have added another brave and brilliant chapter to a history of which all of us are unreservedly proud.” (B Sun, 10/23/68, A6)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb urged Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to restore $48.3 million cut by House from NASA FY 1969 budget request for nuclear rocket program [see March 1]. Webb stressed importance of proceeding with U.S. development of nuclear rocket propulsion as part of total capability in aeronautics and space to (1) meet potential civil or military requirements for space vehicles and missions, (2) avoid short-sighted cutoffs ot constraint on promising new technological developments because they had no specific justification in advance, (3) prove that U.S. “does not intend to limit its development of large launch vehicles and payload capabilities” to Saturn V class, and (4) serve as “central focus for continuing advance in nuclear and other technologies involved.” Responding to questions, Webb cited recent Soviet development of fractional orbital bombardment system, automatic docking flights, and maneuvering of heavy payloads in orbit as evidence U.S.S.R. was “not neglecting any important capabilities. . . . Everything I know . . . indicates they are still probing for those areas that will put them ahead the fastest and give them the lead over us that we cannot overcome in a short time.” (Testimony; SBD, 4/25/68, 309; NYT 4/25/68, 16)
In its international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched three satellites for European Space Research Organization:	International Radiation Investigation Satellite Iris I (Esro II—B), Aurorae (Esro /) to study aurora borealis and related polar ionosphere phenomena, and Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite Heos A for interplanetary physics research. From eight nations, 35 investigators were selected to carry out experiments with first lunar surface material to be retrieved by NASA. Four nations contributed experiments flown on NASA spacecraft and 122 sounding rockets were launched in scientific programs with eight countries. Geodetic satellite observations were carried out with 34 countries; aeronautical research was conducted with 4 countries; and 52 countries had apt facilities to receive cloud cover pictures from U.S. satellites, (nasa Releases 68—219, 68—204; Pres Rpt 68)
Rep. George P, Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reads citation on Goddard Trophy which President Johnson (right) presented to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. (center), former NASA Deputy Administrator. rial Dinner in Washington, D.C. “The public’s knowledge and understanding of space exploration have been broadened by the remarkable achievements of the first decade of the space age, hut a great many people in the space program are deeply concerned about an apparent decline in popular support of space activities.” Space achievements had been well publicized but “the capability that made these feats possible, the underlying science and technology, the inherent value of delving deeper into the mysteries of the atmosphere and space, and the mechanism by which increased scientific knowledge enhances economic and social progress are apparently little understood or appreciated on a wide basis. “Up to now we have had to devote our full energies to working on the means by which we reach into space. Now that the pipelines are filling with space hardware, more and more of our preoccupation is turning toward the question of what can be done to assure that the people who have supported our program . . , receive the full range of benefits which can be derived from space exploitation.” (Text; CRS 3/12/68, E1769) * Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, told Sixth Goddard Memorial Symposium in Washington, D.C., he saw “grave danger to our economic and social progress, as well as to our position in the world, if ‘let technology wait’ attitude becomes too prevalent.” He advocated building sound foundation for economic growth by longterm investment in science, technology, and education and by maintaining technological leadership “as a necessary basis for our national security and economic strength.” He called for “a space program better balanced between scientific, exploratory and economic payoff missions.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 3/6/68, C33; SBD, 3/6/68,25)
NASA awarded three-year, $20,126,224 cost-plus-award-fee contract to Bendix Field Engineering Corp. for maintenance and operation of Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan) facilities at GSFC; Fort Myers, Fla.; Lima, Peru; Tananarive, Malagasy Republic; Mojave, Calif.; Quito, Ecuador; and Santiago, Chile. NASA also awarded $27.6 million cost-plus-incentive-award-fee contract to TRW systems group for work on mission trajectory control program and Apollo spacecraft systems analysis program for msc. (nasa Releases 68—113, 68—115)
Ten years ago NASA officially came into being. In photo, President Dwight D. Eisenhower hands commissions to heads of new agency after Sept. 8, 1958, swearing in ceremonies. At President’s left Is Dr. T. Keith Glenrtan, first NASA A d m in is! tutor. Accepting commission is first Deputy Administrator, the late Hugh L. Dry den. stone of this rewarding effort, we renew our dedication to the guiding principle we expressed 10 years ago at nasa’s launching: that our further mastery of space may continue to be ‘for the benefit of all mankind.’ ” {PD, 10/7/68,1435-1436) During its first 10 yr NASA had completed 234 major U.S. and international launches plus thousands of sounding rocket launches. Of 234 major launches, 189 were launch-vehicle successes and 174 were spacecraft or mission successes, with two missions still under evaluation. For these launches NASA had developed rockets ranging from 88,000-lb thrust to Saturn V with 7.5-million-lb thrust capable of sending nearly 100,000-lb payload to moon. First phase of manned flight program, Project Mercury, had begun seven days after NASA was established. Six manned Mercury flights had proved man could go into space and function as pilot-engineer-experimenter for up to 34 hr weightless flight before returning to earth. Gemini program announced in 1961 had demonstrated work could be performed in orbit outside spacecraft in more than 12 hr extravehicular activity. Gemini included 52 experiments, among them 17 scientific—in astronomy, biology, geology, meteorology, and physics. Seven rendezvous techniques and nine dockings had been accomplished during Gemini. More than 2,000 hr manned spaceflight experience gained through Mercury and Gemini had contributed heavily to Apollo, including 16 flights of unmanned Saturn launch vehicle which had confirmed Apollo engineering concepts and qualified all systems for manned missions. Although Apollo fire on Jan. 27, 1967, had delayed manned missions, it had resulted in safer spacecraft and improved suits for astronauts. Ahead were two manned missions for 1968 and possibly five for 1969, culminating in landing of U.S. astronauts on moon. Facilities at NASA installations in U.S. were worth more than $2.5 billion and peak 35,000 staff included some of Nation’s top scientists. Industrial work force had peaked at 400,000 and was dropping to 200,000. NASA had established global tracking network capable of communicating with vehicles as far away as far side of sun. Its aeronautics program conducted R&D on noise abatement, flight safety, supersonic and hypersonic aircraft, lifting-body vehicles, and v/stol aircraft, nasa’s technological advances included development of new electronic parts, alloys, adhesives, lubricants, valves, and pumps, as well as progress in miniaturization. More than 2,500 technical innovations applicable in industry, medicine, and other nonaerospace activities had resulted from 10 yr of nasa progress. In Christian Science Monitor, Neal Stanford said, “It is . . . science satellites and the new technology developed that are counted on to return to the tax-paying public the dividends that some say will make space the best investment man ever made.” (Marshall Star, 9/25/68, 5; Wilford, NYT, 10/1/68; CSM, 10/5/68) In Washington Sunday Star special report, “A Decade in Space,” John Lannan commented on NASA’s 10th anniversary: “. . . the space agency’s real promise for improving the general welfare of mankind as set forth in the Space Act which brought it into being has apparently been too slow in being fulfilled. The fact that the space investment is only now starting to pay off, and at an increasingly rapid pace, is going unnoticed in the glare of present problems, past mishaps and the imminence of the Apollo venture. Where NASA’s real goals lie are in the future—the near future and the near earth. Spin-off, the serendipity of technology, has long been used as a justification for the vast sums poured into space, but little beyond Teflon-coated frying pans have impinged on the tax-payer’s mind.” (W Star, 9/29/68, Al) NASA Assistant Administrator for dod and Interagency Affairs Jacob E. Smart wrote in Space Digest: “The tenth anniversary . . . marks the end of a decade of concerted effort across a broad front to advance the nation’s capabilities in aeronautics and space. It has been a decade of accomplishment that has few peers in this country’s history. . . . the good working relationships . . . between NASA and DOD have been of immeasurable benefit to them both, and the nation’s space effort is the stronger for it. . . . with the prospect of tighter budgets likely, the maintenance of such relationships—and their improvement—assumes an increasing importance. The need to stretch the appropriations dollars to the maximum may be partly met by fresh efforts to find common ground where cooperation will produce economies as well as mutual benefits.” (Space Digest, 10/68, 68—70) In Space Digest Gen. James Ferguson, Commander of afsc, described “A Decade of Cooperation—The Military-NASA Interface.” afsc’s FY 1969 NASA support expenditures “amounted to millions of dollars and thousands of man-years in effort. The sums of money, and, more important, the human technological resources we are currently expending on the nation’s space programs are of great consequence since they are the foundations of our future benefits. ... we are acutely aware that the fate of future generations lies in space. ... It is a sad commentary to state that technology has provided us with the means to conduct wars. But it is heartening to realize that one day technology will provide us with the means to prevent wars. {Space Digest, 10/68, 71-3)	_
nasa Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) told press at nasa Hq. briefing that Apollo 6 mission, in spite of anomalies, was “a safe mission from a crew safety standpoint” as demonstrated by spacecraft’s recovery in excellent condition after performing an alternate mission. He cited three substantial technical problems—J—2 engine failure because of fuel leak, amplitude of oscillations during 1st-stage burn (pogo effect), and apparent separation of large piece of paint or skin from lunar module adapter during ascent—and one procedural problem—premature shutdown of second of two 2nd-stage engines because of wiring error made by North American Rockwell Corp. which was not discovered by nasa in prelaunch tests. He said all could be corrected. From demonstrations of Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and information gained from Apollo 6 Gen. Phillips said he had determined “the course of actioh . . . necessary to correct and demonstrate the correction of the problems and . . . recommended to the Administrator of nasa that we proceed with preparations for the manned flight of 205 with the 101 spacecraft which is planned to be the first manned flight in Apollo, and ... a Saturn IB.” He also recommended that NASA prepare third Saturn V (No. 503) for manned flight in late 1968 with option to revert to unmanned mission if necessary corrections did not meet requirements to ensure crew safety on manned mission. NASA Administrator James E. Webb’s decision on Gen. Phillips’ recommendation was expected shortly. (Transcript; W Post, 4/25/68, A9)
nasa Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, accepting 1968 Veterans of Foreign Wars Space Award in Detroit, Mich., said: “The long-term outlook for space is good. I have just returned from the first UN Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space. There has been a world-wide increase in awnreness of the values and practicality of space flight. The nations of the world have become more conscious of the economic benefits of the space program, and the public is becoming increasingly aware of the values derived from space technology. With the increase in public awareness of the importance of space technology to the future well-being of the Nation, I believe that the new Congress and the new President will and must reaffirm support for a dynamic U.S. Space Program. . . . Man will prevail in space. On that there can be no serious question. The only question is whether this Nation will prevail in space.” (Text)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
In interview published in New York Times, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge, science adviser-designate to President-elect Richard M. Nixon, said problem facing Government was not “Shall Government support and use science and technology, but how shall it do it. What are the priorities. . . .” Fundamental to use of science was knowledge; therefore, “one must have in any modern society a very important and extensive free basic research enterprise establishment, largely in universities, so that new areas of knowledge will be explored.” Basic research budget of country should increase at least 10% annually for next few years. When it came to using this knowledge, “the Government can, and somebody must, direct, set up the goals.” On space program, Dr. DuBridge said that “the astonishing discoveries” made by launching instruments into space justified further exploration from scientific point of view. When man entered picture as “another piece of the instrumentation that is needed for the exploration,” first effect “is that the costs get large. . . . Apollo landing of a man on the moon is vastly more expensive . . . than the Surveyor landing. ... By the same token, the information returned will be much greater, too. However, as the technology of the spacecraft improves, and our instruments need to get more complex, heavier, or longer lasting, there may very well be a time when putting a man up will actually be cheaper than trying to use automated instruments.” (Sullivan, NYT, 12/17/68, 1).	_
nasa task force appointed by Assistant Administrator for University Affairs Francis B. Smith announced publication of A Study of NASA University Programs, containing assessment of programs and their benefit to nasa and academic community. NASA university programs had “made major contributions to aeronautics and space program. Research sponsored . . . has generated new concepts, has developed new technology, and has created unique facilities for further education and research. Over 50 percent of all experiments flown on NASA satellites have been generated by university programs. Universities have awarded at least 500 graduate degrees and provided continuing education opportunities to thousands . . . [and] university consultants have given policy, scientific, and engineering advice to NASA at all levels.” (Text; NASA Release 68—177)
Canadian Black Brandt IV sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Barreria. do Inferno Range near Natal, Brazil. It carried msc Space Physics Div. 80-lb South Atlantic Anomaly Probe (saap) experiment package containing speedometer, magnetometers, ion chambers, and heavy ion detector to 502-mi (806-km) altitude to provide fast response capability for measuring radiation dose and dose rate at orbital altitude over South Atlantic. Project, cooperative effort of NASA and Brazilian Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) in support of Apollo program, would use data to study dynamics of inner Van Allen belt and possible radiation hazard to astronauts on low-altitude missions, (nasa Releases 68—94, 68—97K; nasa Rpt SRL; SBD, 6/13/68, 213)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices that NASA was still uncertain as to exact levels at which a number of projects could be included in FY 1969 operating plan and that at House-passed $4.008-billion appropriations level NASA’s aeronautical and space activities would have to be sharply curtailed. “We will have to reduce and stretch out ongoing programs and eliminate or defer the work that would have enabled us to continue the research and development . . . looking toward a future resumption of tests and missions which will soon grind to a halt.” Because of reduced budget, Webb said, nasa would have to accept one-year gap in Saturn V production, discontinue production of Saturn IBs, delay initiation of nerva development, either severely limit all proposed planetary orbiter missions or eliminate 1971 or 1973 missions, and curtail work toward using space systems for direct economic benefits. If NASA budget were further reduced under Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968, requiring $6-billion reduction in Federal expenditures in FY 1969, result could be disastrous to goals of national space program. Although NASA would do everything possible to fulfill commitment to Apollo program and would continue on smaller scale programs of greatest and most immediate national importance, further budget cuts would require complete termination of Saturn production and cancellation of production of associated manned spacecraft; elimination of Titan-Mars 1973 missions and possible elimination of Mariner-Mars 1971 missions; and further delays, curtailments, and cancellations which might require more harsh steps such as canceling orders for hardware already under contract and mothballing entire installations. (Testimony; NASA LAR VII/65)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Associate Administrator (1960—67) and now mit professor and consultant to the NASA Administrator, was nominated as AIAA President for 1969. (A&A, 10/68, 106)
New Republic reported interview with Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, physicist and assistant laboratory director of World War II Manhattan Project. Dr. Lapp said: “We are pushing our luck, gambling that everything will work perfectly” on Apollo 8 mission. He advised delay in program so that Apollo 9, configured to have relief-capability, would be on pad ready for launch should Apollo 8 “run into trouble.” Asked if U.S. could afford to delay Apollo 8, Dr. Lapp said, “The basic factor is not really technical. We are racing the Russians to the moon. A lot of people in NASA and in industry are hoping that a successful Apollo-8 orbiting of the moon—or even circumnavigation—will build up public support for an invigorated manned space program. It’s just one of the weighty techno-decisions facing Mr. Nixon. He is committed to funding out the Apollo program—but post-Apollo programs await his decision.” (AP, W Star, 12/9/68; W Post, 12/9/68, 3; New Republic, 12/14/68, 16-9)
nasa appointed Ronald J. Philips Director of Technology Utilization Div., succeeding George J. Howick, who had resigned to join International Research and Marketing Corp. Philips, who had joined NASA in 1964 as management intern at MSC, had been principal staff assistant to NASA Administrator and Executive Assistant to Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, (nasa Release 68—166)
George C. Wilson in Washington Post wrote: “No one is willing to predict what form a new Soviet psychological sputnik would take . . . [but] it was a gut feeling among space leaders that the United States will pay the price eventually for cutting back on its space program while the Soviets move right ahead on all fronts with theirs.” Even Saturn V rocket “does not look big enough to close the thrust gap. NASA Administrator James E. Webb—one of the most underrated administrators in Washington—warns that the Soviets are about to fly a rocket much bigger. . . .” By-product of big boosters was luxury of weight they allowed com-sats. U.S. was using satellites weighing 357 lb at launch and 192 lb in orbit. U.S.S.R. was talking about 1,000-Ib comsats for competing international communications system. “The Soviet Union’s bigness in boosters and payloads will be an advantage in this contest between the two at&ts of space.” (W Post, 9/10,/68, 14) September II: NASA selected Fairchild Hiller Corp. and General Electric Co. to develop spacecraft designs for Applications Technology Satellites (ats) F and G under $4.6-million fixed-price contracts. Configuration would consist of 30-ft-dia deployable antenna and precision control system. Both spacecraft would carry advanced communications, navigation, weather, technical, and scientific experiments. They were scheduled for 1972 and 1973 synchronous orbits at 22,300-mi altitude. Each company would design and develop basic configuration for both spacecraft and provide specifications, drawings, and test procedures, (nasa Release 68—157)
President Johnson submitted to Senate nomination of GSFC Deputy Director, Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr., as Deputy Administrator of Environmental Science Services Administration. He would succeed Dr. Werner A. Baum, who had accepted presidency of Univ. of Rhode Island. Dr. Townsend, scientific administrator and ionospheric physicist, had been head of Naval Research Laboratory’s Rocketsonde Branch and Deputy Science Coordinator of Project Vanguard before he joined nasa in 1958 as Chief of Space Sciences Div. {PD, 6/17/68, 960; essa Release ES 68—38; W Star, 6/11/68; W Post, 6/11/68)
USAF awarded contracts totaling $28.8 million to Fairchild Hiller Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. for contract definition for ZF—15A advanced air superiority fighter aircraft. (dod Release 1147—68) During December: NASA issued Objectives and Goals in Space Science and Applications—1968. NASA Office of Space Science and Applications had participated in 1968 agency-wide planning to detail program objectives and options from which program could be built. Many tools required for future space program had already been developed and many future ventures would require only modest improvements. Spacecraft pointing accuracies and stability would improve, and their lifetimes would increase. More powerful transmitters would communicate data across ever-widening expanses. Spacecraft weight would increase and man would have increasing capability to work and navigate in space. Advances in chemical propulsion, introduction of nuclear and electric propulsion, and new combinations of existing stages, would permit growth of launch vehicle capability to meet mission demands. FY 1969 support of program recognized need for austerity and provided for continuance of existing programs at economical level and initiation of only “projects of great merit, including those where a unique opportunity might be lost.” Future emphasis would be on applications of space and space technology for benefit of man: surveying earth’s resources, TV broadcast from space, and weather forecasting. Knowledge of Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, and other outer planets would be expanded. Introduction of larger, more accurate telescopes would provide man perhaps with “his greatest step in understanding the nature of his universe.” (Text)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Deputy Administrator [see Jan. 31]. (Transcript; nasa LAR VII/10; UPl, NYT, 2/8/68,4)
Col. Robert L. Stevens (usaf), holder of four of nine new world speed and altitude records set in Lockheed YF—12A jet interceptor, was named technical adviser to faa sst Program Director, m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf), (faa Release 68—32)
Howard H. Haglund, jpl Surveyor Project Manager, had been named Stanford-Sloan Fellow for 1968—69. Recipient of National Space Club Astronautics Engineer Award and NASA Exceptional Service Medal, Haglund would attend special nine-month Stanford Univ. graduate course in advanced management. (Pasadena Star-News, 8/16/68; Glendale News-Press, 8/19/68)
Apoilo 7 and 8 flight crews sign memorial document for White House Treaty Room. Signers are Heft to right): Astronaut!, R, Walter Cunningham, Donn F. Eisele, Walter M. Sckirra, Jr. (Apollo 7); William A. Anders, James A. Lovell, Jr^ and Frank Borman (Apollo 8). Standing are Charles A. Lindbergh (ioho also signed), Mrs. Johnson, President Lyndon B. Johnson, retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb, and Vice President Hubert H, Humphrey. dons would be made by land surface stations 300 mi apart throughout world with exception of desert areas. Further data would be passed on by weather ships, upper-air sea stations, aircraft, and meteorological satellites. (W Star, 12/9/68, A8) Committee claimed single entity could make more balanced investment choice on whether to lay more cables or launch satellites and would eliminate need for duplicate transmission facilities. Conclusions were challenged in dissenting footnote to report by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC, who said merger would inhibit development of satellite technology and reduce technological competition between cables and satellites that could result in lower rates. Report also would recommend informal merger of postal and telegraph services, with Western Union Telegraph Co. permitted to operate in post offices; relaxation of fcc restrictions on cable TV to protect broadcasters; and Government sponsorship of experimental program to test TV’s usefulness in assisting minority groups. (Finney, NYT, 12/9/68, 1; 12/10/68, 1; Aug., W Star, 12/12/68, A13)
Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) told 33rd American Assembly in Harriman, N.Y., “The proportion of government expenditures in oceanology must be brought much closer to our outer space program.” Increased Federal investment in oceanology was justified by promise of economic returns, he said. Material benefits from space program were more remote. (Text; W Post, 5/5/68, A25)
Resignation of James E. Webb as NASA Administrator, announced Sept. 16, became effective. Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, assumed duties as Acting Administrator, (nasa Off of Administrator; Off of Acting Administrator)
Interview with Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Science Adviser to President Johnson, appeared in New York Times. Dr. Hornig said problem facing his successor, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, was finding funds for science and technology, to preserve “the vitality, the creativity and the entrepreneurial surge of the establishment.” Next science adviser would have to orient new administration to give science proper place in overall scheme. One of America’s great strengths was recognition that science, like economics, was part of everything. New administration would have to set course for space program after manned lunar landing. It would have to decide how to improve nation’s health care, deal with environmental pollution, and face technological problems of keeping world free of nuclear war. Particularly important task would be advancing vitality of basic science enterprise—research devoted to quest for knowledge with no immediate applications in mind. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/5/68, 28)
