Retirement of Dr. Abe Silverstein, LeRC Director, was announced by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. He would be succeeded Nov. 1 by OART Acting Administrator Bruce T. Lundin. In requesting retirement, Dr. Silverstein wrote: “As NASA engages in its second ten-year program, it may be important that the men whose decisions initiate the new long-range projects be available to complete them. Since I do not think I can stretch my 40 years of service into 50, it is perhaps best ... if I bow out now.” Few have made so great a contribution to our national space effort,” Dr. Paine said. Dr. Silverstein had been first Director of Space Flight Programs in NASA Hq. in 1958. Under his leadership first U.S. man-in-space program, Project Mercury, had been planned and groundwork laid for Gemini and Apollo programs. He had joined NASA at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929 and helped design and later was in charge of Full-Scale Wind Tunnel. Transferring to Lewis Laboratory in 1943, he was responsible for conception, design, and construction of first U.S. supersonic-propulsion wind tunnels. After three years with NASA Hq., 1958—1961, he returned to LeRC as Director. Lundin had served NASA since 1943, when he joined staff at Lewis. In 1961 he was appointed Associate Director for Development. In May 1968 he went to NASA Hq. as Deputy Associate Administrator for oart. (nasa Release 69—145; LeRC Release 69-61; LeRC Biog 4/67)
Reporting findings from four months of Oao II data to 129th meeting of American Astronomical Society in Honolulu, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer Dr. Arthur D. Code said: “It puzzles me to see so much ultraviolet light from the Andromeda galaxy (M31) and so little from M81 because they are rather old ‘garden variety’ galaxies. . . . There is a possibility that we might have discovered an old quasar a few million light years away.” Full impact of Oao II data would not be felt for couple of years. “Some theories on cosmology will have to be modified and others discarded. Practically all phases of optical astronomy will be affected.” Temperature figures assigned to young, hot stars with masses more than 15 times sun’s would require alteration. “These stars are considerably hotter than 20,000 degrees absolute. They are aging about twice as fast as we thought and are burning hydrogen at a very rapid rate.” OAO data thus far provided argument against steady-state theory of universe which maintained universe always looked same, from any point at any time, Dr. Code said. At same meeting, Joseph Purcell, oao Project Manager at gsfc, said Oao II’s observatory control system had exceeded its pointing accuracy requirement of one minute of arc by factor of two. “A subsequent oao will be 100 times more stable.” (nasa Release 69—51; Lannan, W Star, 4/4/69, A5)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
Aerospace Corp. announced election of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, President Emeritus of Case Institute of Technology and first nasa Administrator (1958—1961), as Chairman of Board of Trustees. Sherrod E. Skinner retired as Chairman and l/g James H. Doolittle (usaf, Ret.), Vice Chairman, also retired during annual meeting of Board of Trustees. Skinner and Gen. Doolittle were awarded usaf Exceptional Service Award by Under Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas in El Segundo, Calif., ceremony Sept. 12 (Aerospace Release; CR, 9/25/69, E7813)
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced 1969 recipients of National Medal of Science, Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science, mathematics, and engineering, including: Purdue Univ. chemist Herbert C. Brown, for “discovery and exploration of hydroboration reaction and for developing it into a major and powerful tool in chemical synthesis”; Princeton Univ. mathematician William Feller, “for original and definitive contributions to pure and applied mathematics, for making probability available to users, and for pioneering work in establishing Mathematical ReviewsJack S. C. Kilby, Texas Instruments Inc., for “original conceptions and valuable contributions in the production and application of integrated circuits”; and Wolfgang K. fi. Panofsky, Director of Stanford Univ. Linear Accelerator Center, for “classic experiments probing the elementary particles of matter and for contributions to advancing the means of experimentation in this challenging field.” {PD, 1/5/70, 10-1) During December: NASA issued Apollo 11: Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP—214), summarizing scientific findings of first manned lunar landing mission July 16—24. In foreword Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “The concept of traveling across the vastness of space to new worlds has stirred the imagination of men everywhere. . . . The success of this mission has opened new fields of exploration and research . . . which will lead to a greater understanding of our planet and provide a new insight into the origin and history of the solar system.” Report included photographic review of Apollo 11 mission with observations by crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Descriptions of geologic setting of lunar material, soil mechanics investigation, passive seismic experiment, laser ranging retroreflector, and solar wind composition experiment were provided by principal investigators. In addition to major findings reported Sept. 15 in summary by NASA Preliminary Examination Team (pet), SP—214 reported passive seismic experiment package deployed on moon had operated satisfactorily for 21 days and had detected seismic signals from astronaut activity or lm motions. Whether actual lunar seismic events had been detected was uncertain. Laser reflector deployed on moon had been used as target for earth-based lasers and distance to moon had been measured to within four-mile accuracy. Future studies would be made on distance variation to study motion of moon and earth. Preliminary analysis had been made on part of aluminum foil and showed helium, neon, and argon; isotopic composition of each element had been measured. (Text; NASA Release 69—160)
In Washington Post, Thomas O’Toole said nasa Administrator was “the last big Federal post President Nixon has left unfilled.” He asked, “Is it because he can’t find the man he wants? Is it because no man he wants wants the job? Or is Mr. Nixon playing with the possibility of appointing [Acting Administrator Thomas O.] Paine to the post of Administrator?” Washington “space watchers” felt job could not be kept vacant much longer, “if only because the program to land American astronauts on the moon is rapidly nearing its goal.” (W Post, 2/9/69, All)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Associate and Deputy Administrator, delivered 1969 Minta Martin Lecture at MIT as 1968—69 Jerome Hunsaker Professor of Aeronau-• tical Engineering. Describing origins and development of U.S. space program as well as decision-making and implementation in commitment to manned lunar landing, paper would be presented also at Univ. of Maryland March 20 and at LeRC April 24. Citing need for set of national goals, Dr. Seamans defined national agenda for allocation of R&D that might be acceptable to man in street: understanding, forecasting, and controlling environment; supplying basic resources of food, fuel, minerals, and water; improving quality of life; improving transportation; improving communications; encouraging economic growth; and assisting international development and providing national security. Space program contributed to all categories. Studies of sun’s transmissions, of Mars and Venus atmospheres, of moon’s origin, and of earth itself contributed to understanding of environment for practical use of man. Space R&D might aid search for alternative basic resources; it could establish facilities for detecting available resources and speed communications to meet problems. Biological and medical investigations in space program held greatest promise in study of reactions of biological specimens, animals, and man. Impact on education had been cited by some as greatest value of space exploration. Program had required in-depth investigation of waste management, fire prevention, materials development, and microminiaturization. Space technology influenced new vehicles being tested for transportation—hydrofoil ships, surface-effect and air-cushion vehicles, high-speed trains, electric cars, vtol and v/stol aircraft, jumbo subsonic aircraft, and supersonic aircraft. Communications satellites, already in commercial use, ultimately could broadcast directly to home receivers. In international cooperation, NASA was working with 64 nations in space activity. Returns from NASA’s scientific satellites and communications satellites, development of manned space flight capability, and tracking facilities contributed to national defense. (Text)
In Cape Kennedy interview before Apollo 11 launch, Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said, “It is my individual feeling that we should articulate a simple, ambitious, optimistic goal of a manned flight to Mars by the end of this century. Whether we say it or not, someone’s going to do it.” After liftoff, Vice President told NASA launching team, “. . . all the time I was out there I couldn’t help thinking of you, the people in here and all over NASA who have done such a brilliant job in putting together the combined effort behind those three gentlemen who are off on this historic mission. ... I bit the bullet for you today as far as Mars is concerned. But on the other hand ... I may be a voice in the wilderness.” In Washington, D.C., Senate Majority Leader Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) told press, “I think we have a lot of problems here on earth that we must face up to and when we settle those we ought to consider future space ventures.” Senate Majority Whip Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said, “The Apollo program is for landing a man on the moon and exploration and should take another one to two years. I think after that the space program ought to fit into our other national priorities.” (Witkin, NYT, 7/17/69, 1; Transcript, Agnew statement to NASA launch crew; Unna, W Post, 7/17/69, Al)
Washington Post said it found intellectuals “deeply divided” on implications of lunar landing. Univ. of California physicist Dr. Owen Chamberlain had said achievement showed “mankind can be in charge of his destiny. . . . We should now come back and put our emphasis on the surface of the globe” to achieve peace, lessen poverty, control overpopulation, and preserve our environment. Univ. of California chemist Dr. Harold C. Urey said if some of space effort reliability rubbed off on industry, “spin-off” would be enormous and space program would pay for itself. Less than % of 1% of GNP was spent on space and if lessened there was no guarantee it would be spent on necessary domestic programs. Harvard Univ. biochemist Dr. George Wald had said: “What should have been a great flight of the human spirit comes to us heavy with threat. Those almost miraculous guidance systems that so uncannily find their targets, will they one day be guiding missiles to find us?” Dr. Wald wondered if Apollo 11 had opened new horizons for his students. “I am afraid that they see in this an exercise in great wealth and power, heavy with military and political overtones. I am afraid that they feel a little more trapped; a little more disillusioned, a little more desperate.” Most overseas intellectuals tended to concur with historian Prof. Arnold J. Toynbee’s judgment, “If we are going to go on behaving on earth as we have behaved here so far, then a landing on the moon will have to be written off as just one more shocking misuse of mankind’s slender surplus product.” But Oxford Univ.’s Prof. A. J. Ayer had said, “I doubt if Prof. Toynbee has any evidence that men are being prevented in any large numbers from turning their minds to meaningful pursuits by the part which they play, or the interest which they take, in the exploration of space. ... I think that these spatial explorations . , . are intellectually stimulating, especially to young people.” (W Post, 7/22/69, Ai4)
Dissatisfaction with substandard performance in other parts of society was “something worthwhile that the Space Program is contributing to the United States,” NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, said in speech before National Press Club in Washington, D.C. “I hope we have spurred our society and our people to . . . demand higher performance, to set bolder goals, and then to have the gumption to stand up before the whole world and demonstrate whether or not the goals are achieved.” Space program had also taught “need for broadly enlisting not only American capability, but the best people from around the world willing to throw their competence and a portion of their careers into challenging endeavors.” It had “unleashed in the 1960’s the talents and energies of a technological generation.” U.S. must continue “to put together bold programs that will release the creative energies of our people in productive channels.” Dr. Paine thought history would record as “the great contribution of our generation” astronauts’ blazing of “trail for all future generations of men who want to . . . conquer new worlds. . . . Through man’s brains, energy and resources life can—and life will—extend itself through the solar system. . . . The 1980’s are very clearly the decade in which both we and the Soviet Union, with reasonable-sized space programs in the 1970’s, will develop a technological capability for landing on Mars.” In response to questions, Dr. Paine said: “It seems clear to me that there are increasing opportunities for all nations to work together in space exploration and application. Certainly we and the Russians can and should cooperate more closely in space science so our two programs can produce greater results than the simple sum of their outputs.” (Transcript)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said to press representatives in Houston he was “surprised and disappointed” by May 19 speech of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) suggesting slowdown in U.S. space program after lunar landing and exploration. “He is wrong,” Dr. Paine said. “The United States should not weakly yield technological supremacy in space to the Soviets. We should not ground our astronauts after Apollo.” He told press he did not want Apollo 10 astronauts in flight to moon to hear news of speech and would not include item in news reports sent up to spacecraft. (W Post, 5/21/69, A12)
William Teir, Saturn IB program manager at MSFC, became deputy director for management of Program Management directorate, (msfc Release 69—225)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, nasc Chairman, discussed future of U.S. space program in Space Age News: “It is my personal belief that a vigorous space effort is essential to the welfare of this country, particularly since it has contributed so much to our international prestige, our national security and our economy. I can assure you that the President shares this view.” Through 11 yrs of space activity U.S. had “gained one of its most priceless resources—trained, experienced professionals capable of creating, managing, and operating a complete range of space systems dedicated to bringing the benefits of space within reach of all of us here on Earth.” U.S. had “just begun its space program. The success of the first decade indicates an enlarged effort in the decade to come.” (Space Age News, 12/69)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp.’s Space Div. to conduct parallel $2.9-million, 11-mo design and planning studies of 12-man earth orbital space station which could be developed by 1975 and have 10-yr lifetime. Companies would also include conceptual design of 50-man space base composed of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s to serve as centralized scientific and technical facility in orbit. Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., and Hughes Aircraft Co. had been selected for final competitive negotiation of contract to develop advanced optical communications experiment. Companies would compete for one $5-million contract to develop wideband laser communications system to be placed on board Applications Technology Satellite ATS—F, scheduled for launch in 1972, for communications between satellite and transportable ground station. (NASA Releases 69—108, 69-109)
Washington Post editorial: “There was a certain logic in playing down the purely scientific aspects of the Apollo program in the past since the effort was to land men on the moon before the Russians did. But that day is past. The scientists of space, as contrasted with its engineers and technicians, have been forced into the back seat of the manned space program. It is time now to make them the navigators. The choice of missions—for future flights to the moon and for future operations that will lead some day to a trip to Mars and eventually other planets— should be largely in their hands. They, far better than the men who created the hardware and the knowledge necessary to make space travel possible, know the areas most appropriate for exploration in terms of gaining knowledge.” (W Post, 8/8/69) Pac (Package Attitude Control) system, carried pickaback on Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 340-mi (547.1-km) apogee, 300mi (482.7-km) perigee, 94.2-min period, and 32.9° inclination. Primary objective was to flight-test long-life, low-power, three-axis Pac earth-stabilized control system for Delta 2nd stage and to demonstrate feasibility of using stage as experimental platform. Oso VI was spin-stabilized, weighed 640 lbs, carried seven experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower), which carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equipment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. It was similar to previous osos but had unique capability which enabled two sun-pointing telescopes to study in detail uv and x-ray spectra at any point on solar disc and would provide greater knowledge of solar atmosphere (chromosphere) as well as outermost layer (corona) visible only through special instruments or during total solar eclipse. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso spacecraft, were provided by Harvard College Observatory, Naval Research Laboratory, Rutgers Univ., Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories, Univ. of New Mexico, Univ. of Bologna, and University College (London). Both tape recorders were operating at liftoff and were still operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft stabilized and acquired sun as scheduled shortly after entering orbit. By Aug. 15 all experiments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Two minor anomalies— higher than planned use of current by motor that provided fine elevation pointing and lower than expected spacecraft operating temperature —were not expected to affect spacecraft operation adversely. Oso VI was seventh in series of eight oso spacecraft designed to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and together provided more than 8,600 hrs of scientific information, oso—c (launched Aug. 25, 1965) had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily. Oso V (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfactorily after six months in orbit, oso program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Releases 69—112, 69—112A, 69—123; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Venus, “least understood of the inner planets,” should be U.S. space program priority target, Kitt Peak National Observatory physicist Dr. Donald M. Hunten and Harvard Univ. physicist Dr. Richard M. Goody said in Science. Some fundamental data were available; quantitative theories had been stated; questions about atmosphere could be answered by feasible missions; and geophysicists’ interest had been aroused and offered specialized knowledge needed to understand complex processes. But NASA had no present plans for investigation of Venus’ lower atmosphere. Uncertainty as to Soviet intentions had been cited as reason for giving Venus low priority. But until collaboration with U.S.S.R. and other European countries could begin, “we have no choice but to base our judgment upon our own scientific and technical abilities and desires.” (Science, 9/26/69, 1317—23)
At Smithsonian Institution ceremony attended by Apollo 11 astronauts, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, presented two-pound, gray, lunar rock of igneous, breccia type to Smithsonian Secretary, Dr. S. Dillon Riply, for Smithsonian collection. It would be sealed in nitrogen-filled container covered by three-foot glass bubble and displayed to public beginning Sept. 17 for indefinite period in Arts and Industries Building. At presentation, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., • said: “Every human being, every animal who has looked up into the heavens has seen that rock. It is a fortunate time for mankind to look up and be able to say, ‘here is the moon.’” (Smithsonian Release SI—150—69; Shelton, W Post, 9/17/69, Bl)
Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Konstantin P. Feoktistov, and Georgy T. Beregovy were among Soviet officials who met Astronaut Frank Borman and family on arrival at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo Airport at start of nine-day U.S.S.R. visit. Asked if Soviet cosmonaut might visit U.S., Borman said, “I’m sure that will be discussed. Cooperation in space activities is an important aspect of the space program.” Bormans breakfasted in Moscow and returned to airport for flight to Leningrad. Schedule called for visit to Zvezdny Gorodok—Star City—where cosmonauts lived and to space communications center in Crimea; nothing in program indicated visit to U.S.S.R. launching center at Baikonur in Kazakhstan. (AP, W Star, 7/2/69, A14)
Los Angeles Times editorial observed space industry employment drop from 400,000 in mid-1960s to current 200,000—at which rate it would sink to 50,000 by 1972. “. . . the pool of scientific and technical expertise which has been brought together in the manned space program is disintegrating. If the President wants to save what is really an invaluable national resource, he and Congress cannot wait much longer to assign new projects to the space agency. . . . “A sound space program deserves a high place on the scale of priorities. And, both economic and military considerations dictate that the emphasis should be heavily on activities in the space near earth rather than on esoteric exploration of such deep planets as Mars and Venus. The proposal for construction in earth orbit of a large, permanent scientific laboratory . . . seems to deserve serious consideration as the major space project of the 1970s.” (LA Times, 3/14/69)
In Washington Post, Victor Cohn said fight for ideas “which once would have been labeled ‘wild’ ” had begun when NASA began congressional committee hearings on its $3.7-billion FY 1970 budget [see March 4]. It had continued with announcement of “dramatic plan for ten more manned expeditions to the moon after the first men land there in July.” Americans had responded to 1 “exciting” Apollo program “with heightened fervor for a man in space.” But new fight for funding would probably be “nasa’s toughest.” Americans were asking, “How about our needs here on earth?” Many scientists felt unmanned instruments could do cheaper and nearly as effective job of space exploration. Congress had been calling nasa’s present spending level “enough.” Still, NASA had succeeded in marshaling “powerful scientific support.” As yet unreleased report of Dr. Charles H. Townes’ space task force appointed by President Nixon urged both vigorous manned space program and development of reusable space shuttle. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, had declared himself for “a really solid, many-faceted program.” NASA officials were optimistic but funds actually appropriated for FY 1970 budget would finance only five more Apollo flights plus first hardware for Apollo Applications program. Public thinking was “just about 50—50 today, and new U.S. consensus has not yet crystallized.” (W Post, 3/16/69, Al)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and other top NASA officials testified on future space programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Introducing programs, Dr. Paine said: “The decade of the 1970’s and 1980’s should have a program as bold in concept and as productive as we have had in the decade of the 1960’s. ... we need to have clear objectives to focus our work and a commitment, subject ... to annual review, as to what these achievements will be. Our general goal area should be the continued exploration of the solar system while deriving the maximum scientific and practical benefits here on earth from the space program. There is no question that, at some future time, we will have the capability for manned planetary exploration and we need to face now some of the decisions that will not bear fruition for more than a decade. Although I do not believe that we will see manned exploration of the planets in the 1970’s in the United States ... I do think this could come in the 1980’s. It is by no means clear that for the Soviet Union the decision may not be made to mount a crash program and bring this in before the end of the decade of the 1970’s.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, described possible 1981— 1982, 12-man, 2-ship expedition to Mars [see Aug. 1]. Each spacecraft would weigh 1.6 million lbs at departure from earth orbit and would be 270 ft long, “smaller than what we are flying already to the moon.” nasa was using “concept of reusability” in planning, to improve and reduce cost of operating in space, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Committee. Reusability could be achieved “through the reuse of launch and space vehicles and . . . through the reuse of a mission module such as a space station” put into orbit and used over 10-yr or even 20-yr period. Space shuttles would be designed to run 100 or more flights. Modules and vehicles would be designed for multiple applications in earth, lunar, and synchronous orbits. Space tug would permit travel from space station to other spacecraft and back again—“general purpose . . . equipment.” In earth orbital operations, “it permits us to fly off from the space station over to ... an oao, orbiting astronomical observatory, either to repair or check the oao, or to bring it back to a space station where it can then be loaded on the space shuttle for return to earth and then brought back into orbit after repairs.” (Transcript)
Dr. Arthur Rudolph, former Saturn V Program Manager at msfc, was honored by W. Randolph Lovelace II Award at American Astronautical Society banquet in Denver, Colo. Award was presented for his sustained contribution to space travel in directing Saturn V launch vehicle program 1963 through 1968. It was accepted for Dr. Rudolph by Dr. Helmut G. Krause of msfc. (Release 69—144)
NAS announced appointment of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator (1958—1961) and Assistant to Chairman of the Urban Coalition, as Chairman of nrc’s Committee on Radio Frequency Requirements for Scientific Research. Dr. Glennan had been President of Case Institute of Technology, AEC Commissioner, and President of Associated Universities, Inc. (nas PIO; nas—nrc—nae News Rpt, 4/69, 10)
Space program could provide tools and knowledge to help eliminate air pollution, NASC Executive Secretary William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut, said in speech before Governors’ Conference on California’s Changing Environment in Los Angeles. With remote sensors in aircraft “pilot can quickly and accurately map pollution levels over a wide area and range of altitudes.” Pollution map of entire U.S. could be generated each day. “Thus, aircraft and satellites with these remote sensors offer the unique advantage of being able to view large areas through new eyeballs very quickly and selectively. Further, by computer, the data can be reduced to formats that can be quickly and easily understood.” Aircraft and satellite surveys would provide “data which supplement surface techniques and which, in some cases, can’t be gathered in any other way.” Rather than fantastically expensive, satellite measurements could “be competitive with surface systems.” (Text)
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
Eugene S. Burcher, NASA Tektite Program Manager, omsf, received Navy Distinguished Public Service Award for “distinguished and outstanding service to the United States and to the Department of the Navy as a participant in Project tektite i mission, as well as its planning and implementation.” (nasa Hq WB, 6/2/69, 6)
President Nixon, at White House ceremony, presented National Space Club’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Apollo 8 astronauts and announced nomination of Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to be NASA Administrator. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., accepted award for himself and Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders. Citation: “In an epic journey man for the first time in December 1968 soared out of the earth gravitational field, flew unerringly into a close orbit of the moon, then back to a precise and safe landing. This historic voyage performed at times before the largest television audience in history, and open for coverage by the world’s press, reflects the utmost credit on the United States Space Program, Congress, nasa, and thousands of companies and employees in industry representing all these, the courageous, competent crew of Apollo 8.” Following award presentation, President announced Dr. Paine’s appointment: “There has been a great deal of interest as to who would be the new head of NASA. ... we have searched the country to find a man who could take this program and give it the leadership that it needs, as we move from one phase to another. This is an exciting period, and it requires the new leadership that a new man can provide. But after searching the whole country for somebody, perhaps outside of the program, we found . . . that the best man in the country was in the program.” Dr. Paine in his response said: “I believe in the space program. I believe in this country, and I think that this country should indeed be the preeminent nation in space-faring, and ... I am sure that we can go ahead to . . . see that the NASA program in the second decade of space will even out-perform the accomplishments in the first.” (PD, 3/10/69, 369-71)
President Nixon’s Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, announced at his first Washington press conference that overall plan for next decade of U.S. space program would be drafted at President’s request by his office, NASA, nasc, and DOD for submission to President about Sept. 1. Charting “new directions, new goals and new programs for the entire United States Space program” was necessary. “Bringing to the benefit of people the marvelous space technologies that have been developed in the last decade and certainly orbiting satellites for the purpose of learning more about the earth must be an important element in our future space program,” Dr. DuBridge said. “Whole problem” was balance between that enterprise and planetary and lunar exploration and “this is the problem which our group will seek ... to bring into perspective as we project ahead and consider the budget problems that also lie ahead.” In answer to question on White House appointments, Dr. DuBridge said, “We have not yet located the right man” for either Administrator of NASA or Executive Secretary for Space Council. (Transcript; White House Memo)
Saturn V (left) thrust Apollo 11 spacecraft toward the moon, watched by former nasa Administrator James E. Webb (below at left), former President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Kennedy Space Center. In ksc Launch Control Center (above) mission officials relaxed after launch; left to right were Charles W. Matthews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr, George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and l/g Samuel C, Phillips, Apollo Program Director. was heading was in center of large, rugged crater with 5- to 10-ft-dia boulders. Consequently crew flew past crater to more suitable touchdown point by controlling attitude manually and adjusting descent rate and horizontal velocity. Officials later attributed change in course to malfunction in onboard radar and subsequent critical overload of computer, which caused warning alarms and could have aborted mission. lm landed on moon at 102:46 get (4:18 pm edt July 20) in Sea of Tranquility, 20,800 ft west and 4,000—5,000 ft south of center of planned landing ellipse. Landing-point coordinates were approximately 23,5°E and 0.64°N and site altitude was approximately 8,600 ft below moon’s mean radius. Armstrong reported: “Houston, Tranquility Base here—the Eagle has landed.” Mission Control replied: “Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We are breathing again. Thanks a lot.” Armstrong said landing area contained numerous boulders up to two feet in diameter, some apparently fractured by LM engine exhaust, and surface color varied from very light to dark gray. Crew immediately adapted to one-sixth (earth) gravity in lm and moved with ease. About two hours after landing astronauts requested and were granted permission to perform extravehicular activities (eva) on moon’s surface before sleep period—about 4Vs hrs earlier than originally scheduled. After postlanding checks, Armstrong opened LM hatch, descended lm ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera, which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Aldrin remained inside LM and recorded Armstrong’s descent with 16-mm Maurer camera. Armstrong took man’s first step on moon at 109:24 get (10:56 pm EDT July 20). Some 600 million viewers on earth—one-fifth of world population—watched live TV transmission and heard him describe feat as “one small step for a man—one giant leap for mankind.” Collins, orbiting moon alone in CSM Columbia, was unable to see landing and subsequent eva because csm was not equipped to receive TV transmission. Armstrong said moon had “stark beauty all its own"’ like desert in southwestern U.S. Lunar surface was “fine and powdery” and could be kicked up loosely- “It adheres like powdered charcoal . . . but I only go jn a small fraction of an inch. I can see my footprint in the moon like fine grainy particles.” Armstrong checked EM exterior and reported penetration of EM footpads into lunar surface was three to four inches and that strut collapse was minimal. Blast of descent engine had not formed crater in surface and about one foot of clearance remained between engine bell and lunar surface. He reported only problem was seeing his footing in darkness of lm shadow. He emplaced microdot containing messages from world leaders, collected contingency sample of lunar soil near lm ladder, and reported that, although surface consisted of soft loose material, material six or eight inches under surface was very hard and cohesive. Rocks were very slippery, apparently because vesicles (pores) were filled with powdery surface material. Armstrong photographed Aldrin’s descent to lunar surface at 11:15 pm edt and astronauts unveiled plaque mounted on strut behind ladder and read its inscription to tneir worldwide TV audience; “Here men from the planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.*’ Armstrong then removed TV camera from MESA, obtained panorama, and placed camera on tripod 40 ft from LM to view subsequent EVA, Aldrin experimented to assess mobility on moon by walking, running, leaping, and doing twofooted kangaroo hops between LM and camera. He indicated some difficulty in maintaining balance but said that his agility was better than expected and that he was able to move with great ease. Mass of backpack affected inertia and caused “slight tendency ... to tip backwards, If I’m about to lose my balance in one direction, recovery is quite natural and easy. You’ve just got to be careful landing in die direction you want to go in.” Aldrin deployed solar wind composition experiment in sunlight north of LM and joined Armstrong in erecting three, by five-foot American flag on eight-foot aluminum staff. Astronauts saluted flag and then talked by radiotelephone with President Nixon at White House in what President called “most historic telephone call ever made from the White House,” President said: “Because of what you have done the heavens have become a part of man’s world. As you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth. For one priceless moment in t	mn 1 rssi xh-e mi m First footsteps on H.-Kficn: TM* ■#* tLCtt UTI, EfMMK, JDIT H, I*, ’I.K JQTTWat LA UHIE GOHOIIi; 1g_ll*k u*w JtAVU *1 THE TIMES sS JMan takes first steps on the moon . |..rsn magnthg, r y«m\ && | ip- * l=ij s the whole history of man all the people on this earth are truly one— one in their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth.” Astronauts saluted President and expressed honor and privilege of representing U.S. and world on moon. Continuing eva, Armstrong collected bulk sample of assorted surface materia] and selected rock chunks, inspected lm, deployed passive seismic experiment package and laser ranging retroreflector, and collected two core samples and 20 lbs of discretely selected material. Throughout EVA continuous black-and-white coverage of crew activity provided live documentation, with telemetered data and voice comments. Lunar surface photography included both still and sequence coverage using Hasselbtad, Maurer data-acquisition, and Apollo lunar surface close-up cameras. Astronauts completed eva, transferred film and samples to LM, reentered LM and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by Hl:39 get (1:11 am edt July 21). Armstrong and Aldrin rested inside LM seven hours and checked out systems. At 124:22 get (1:54 pm July 21) lm successfully lifted off moon, after 21 hrs 36 min on lunar surface. All lunar ascent and rendezvous maneuvers were nominal. Eagle reported to Mission Control: “Eagle TOUm 0EU5MDE, YLtEOIMWA. JULY Jl, BMHTHIfJ! [ISSl RMlflBM	jiebUwJ ^LV¥~l* J_—
At annual AIAA dinner, in New York, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary-designate of the Air Force and former nasa Deputy Administrator, was installed as President of aiaa for 1969, succeeding Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, who continued as a director. In interview following dinner, Dr. Seamans said NASA should maintain its open space program and its freedom for international exchange of information. USAF, with current MOL program, “has special problems which can be resolved by the Department of Defense.” Value of dual space program, he said, was that one element could learn from another. Of U.S.S.R. space program, Dr. Seamans said, “They’re awfully good at doubling in brass . . . getting the most out of their program,” but “our program has more breadth and depth and if we’re imaginative about what we’re doing, we’re not going to take second place.” aiaa presented its Goddard Award to Dr. Stanley Hooker, Technical Director of Bristol-Siddeley Engine Div. of Rolls-Royce, Ltd., and Perry W. Pratt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of United Aircraft Corp., for work on turbine engines. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, Chief of Space Sciences Div. at arc, received annual Space Science Award of $500 for “his personal contribution as a planner, leader, and individual experimenter in major space science vehicle programs which have contributed to the field of space physics.” LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright and Charles W. Harper, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, Aeronautics, oart, were elected aiaa directors. (Lannan, W Star, 1/22/69, A13; NYT, 1/22/69, 33; aia Releases)
Federal Register published rule signed by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, which made unauthorized manufacture, sale, reproduction, or possession of official Apollo flight insignia, “or any colorable imitation thereof,” misdemeanor punishable by $250 fine and six months in prison. (Federal Register, 7/26/69, 12332-4)
dod internal, classified memoranda suggested Government would waste money buying additional Lockheed C—5A aircraft, Washington Post article said. Central conclusion was that most efficient and least costly transportation network to support two major and one “brushfire” war “for which military wants to be prepared consists of the existing three squadrons (58) [of] C—5As plus smaller carriers like the C—141 and modern freighters.” (Nossiter, W Post, 8/31/69, Al) During August: Pace magazine published articles by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, also nasc Chairman, and by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. Dr. Paine said, “To improve conditions in our society we need to create more wealth through greater productivity based on new technology. We should be restless and dissatisfied with our slowness in overcoming social ills, and I hope that the space program will continue to spur us onward here. If we can go to the moon, why can’t we build great and shining cities? Why can’t we eliminate ignorance, crime and poverty? If our space program highlights such questions and helps form a national commitment to find new solutions, it will have served the nation well. Our space advances should embolden the nation to proceed forward with increased confidence in these other areas. Our Apollo program has demonstrated anew what Americans can accomplish given a national commitment, capable leadership and adequate resources. “Man’s future in space is limitless. We have embarked on a new stage of evolution that will engage all future generations of men. We face the unknown in countless areas: What are the effects of sustained zero and artificial gravity? Of time-extending flight at nearly the velocity of light? Of societies genetically selected for extraterrestrial living? “We must find the answers. We must move vigorously forward in space. The practical benefits alone justify this venture, but there are many other compelling human reasons. Progress in space should continue to spur us onward to find new solutions to our age-old problems here on Spaceship Earth. We must make the blue planet Earth a home base, worthy of men who will set forth one day on journeys to the stars.” Vice President Agnew said: “With the remarkably successful Apollo moon-landing program on the verge of culmination, we are now faced with a need to define just what we should proceed to do to make use most effectively of the results of our past and continuing space-exploration investment. Wealthy as our economy is, rich as our technology has become, we must plan carefully in order to meet a wide range of urgent national requirements. ... It is our hope that, with a carefully reasoned set of goals adequately funded by the people through their Congress, the nation and the world will reap the maximum possible benefit from mankind’s most ambitious undertaking. We must keep our horizons wide and our sights high. Despite its many internal domestic priorities, this nation should never turn inward, away from the opportunities and challenges of its most promising frontier.” (Pace, 8/69, 2—4)
During “Meet the Press” interview shown on nbc TV Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said he thought Apollo 11 spacecraft would have crashed if Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong had not piloted it on final lunar approach. Quick reactions hy Apollo 12 crew had helped save mission from power failure on its launch. “I think that the [Apollo 12] launch would have been a success. But we felt a good deal better with the astronauts there.” Dr. Paine thought U.S.S.R. would attempt moon trips “in the next few years.” (W Post, 11/17/69, A3)
Nuclear energy in space was discussed in address opening U.S. Technical Forum at Nuclex 69 in Basel, Switzerland, by Milton Klein, Manager of aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems Div.: “A forward looking space program such as that envisioned by the Task Group [see Sept. 15, 17] will mean growing reliance on nuclear systems. ... As an integral part of a new capability for space transportation, we look to the nuclear rocket to provide the propulsion to move large payloads from low earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or to lunar orbit to support extended lunar exploration. It also offers major advantages for transporting heavy payloads into deep space.” nerva development was being initiated, with nuclear engine expected to be in operation in late 1970s. “It is also possible to envision ultimately the use of a controlled thermonuclear, or fusion, reaction for producing propulsion energy. Obviously development of such a propulsion system for space would come only after the development of a useful controlled thermonuclear reaction in a ground based plant, a goal that has not yet been achieved.” (Text)
Aerospace Industries Assn, released 1969 Aerospace Facts and Figures. During 1968 industry sales reached #29.5 billion, up 8.1% over 1967, with civil transport aircraft accounting for major share. These sales were expected to decline in 1969 when current models were phased out before third-generation jet transports were delivered in substantial quantities. Total industry sales were expected to decline to #28.7 billion in 1969 but 1968 backlog for 60 major companies was #31 billion— approximately 2% times that in 1960. Overall space program expenditures during FY 1969 were estimated #6.3 billion—#4.1 billion for NASA, #2.1 billion for dod, $117 million for aec, and #34 million for other agencies. Space expenditures declined approximately $300 million from 1967. Aerospace r&d, including nasa’s, reached $8 billion. (Text)
nasa announced resignation of Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Dec. 10. No successor was named and Dr. Mueller did not reveal his plans for future. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Administrator, said: “It is due to Dr. Mueller’s creative leadership of the magnificent manned space flight organization that the flight of Apollo 11 . . . achieved the national goal set in May, 1961.	. . . We regret that Dr. Mueller has made the decision to return to private life, but recognize that decision comes at a time when the task he accepted is complete and a sound foundation for our future national space program has been established.” Dr. Mueller, who had directed manned space flight program for six years, had received nasa Distinguished Service Medal, achieved early operational flight schedule in Gemini program, formulated concept for thorough and comprehensive ground testing permitting all-up flight testing and early operational availability of Saturn-Apollo hardware, introduced improved techniques that established efficient management of nationwide industrial complex for first lunar landing and return on schedule and within cost, and formulated low-cost space transportation and operations which were basis for space shuttle and space station programs. (NASA Release 69—151)
Washington Post reported interview with l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director. Space shuttle was samso’s top priority program. New family of spaceships was being roughed out on drawing boards. “From a military standpoint, we need to be aggressive advocates of the capability to take a look at and deal as necessary with space vehicles of another country.” usaf and NASA were dividing labor on space shuttle program, which would cost estimated $1 billion. Pace of program would depend on progress toward development of reusable rocket engine which would not burn itself out as it hurtled into space, LeRoy E. Day, Chief of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, said. (Wilson, W Post, 10/15/69, A3)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Brown Univ., his alma mater, (nasa Off of Administrator)
Welcome back to earth: Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left to right inside the mobile Quarantine facility), were greeted by President Nixon aboard the V.S.S. Hornet after their splashdown. is back in orbit, having left Tranquility Base, and leaving behind a replica from our Apollo 11 patch with an olive branch.” LM docked with CSM at 128:03 get. Crew transferred with samples and film to csm, and LM ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit. SM reaction-control-system separation maneuver placed CSM into orbit with 72,0 mi (115.9-km) apolune and 63.0-mi (101.4-km) perilune, where crew rested and prepared for return to earth. cm separated from SM on schedule at 194:49 GET. Because of deteriorating weather in nominal landing area, splashdown point was moved 247.4 mi downrange, where weather was excellent. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 11 splashed down in mid-Pacific at 12:51 pm edt July 24, 15 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Hornet, 195 hrs 19 min after launch. Swimmers attached flotation collar and seven-man raft to spacecraft and helicopter dropped biological isolation garments, which were donned by astronauts inside CM and by one swimmer. Two other swimmers moved upwind of CM on another large raft. Postlanding ventilation was turned off and CM powered down, and astronauts climbed out and helped swimmer close hatch. Swimmer then decontaminated all garments, hatch area, flotation collar, and area around postlanding vent valves with Betadine disinfectant. Helicopter carried astronauts to recovery ship, where they entered 32-ft-long mobile quarantine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. They were congratulated by President Nixon and Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, who were on board ship. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory (lRl) in Houston July 27. cm was retrieved, placed in dolly on board recovery ship, moved to MQF, and mated to transfer tunnel. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, mqf engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to lrl. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Johnston Island and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 11 mission objective—to perform manned landing on moon and return—and all detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor, corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits and proficiency were major factors in mission’s success. Accomplishments included first manned lunar landing and return; first lunar surface EVA; first seismometer, laser reflector, and solar wind experiment deployed on moon; first lunar soil samples returned to earth; largest U.S. payload ever placed into lunar orbit (72,037.6 lbs at lunar orbit insertion); acquisition of numerous visual observations, photos and TV transmissions of scientific and engineering significance; and first operational use of mqf and lrl. Apollo 11 was eighth Apollo mission to date, fifth manned Apollo mission, and first manned lunar landing mission. Mission acquired major quantities of data for subsequent Apollo flights. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distance and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of lm to operate in space under manned conditions. Apollo 10 (May 18—26, 1969) had successfully operated complete Apollo spacecraft on lunar orbital mission and had provided major quantities of scientific and training materials for Apollo 11. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-83K; NYT, 7/16-25/69; W Post, 7/16-25/69; W Star, 7/16-25/69; B Sun, 7/16-25/69; PD, 7/28/69, 1016)
usaf magazine Airman published interview with Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator. NASA—usaf X—15 program had been highly successful in providing data for many disciplines and “very good test bed” for atmospheric probe instrumentation. XB—70 program, initiated as manned supersonic bombing system, was “very bold step” in speeds over mach 3. When technological difficulties and rising costs resulted in decision against XB—70 production, NASA with usaf had initiated experimental program. Dr. Seamans felt usaf was not using NASA expertise to fullest extent, usaf needed new manned bomber, new fighter, and modernization of air defense. He was not convinced usaf had yet established “best relationships with industry to get these things done.” (Airman, 9/69, 7-9)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Administrator. (CR, 3/20/69, S2949)
New York Post published results of Louis Harris poll which showed American people favored manned lunar landing by 51% to 41%. In February poll public opinion had been opposed by 49% to 39%. Harris attributed change to feeling “if we have gone this far, we ought to finish the job.” He said 56% of 1,607 adults polled from June 16 to 22 were opposed to annual $4-billion ouday for space program, while 37% favored it—little change from 55% for to 34% against in February. Reaction to Apollo 10 flight had been generally favorable. (NYT, 7/15/69, 20)
During Apollo 11 celebration, credit should be given to former nasa Administrator James E. Webb, “whose organizational skill, vision and drive played a major part in its success,” mit Provost, Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, and mit physicist Jerrold Zacharias said in letter to New York Times. “There never was any question regarding the technical feasibility of a manned lunar landing. The real question was whether or not we could organize and manage so large and complex a program on the time schedule laid down by President Kennedy.” Webb had organized, defended, and managed program, “and as the world celebrates this great technical and human achievement we should also honor the man who directed its accomplishment.” (NYT, 8/5/69, 32)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs had common problem—what to do next in space exploration, Associated Press quoted Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov as saying in Moscow. Both countries understood need for new space exploration technology, “and we, as well as the Americans, are facing the choice of a new direction.” (AP, W Post, 11/14/69)	_	_
Terms of Reference for joint NASa/dod study of space transportation systems were approved by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Two-part study to assess practicality of common system would correlate needs of both agencies, assess technical feasibility of various systems, compare costs, assess economic sensibility of systems, and recommend concepts of space transportation system with rationale for each concept. Group would report to President’s Space Task Committee June 15. (Terms of Reference)
usaf YF—12A supersonic aircraft made its first research flight from Edwards afb, to open a joint nasa-usaf program to advance knowledge of high-performance flight. Special instrumentation installed by NASA increased the value of the flying test bed for accumulating data. Pitots were from NASA and the Air Force. trator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; and others. (Natl Archives Pio)
Atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair—on behalf of herself, her husband Richard O’Hair, and her “Society of Separationists”—filed suit in Austin, Tex., District Court against NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to prevent U.S. astronauts on duty from practicing religion on earth, in space, or “around and about the moon.” She objected specifically to Apollo 8 Christmas Eve 1968 Bible reading by Astronaut Frank Borman and placing by Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., of disc containing microfilmed prayers on moon July 20. (upi, W Post, 8/7/69)
Full-color lunar photos from Apollo 11, including one of man first setting foot on moon, would be released by NASA to press and TV four days after splashdown, following two-day decontamination of film, NASA announced. Superintendent of Documents, gpo, was taking orders from public for photos to be filled in late August. Series of reproductions of paintings by American artists recording space program, “Eyewitness to Space,” also would be released. (NASA Release 69-83J)
Terre Haute [Ind.j Star said: “In backing Columbus, according to Samuel Eliot Morison, historian, Queen Isabella had two motives: To make a buck in the spice trade, and to open new territories for her Catholic missionaries. It did not occur to her that she was about to change the history of mankind. That is the way of most turning points in human history. The Manhattan Project which resulted in the atomic bomb was basically a defensive move against the danger of Germany’s doing it first. It launched the atomic age. Johann Gutenberg found a way to print with movable type for the simple reason that he wanted more people to read the Bible. He had no idea that he was introducing mass literacy. These great human adventures had two things in common: They were done for practical reasons, and most contemporaries said, 'who needs it?’ The space program began for practical, everyday reasons. Russia’s Sputnik scared the pants off most Americans. The initial goal of catching up with the Russians has been achieved, and this is part of the reason why there is now a slowing interest. However . . . this country now has the potential of changing the world. . . . The U.S. should continue in the forefront of space exploration, with a well-funded and stable program. Space should continue to have a permanent, though not extravagant, position in the priority of national goals.” (Terre Haute Star, 5/29/69)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 14 briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget at which Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, said $3,878-billion budget approved by President Johnson had been developed “to maintain an austere but balanced NASA aeronautics and space program aimed at major program goals of high national priority.” Goals were continuing advances in space applications, including initiation of experimental earth resources technology satellites and slightly decelerated research on space environment; achieving manned lunar landing and additional Apollo moon missions, with limited provision for studies—not for development—of equipment to achieve longer lunar stay-times and mobility for future exploration; proceeding with Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount; proceeding with Viking Project to land instruments on Mars in 1973; initiating in FY 1970 Mariner flyby in 1973 of Venus and Mercury; producing family of small planetary Explorers for orbiting Mars and Venus; making preliminary observations of Jupiter with previously approved Pioneer spacecraft; continuing work on unmanned orbiting astronomical observatories; continuing advanced aerospace technology work at about current levels; emphasizing noise reduction, with construction of special noise research laboratory; developing full potential of civil and military aeronautics; and undertaking NERVA project for development of flight-weight nuclear engine. Dr. Paine noted FY 1970 budget, as approved by President Johnson, “would halt a four-year downward trend in NASA budget.” It was “austere and does not make full use of the aerospace capabilities that the nation has developed. . . .” But it permitted “a balanced program of useful work in critical areas.” Budget left “the major new program decisions, especially in the manned flight area, for the next Administration,” and was “ ‘holding budget’ that provides for progress, but defers critical program and funding decisions to the new Administration.” (Transcript)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, summarized recent NASA efforts to improve international cooperation in space. He had visited major European capitals and Canada and hoped to visit Australia and Japan, to explain “planning for U.S. space activities in the next decades.” Foreign space authorities had been invited to “sponsor their own industrial participation in the nasa conference on space shuttle concepts” held in October. “Additional mechanisms are being developed to permit foreign space interests to keep in touch with and even contribute to our studies over the next year, especially in the space shuttle and station programs.” In letters to President Mstislav V. Keldysh and Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov of Soviet Academy of Sciences Dr. Paine had invited Soviet proposals for experiments on U.S. spacecraft, offered use of laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts, invited Soviet proposals for lunar sample analysis, invited Soviet scientists to Viking Mars 1973 conference, offered to discuss coordination of planetary programs, and reiterated U-S. readiness “to meet anytime, any place, to consider any possibilities for cooperation or coordination between us.” There had been “no substantial response.” (CR, 1/21/70, S259)
Canadian Isis I (isis—a) International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies was successfully launched by NASA from wtr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Thor-Delta (DSV—3E) booster. Satellite entered orbit with 2,188.5-mi	(3,522-km) apogee, 356.7-mi (574-km) perigee, 128.3-min period, and 88.4° inclination. Primary NASA objectives were to place Isis I into elliptical earth orbit that would permit study of topside of ionosphere above electron peak of F region and to extend cooperative Canadian-U.S. program of ionospheric studies initiated by Alouette I (launched Sept. 28, 1962) by combining sounder data with correlative direct measurements for time sufficient to cover latitudinal and diurnal variations during high solar activity. Third in series of five satellites to improve understanding of ionospheric physics, Isis I weighed 520 lbs and carried six Canadian and four American experiments. First launch in series (isis x project, Nov. 28, 1965) orbited Canada’s Alouette II and U.S. Explorer XXXI. isis program was joint undertaking of NASA and Canadian Defence Research Board (drb) under December 1963 Memorandum of Understanding. drb was responsible for spacecraft design, fabrication, electrical testing, experiment integration, and satellite control. NASA provided launch vehicles, launch facilities. (NASA Proj Off; nasa Releases 69—14, 69—22)
At nonpartisan farewell dinner given to President Lyndon B. Johnson in New York, former NASA Administrator James E. Webb read statement on accomplishments in space effort under Johnson Presidency: “Lyndon Baines Johnson has done more than lead the United States forward in space. He has stamped on our program its significant characteristics: that it be conducted in the open for all the world to see; that it be carried out so as to strengthen and not to undermine the basic institutions and values of our society; that it be dedicated to the cause of peace and the benefit of all mankind. “Of all the debts the American people owe President Johnson, none is likely to loom larger over time than that he started them on the road to mastery of this new, unlimited environment by means of the new rocket technology. ... It is the lasting tribute to Lyndon Baines Johnson that he has seen from the beginning that accomplishments in space and the capability which can sustain and increase these accomplishments constitute a new barometer of the stature of our Nation.” (CR, 1/17/69, S496)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), gave go-ahead to Apollo 11 lunar landing mission for launch July 16. Nine-hour flight readiness review had revealed only one major problem— in guidance system. “Although this problem is not completely resolved at this time,” Gen. Phillips said, “I am confident this will not become a constraint to the July launch.” (AP, W Star, 6/18/69, Al)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
Washington Post editorial praised Nov. 20 speech of RCA President Robert W. Sarnoff which called for use of space technology in “full-scale pilot program” to rehabilitate Washington, D.C.: Nation “needs to know whether the computer-age technology that sent us to the moon twice can be used to solve the problems of American cities. That question in a slightly different form has been plaguing the space community. Are vital national resources needed to meet the crisis at home being diverted to the moon and beyond?” Sarnoff speech “picks up from a series of addresses by Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, suggesting that modern technology can assist in solving the problems of cities, provided there is a national commitment to do so.” {W Post, 12/2/69, A18) December 3; Dr. George M. Low was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator. (NASA Release 69—159) •
Year 1969 was one of critical decision and realignment of programs for NASA as primary goal of first decade was achieved through Apollo program. Post-Apollo planning had preceded the coming of the Nixon Administration and Apollo 11. Budget retrenchment accelerated throughout Government as cost of Vietnam war continued high and White House sought to lessen inflation by fiscal economy. Nationwide reevaluation of societal; priorities emphasized problems of pollution, poverty, and crime. Successful lunar landings of Apollo 11 and 12—seen and acclaimed worldwide—mushroomed U.S. enthusiasm for manned space achievement. NASA announced development of plans for further lunar missions and post-Apollo planetary exploration. But year was turning point, with completion of a major goal and examination of possible new goals and priorities for the next decade. Phasing down of Apollo program after climax brought shifts in program emphasis and in personnel. Most of initial Saturn V launch vehicles had been completed. Hardware requirements would decrease as missions slowed. Peak costs during 1960s had built NASA base of people, technology, and facilities as national capability to conduct space missions. Future space objectives and budget options were examined, within Government and outside, for .balance between more manned missions and more unmanned scientific exploration and applications of knowledge already gained. Criticism of past emphasis on engineering rather than on science was partly answered by decision to provide more time for scientific study and planning between the next Apollo lunar missions. Program plans included Apollo Applications, missions to Mars and Jupiter, long-range studies of Venus-Mercury mission and three-planet grand tours, development of permanent space station, joint NASA—DOD studies of space transportation system with reusable shuttle, and accelerated aeronautics activities. nasa FY 1970 appropriation of $3,697 billion was $181 million below budget proposed by outgoing President Johnson and $19 million below President Nixon’s amended request for $3,716 billion. Cutbacks in Government spending forced NASA to announce 1970 closing of Electronics Research Center and DOD to cancel Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told ERC employees in December that agency had to “effect reductions and consolidation across the board if we are to shape our programs to meet the nation’s future needs in aeronautics and space.” Reductions in work force—largely in contractor personnel—were brought by planned phasing out of Apollo program as well as by budget cuts. Year of man’s first landing on moon, despite its global impact, ended with space goals and levels of effort for the next decade an open question. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; A&A 69)
President Nixon submitted to Congress FY 1970 budget amendments [see April 12]. White House, DOD, and NASA released details. NASA funds were reduced $45 million from $3.878-billion Johnson proposal to $3,833 billion (recommended $3,716 in new obligational authority plus $117 million carried over from prior years). Apollo Applications program would be cut by $57 million but new obligational authority of $46 million for resumption of Saturn V rocket production and $40 million for lunar exploration would be added, for net increase of $29 million in manned space flight funds. Space science and applications would be cut by $41 million, to $517.8-million new total. Advanced research and technology would be cut $13 million, to total $277.4 million; and tracking and data acquisition, $20 million, to total $278 million. University affairs funding would remain at $9 million, technology utilization at $5 million, and NERVA funding under nuclear rocket program at $36.5 million. Funds proposed for construction of facilities and for research and program management remained unchanged. At NASA budget briefing, NASA Administrator Dr. Thomas O. Paine said: “The reductions we have been required to make will make necessary difficult program adjustments and will result in reduced accomplishments in many areas. However ... in a context clearly requiring that Government spending be held to a minimum, the Administration has recognized the importance to the United States of a strong and continuing program in space and aeronautics. . . . Last January, I characterized President Johnson’s FY 1970 Budget as a ‘holding’ Budget . . . deferring to President Nixon’s Administration the decisions the nation faces on the future of manned flight programs.” President Nixon’s recommendations, “if approved by the Congress, will ensure that the nation can continue a scientifically effective program of manned lunar exploration and avoid foreclosing our ability to continue large-scale space operations in the future by allowing the capability to produce Saturn V launch vehicles ... to lapse beyond the point where it can economically be resumed.” dod spending was reduced $1.1 billion and requested new obliga-tional authority, $3.1 billion, including $51 million from MOL. Other science budget cuts: aec funding, $78.6 million; agricultural and natural resources conservation, $345 million; hew university facilities, $107 million; and nih, $47.4 million, nsf budget remained at $495 million. Nixon budget made available $92.7-million carry-over for SST r&d but no funds for prototype construction. Overall reduction in space and atomic energy funding was $140 million. (PD, 3/21/69, 561—3; nasa Budget Briefing Transcript; dod Transript; W Post, 4/15— 16/69; NYT, 4/16/69; Science, 4/25/69)
Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service published United States and Soviet Rivalry in Space: Who Is Ahead, and How Do the Contenders Compare? by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Senior Specialist in Space Transportation and Technology, Science Policy Research Div. By June 30, 1969, U.S. expected to have spent $50.6 billion on space. Because of greater weight of Soviet hardware, “one could assume that their program is at least of the same magnitude . . . and may be larger.” While “there is no reason to believe their total aerospace industry is as fully equipped as our own,” missiles in Moscow parades indicated existence of multiple design and development team for space work. Each country seemed adequately equipped with launch pads and ground support. While U.S. had worldwide tracking system supplemented by ships and electronics-carrying aircraft, U.S.S.R. accepted “certain constraints,” relying on ships to fill gaps in tracking system. U.S. launch vehicles ranged from those lifting 20 lbs to Saturn V capable of 285,000-lb lift to low earth orbit. U.S.S.R. still used basic icbm vehicle introduced in 1957, with upper stages added to improve performance. While NASA program was run on open basis, there was less “openness” in dod. U.S.S.R. “holds to a minimum advance notice of flights, limits information . . . but at least makes a prompt announcement, assigns a name, and gives orbital parameters” of successful launches. There seemed little difference between space programs “as to general purpose and direction.” Both placed emphasis on military, though little was known of Soviet organization pattern. All “reasonable analyses are fairly convincing that up to this time the Soviet Union has not placed nuclear bombs in orbit.” In space applications U.S. “has held a clear lead from the earlier days.” U.S.S.R. “has made a greater relative effort in . . . flights committed to lunar and planetary work than the United States” but “has not gained as good results.” In future programs, both nations “undoubtedly have to face hard budget choices before actual hardware can begin.” Soviet goal was “comprehensive exploitation of space technology including the exploration and settlement (where practical) of the planets, along the way exploring the Moon in great detail, and using Earth orbital stations for a host of practical purposes.” While large orbital station would be within NASA’s technical capabilities in late 1970s, beginning of such capability probably already existed in U.S.S.R., but “it would be risky to predict whether such a station will appear soon or only after some years.” Cooperation of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in space already existed in exchange of information, treaties, plans for trading space-collected weather pictures, plans for joint textbook on space biology, and joint efforts in geomagnetism, but no assessment could be made of future prospects. (Text)
Climaxing day of cross-country celebrations, President and Mrs. Nixon hosted formal state dinner at Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles to honor Apollo 11 astronauts, their wives, and “historic achievement of the first manned landing on the moon.” Guests included other astronauts and wives; widows of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H.	White II; Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard; NASA and other space program officials; U.S. and international aviation pioneers; Cabinet members; Chief Justice and Mrs. Warren E. Burger; governors of 44 states; members of Joint Chiefs of Staff; Diplomatic Corps members representing 83 nations; Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower, widow of former President; former Vice President and Mrs. Hubert H. Humphrey; and Congressional leaders. President asked NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to read citation of posthumous awards: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration awards posthumously to Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee the NASA Distinguished Service Medals for professional skill, courage, and dedication to duty in Project Apollo. They gave their lives in their country’s historic undertaking to realize the goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth.” President also asked Dr. Paine to read citation of NASA Group Achievement Award to Apollo 11 Mission Operations Team “for exceptional service in planning and exemplary execution of mission operational responsibilities for . . . first manned lunar landing mission.” Award was presented to Apollo Flight Control Engineer Stephen G. Bales, who bad made decision to proceed with lunar landing when computers failed just before Eagle’s landing on Sea of Tranquility, on behalf of 400,000 persons who had contributed to Apollo program success. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, as nasc chairman, presented Medal of Freedom, nation’s highest civilian honor, to Apollo 11 astronauts for participation in “a unique and profoundly important adventure. The accumulated scientific knowledge and technological ability of mankind made man’s first step on the moon practicable; the courage and skill of men like these made it possible. Their contributions to this undertaking will be remembered so long as men wonder and dream and search for truth on this planet and among the stars.” Replying to honors, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said: “What Apollo has begun we hope will spread out in many directions, not just in space, but underneath the seas and in the cities, to tell us unforgettably that we can do what we will and must and want to do.” During evening orderly crowd of peace and antipoverty protesters gathered outside hotel. (PD, 8/18/69, 1141—2, 1148—51; Roberts, NYT, 8/15/69, 14; B Sun, 8/14/69, Al)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star commented on “deadly dullness” of last five days of Apollo 9 mission: “The flight plan of Apollo 9—which most people do not see and therefore do not understand— was carefully divided into six ‘activity periods,’ of which five were each about 24 hours long and the sixth five days in duration. “It is no criticism of the . . . crew that after five days of brilliant spacemanship they took it easy for the rest of the flight. Nor is it criticism of the space program to say that the last half of Apollo 9 was dull. It was planned that way, and if it had turned out otherwise the United States very likely would not be attempting a moon landing in July.” (W Star, 3/23/69, C4)
In Bonn Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and West German Science Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg signed Memorandum of Understanding calling for NASA and West German Ministry for Scientific Research cooperation on Helios. Most advanced international scientific space program, Helios would consist of two solar probes carrying 10 scientific experiments 28 million mi—closer to sun than any other yet scheduled—in 1974—75 to provide new understanding of fundamental solar processes and sun-earth relations by studying solar wind, magnetic and electric fields, cosmic rays and cosmic dust. NASA would launch two German-built spacecraft on Atlas-Centaur vehicles one year apart. Seven experiments would be provided by German scientists and three by gsfc in cooperation with U.S., Australian, and Italian experimenters. (nasa Releases 69—86, 69—91)
hud Secretary George W. Romney addressed International Platform Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “I do not propose that we now abandon our efforts to extend man’s reach still further beyond our planet, any more than we abandoned our domestic goals while we were reaching for the moon. But I do believe the time has come for a revision— in fact, a reversal—of our national priorities. I believe that in the decades ahead, the public interest and indeed our national survival require us to assign our housing and urban goals a high priority-—at least comparable to the priority we gave our space program in the decade just ending.” (HUD News; Hutchens, W Star, 1/22/69, A6)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in by Vice President Spiro T, Agnew ,as NASA Administrator in ceremony in Vice President’s office. Dr. Paine said: “I am particularly anxious to see that in the second April 3; Dr. Thomas O. Paine (right) was sworn in as Administrator of the National Aeronautics anil Space Administration by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. decade of space we bring down to the people on earth more of the benefits that can be obtained from this wonderful new technology. . . . Such areas as navigation, communications and particularly earth resources are things that are very much on our minds as we look out to the moon and beyond.” (nasa Hq WB; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/4/69; AP, W Post, 4/4/69) * National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal for research, exploration, and discovery was presented by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A, Anders in Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C. Vice President Agnew said: “The possibilities of space exploration are so infinite they overwhelm the mind. The speed with which we have reached this new threshold of hope itself is awesome. Less than half a century has passed since the Hubbard Award was presented to Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh for his solo flight from New York to Paris. Less than a decade has passed since Colonel John Glenn was awarded the first Hubbard Medal for exploration in space.” Award, one of Nation’s highest honors, had been given only 24 times in 63 years, for outstanding achievement in geography and exploration. First medal had gone to Robert E. Peary in 1906 for Arctic explorations. Earlier in day at National Geographic headquarters, Apollo 8 astronauts had received General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1968, awarded to military or civilian usaf member making most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release )
Washington Post published results of July 30—Aug. 4 Harris survey of 1,577 U.S. households to determine attitude toward spending $4 billion annually for decade to explore moon and other planets. While 53% of those polled approved funding for lunar landing, narrow plurality of 47% was opposed to further $4 billion annually; 44% favored. Persons under 30 favored extension of space program 60% to 34% but those over 50 opposed it 59% to 30%. Black citizens were opposed 68% to 19%. ( W Post, 8/25/69) Among 400 scientists from 19 countries attending meeting were NASA Apollo Applications Program Director William C. Schneider; Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director of Flight Operations, and M. P. Frank from msc; Herbert A. Wilson, Jr., Chief of Applied Materials Div., from LaRC; ogo Project Manager Wilfred E. Scull from GSFC; Dr. Thomas Vrebalovich. from JPL; and Leon C. Hamiter, Jr., msfc engineer. Hamiter presented paper on increased computer capacity and lighter weight flight hardware. Prof. Masahiko Kido of Japan’s Ehime Univ. said legal status should be developed for moon before disputes arose over lunar real estate. Other participants urged steps to outlaw military use of moon. Dr. Werner J. Kleen, Director of European Space Research and Technology Center, said ESRO had been given permission to put comsat into orbit and would start work in autumn. Japan announced its space development corporation would begin operations Oct. 1 and would launch MS—4 three-stage rocket in early 1970, followed by comsat launch. (Shabecoff, NYT, 8/26/69, 11; msfc Release 69—181; nasa Int Aff)
NASA officials ordered technicians to repaint Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) after they discovered old coating had begun to peel. Thermal paint would help protect super-cold hydrogen fuels from sun’s heat. Repainting of stage, scheduled to boost manned Apollo 11 spacecraft toward moon July 16, would not affect launch date. (AP, W Star, 7/5/69, A13)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced H.R. 465 “providing for the establishment of the Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct and erect with funds a memorial in the John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, or the immediate vicinity, to honor and commemorate the men who serve as astronauts in the U.S. space program.” (CR, 2/19/69, H1087)
Space Task Group report to President on post-Apollo space program [see Sept. 15] was released at White House press conference by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Space Task Force Group members Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator; Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser; and William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary. Vice President Agnew said Task Group had rejected “crash program of the magnitude that would turn loose every bit of our technological ability” to achieve quickest possible manned Mars landing because “there are competing priorities in a difficult time of inflation.” Task Group had also rejected “foregoing the substantial benefits that have come out of the Apollo program, the benefits of National prestige.” Dr. Paine said all three options recommended to President in report would enable NASA to “hold together the team” and provide “major challenge.” Dr. DuBridge said all three options held “heavy emphasis on earth applications, satellites, for studying the geology, the geography, the atmosphere of the oceans of the earth and bringing space technology directly and immediately to the benefit of the people on earth. All three programs also . . . include heavy emphasis on scientific programs, to extend our scientific knowledge of the earth itself, of the moon, through additional lunar expeditions, interplanetary space and additional scientific information about the moon and the planets.” He also cited emphasis on international collaboration. (Transcript) NASA released America’s Next Decade in Space: A Report for the Space Task Group. Major points had been incorporated in Task Group report. (Text)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Vikram A. Sarabhai, Chairman of Indian Space Research Organization, on behalf of India and U.S. signed agreement at NASA Hq. to provide direct TV broadcasts from satellite to some 5,000 small Indian villages. Broadcasts would be first from satellite to small receivers without ground relay. Experiment would utilize ATS—F, sixth in NASA series of Applications Technology Satellites, scheduled for mid-1972 launch. India would use experimental ground station at Ahmedabad and others to transmit TV programs to satellite, which would relay them to village receivers. Increased onboard power and deployable satellite antenna with high pointing accuracy made direct broadcast possible. (NASA Release 69—135)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, presented paper “Space-Age Management and City Administration” at 1969 National Conference on Public Administration in Miami: “Mobilizing modern science, technology and management to accomplish bold ventures in space is clearly far simpler than better organizing the extraordinarily complex human interactions that comprise a modern metropolis. NASA’s spectacular advances in space are undoubtedly exacerbating public frustration with urban failures, but . . . they are encouraging the nation to tackle its more complex human problems with greater confidence on a bolder scale. If America can go to the moon, it can indeed do much better here on spaceship earth. “NASA’s range of management approaches is nearly as broad as the range within an urban complex.” Urban manager, like NASA manager, “can and should directly manage only a limited part of the complex interacting human enterprise for which he has responsibility. For the important remainder he must structure a ‘Darwinian Discipline’ system to encourage essential contributions from industry, from universities, and from the entrepreneur, the free wheeler, the scientist, the brilliant innovator, the gifted teacher, and other committed individuals. . . . The greatest single achievement of the space age may have been the formation of NASA; the rest followed as the energies and talents of America were released and given direction.” (Text)
Aerospace industry employment would continue to decline from record achieved in 1968, according to semiannual survey results released by Aerospace Industries Assn. Total employment was expected to drop from 1,388,000 to 1,305,000 (6%) between March 1969 and March 1970 because of reduced expenditures for civilian space program and declining sales of civilian transport aircraft during phase-out of current models and commencement of production on new aircraft, (aia Release 69—45)
German space program was described in International Science Notes published by Dept, of State. For 1969, German space budget was $88 million, with $51 million for national program and remainder for international programs. Amount was approximately 16.5% of total Science Ministry budget. During 1969 to 1973, program would be directed to extraterrestrial research, development of scientific and applications satellite technology (communications, TV, navigation, and meteorology) , and development of launcher technology in cooperation with other European countries. Plans included two German Azur research satellites to measure earth radiation belt and density composition of higher atmosphere, both to be launched by United States rockets; development of two solar probes (Helios) in cooperation with NASA; research comsat (Symphonie) to be developed with France; and participation in ESRO research programs and in development of eldo launcher. (Science Policy Bull, 10/69, 51)
Washington Post editorial said: “It is a pity that the Soviet Union continues to wrap its space program in secrecy. The flights of Soyuz 6, 7 and 8 were launched in secret and on a mission also kept secret from the people whose labor supports the government that is paying for it. The contrast with the openness of the American space program could not be sharper and it is our lack of knowledge of what the Russians are doing that makes difficult any assessment of the meaning of these flights.” As long as U.S.S.R. preferred to operate in secret, “there is little that Americans can do other than congratulate them on their successes.” (W Post, 10/15/69, A18)
Dr. Vikram A. Sarabhai {left). Chairman of the Indian Space Research Organization, and Dr, Thomas 0. Paine, NAsa Administrator, signed an agreement at masa Headquarters for a cooperative experiment to broadcast educational TV programs from nasa’s planned ats-f satellite direct to SflOO small Indian villages.
Studies of shock and thermal metamorphism of olivine trachy-hasalt by nuclear explosion at Nevada Test Site for comparison studies of Apollo 11 lunar samples were described in Science. Preliminary examination of Apollo 11 lunar surface material suggested many samples would be mafic igneous rocks showing shock metamorphism produced by meteorite impact. (James, Science, 12/26/69, 1615—9) December 26—31: American Assn, for the Advancement of Science held 136th meeting in Boston, Mass. Panel discussion of future of U.S. space program was disrupted by some 50 student protesters who converged on panel chairman Dr. Charles Stark Draper, former director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory, and participants. Protesters said they objected to space program because funds could be better spent to solve social ills on earth. They littered podium with signs and papier-mache moon rock. Dr. Draper justified continuation of space program because of its technological and prestige contributions. “Space is a bargain.” Outgoing aaas president Dr. Walter Orr Roberts met continued objections in his attempt to justify space program on basis of applications and was almost shouted down when he suggested U.S.—u.s.s.R. cooperation in internationalized space stations. In presidential address Dr. Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, said space technology had “vastly enlarged the arsenals of the United States and the U.S.S.R., bringing to reality hitherto fanciful modes of military surveillance, communications, and weaponry.” Time had come “for us to take a bold new step in space. I propose that this nation call upon the Soviet Union to join hands in space, with a jointly conducted, earth-oriented space program that will put the new-found Soviet and American skills in space to work for the direct benefit of man.” Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astronomer and consultant to usaf Project Blue Book, expressed fear that usaf would destroy classified UFO records because of Dec. 17 termination of project. “I do not believe we are being visited by little green men. ... I do believe a phenomenon exists, and that it is worthy of scientific attention.” Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, Director of National Bureau of Standards, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Vice Chancellor of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, called for hard, new look at manned space flight spending and urged moratorium on pressure for early manned missions to Mars. Dr. S. Fred Singer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Interior, said, “If we downgrade the manned space program we may find we don’t have any space program.” Panel of young scientists from Harvard Univ. and mit, invited by aaas, attacked “misuse” of science in formal papers presented before meeting. Allen S. Weinraub, graduate student at Harvard, said science was controlled by Federal Government and large corporations that held pursestrings. Panel member Larry W. Beeferman of mit called NASA “the national aerospace subsidy administration.” At press conference following meeting, Presidential adviser on hunger Dr. Jean Mayer said, “We can feed everybody—and feed them very well—and go to the moon as well.” Dr. Frank J. Low, Univ. of Arizona scientist, reported discovery of “Irtrons”—cells of creation—at centers of 12 galaxies so far, including Milky Way. He believed both matter and antimatter were created in each and then annihilated each other, continuously spraying out debris to fill universe, making stars, planets, and new worlds. Theory had originally been proposed by British astronomer Sir James Jeans early in century. (Lannan, W Star, 12/28/69, A7; W Post, 12/27/69, B6; 12/29/69, Al, A7; 12/30/69, A2; Science, 1/2/70, 11-6)
President Nixon sent to Senate nomination of Dr. George M. Low as NASA Deputy Administrator. Manager of Apollo spacecraft at msc since 1964, Dr. Low had served space program since 1949, when he joined naca. He was recipient of NASA’s Outstanding Leadership and Distinguished Service Awards and had received Arthur S. Flemming Award in 1963 as one of the 10 outstanding young men in Government. {PD, 11/17/69, 1597)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said at press conference following tour of October I: nasa launched Boreas, European Space Research Organization satellite, to study the aurora borealis and polar atmosphere. In the photo the spacecraft teas prepared for launch on a four-stage Scout booster from the Western Test Range. jpl:	, the cities may benefit more from what’s happening right here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory than they do from what’s happening in some community action agency. Now, I’m not downgrading the need to work closely with people . . . but I think it would be a desperate mistake ... to adopt an attitude that we do not challenge the unknown, we do not move forward simply because we can’t predict what we’re going to find.” Columbus “didn’t find what he went for but he found something even better. Maybe that applies to the situation with regard to the ultimate goal . . . about landing a man on Mars. . . . we may do something a lot better.” In reply to question, he said: “We will never reach a point where we’ll have enough money for . . . the problems of the cities and of the population. . . . we could spend every resource we have and forego any scientific exploration and forget the need to research and develop new techniques. ... I suppose you come down to the final determination that you’ve got to put some of your effort in the future and not all of it in the present. And I don’t think the lack of a focus in the space program would be a benefit at all to the future of the cities and the problems you mention.” (Transcript)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, former Assistant Secretary of Defense, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator. He would advise nasa senior officials on scientific and engineering aspects of agency programs and review and advise on work of President’s Space Task Group and nasa— dod cooperation on space shuttle. Before joining NASA Dr. Fubini had been Vice President and Group Executive at ibm. (nasa Release 69-85)
Within 76 hrs after Apollo 11 splashdown, Bantam Books and New York Times published We Reach the Moon, 416-page paperback account of U.S. space program from 1961 through Apollo ll’s success. Early publication was effected by nearly 2% yrs of planning. Book went to press immediately after July 24 splashdown while aerospace reporter John Noble Wilford was completing text. Final copy was telexed to Chicago printer July 25. First printing comprised 375,000 copies. Hardcover edition would be published by W. W. Norton & Co. in September. (NYT, 7/29/69, 16)
At msfc ceremony, NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, presented awards to 117 center employees and industry representatives, mostly in recognition of exceptional service to Apollo program. Employee awards included NASA Medal for Distinguished Service to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun; Deputy Director, Technical, Eberhard F. M. Rees; Deputy Director, Management, Harry H. Gorman; Director of Science and Engineering Hermann K. Weidner; Vice Commander, Aeronautical Systems Div., m/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) ; Director of Program Management Lee B. James; and Deputy Director of Science and ^Engineering Ludie G. Richard. NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement was presented to James A. Downey, III; Erwin Fehlberg; Gerhard B. Heller; Robert J.	Nauman; and Joseph L. Randall. Other awards received were NASA Medal for Exceptional Service by NASA employees and NASA Certificate for Distinguished Public Service by industry personnel, (msfc Release 69—222)
Madrid ceremony marked takeover by Spanish crew of operations at U.S. Deep Space Network tracking facility. Attending were NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine; Spanish Space Research Council President, Gen. Luis Azcarrago; U.S. Ambassador Robert C. Hill; and Gen. Antonio Perez-Marin, President of Spanish Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial. Dr. Paine sent final U.S. signal to Pioneer Vlll (launched Dec. 13, 1967) orbiting sun. Short time later Gen. Azcarrago sent first signal under Spanish control. Dr. Paine said, “Spanish determination to participate in this exciting 20th Century form of exploration reminds us that five centuries ago Columbus’ great voyage of exploration was carried out under the flag of Spain.” (NASA Release 69-93)
nasa advocated “balanced, broad-based Planetary Exploration Program” as “feasible and practical” part of U.S. space program, Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Basic goals were to increase understanding of origin and evolution of solar system and life in solar system and understanding of dynamic processes shaping man’s terrestrial environment—“increasing our understanding of the planet Earth, how it has evolved, and how it may evolve in the future through a comparative study of the other planets in the solar system.” Approach would be broad-based exploration of several planets—• Jupiter, Mercury, Venus—over period of time, combined with direct measurements of Mars surface in orbital and lander missions. Pioneer F and G spacecraft (planned for launch in 1972 and 1973) and new cooperative project with West Germany, Helios, would open “new era” in solar system exploration, studying effects of radial distance on interplanetary medium close to sun. (Testimony)
On ABC radio-TV program “Issues and Answers,” Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said he did not favor increased military participation in U.S. space program. “We’ve had very good cooperation between the military and our civilian programs and I think that’s the way it should continue.” (B Sun, 5/19/69, Al)
Report of President Nixon’s Task Group on Space [Sept. 15] and Apollo astronauts’ speeches to Congress [Sept. 16] had brought some “rationality back to the discussion of whither the space program,” Washington Post editorial said. Acceptance by President of recommendation “would eliminate talk of abandoning manned space flight, which would be a foolish course of action, or of proceeding toward Mars in a crash effort to get there as quickly as possible.” It was important “for the nation to push ahead on the immediate recommendations of the Task Group— exploring the moon, developing the tools that are needed for systematic exploration of our space travel capability, and extracting from the space program more benefits for those of us who are earthbound.” (W Post, 9/19/69)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
In speech before Chicago Executive Club in Chicago, 111., Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said operation of military systems in space “to enhance the national defense” must be one objective of U.S. future space program to ensure “there will be no hlind reliance on good faith.” Vice President Agnew was also Chairman of nasc and of President’s Space Task Group. Two questions dominated speculation over national space policy, he said: Why space? And Why Mars? “Mars holds the greatest promise of a capability to sustain human life. It is a potential resource and reserve. More important for the present is the fact that the mind of America functions better when it focuses upon a clear target. Manned exploration of the Solar System is too nebulous to capture the public’s attention. A manned landing on Mars is as understandable a challenge to the citizen as it is to the scientist. It is a test that can be put in a time frame and its anticipation can be appreciated by all.” (Text)
As NASA prepared for Apollo 11 lunar landing, space contractors, engineers, and scientists cited thousands of “space technology transfers,” down-to-earth rewards from space program, Wall Street Journal said. Side benefits ranged from medical innovations and safer highways to new management techniques, commercial products, and industrial tools. They included liferaft with bucket keel to prevent capsizing in rough water and inner tube that inflated automatically to keep craft afloat if outer skin was punctured, computer system to track down fathers behind in child support payments, inertial navigation systems that were standard equipment on new 360- to 400-passenger Boeing 747, and thermal mapper developed for satellites, being used to seek oil formations, diagnose cause of sinking airport runways, and find sources of water pollution. Other space age spinoffs were plastic resin marketed as commercial laminates, adhesives, and coatings; devices to monitor internal stress in dams during earth tremors; data-processing techniques to record train traffic and to match power-generating capacities to demand; electromagnetic hammer that smoothed and shaped metal without weakening it; and luminous devices for aircraft exit signs, map reading, and gun sites. Medicine was benefiting from miniaturized electronic devices in cardiac pacemakers, remote-handling and manipulation equipment that had improved prosthetic devices like artificial limbs, space-helmet-like hoods to measure oxygen consumption while patient exercised, and computer to provide sharper x-ray photos. (Tanner, WSJ, 7/6/69)
At dedication ceremony in Houston for Apollo 8 stamp, Postmaster General Winton M. Blount said: “The fact that this is the fifth stamp the Post Office Department has issued commemorating accomplishments of the space program signifies the extent to which space exploration has captured the imagination of the American people. . . . The nation’s concerted effort to reach the moon and outer space reflects two traditional aspects of our national character. One is scientific: the search for truth, knowledge, discovery. The other is psychological: the strong urge for adventure—an urge kindled by the unknown. We are all explorers at heart. The space program has made an entire nation explorers in fact. The flight of Apollo 8 around the moon and back was perhaps the greatest technological achievement of man to date. Certainly it was the most dramatic.” (Text)
At Explorers Club symposium in New York scientists, educators, community leaders, and students discussed significance of Apollo 8 mission. William Booth, Chairman of Commission on Human Rights in New York, said, “I still am quite disturbed by the fact that we’re dying at home, people are about to starve. There’s overpopulation and underproduction of food in the world. We haven’t been able to solve these problems and here we are going off to the moon.” Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said flights were “a means of concentrating our energies toward building a technological capability.” Moon flight had played “same role as Lindbergh’s flight to Paris” in that it demonstrated new capability. Space program was paying economic dividends in communications, mineral exploration, and new materials. Dr. Maynard M. Miller, Chairman of Explorer Club’s World Center for Exploration Foundation, said, “The word ‘impossible’ has a different meaning after Apollo'8. Perhaps its real contribution will be as a symbol of man’s willingness to dare to do something great.” (Wilford, NYT, 1/5/69, 26)
Apollo 9 commander James A. McDivitt was appointed Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, replacing George M. Low, who was temporarily on special assignment to msc Director to plan future msc programs and work on organizational matters, (msc Release 69-66) *	East Germany’s People’s Chamber unanimously ratified nuclear nonproliferation treaty. West Germany had not yet signed. (P Inq, 9/25/69) *	House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably S. 1287, which authorized appropriations for FYs 1970, 1971, and 1972 for metric system study. (CR, 9/25/69, H8488) Lee B. James, Director of Program Management at msfc, said next moon flights could suffer from lack of proper employee motivation. “We are completing [rocket] stages with welders who know they are going to be laid off.” Sheet metal workers in plants with termination papers were working on vital space hardware. Twenty defects attributed to human error had been uncovered in single rocket. Apollo Program Director Rocco Petrone said future moon landings would be even more demanding than first, with astronauts spending 54 hrs on moon during some. To make missions successful, workers must be motivated to pay greatest attention to detail. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said NASA hoped to cut payload launch costs to $200 per pound and reduce number of workers on Saturn V launches from 20,000	to about number required to get Boeing 747 off ground, (msc Release 69—65; Maloney, H Post, 9/26/69)	•	v
nasa named Rocco A. Petrone, Director of Launch Operations at ksc since 1966, to succeed l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of Apollo Program, effective Sept. 1. He would be succeeded by Deputy Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan. Petrone had been Saturn Project Officer and Apollo Program Manager. His awards included NASA Exceptional Service Award for direction of Apollo 7 checkout and launch and nasa Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest award, for direction of Apollo 8 checkout and launch. (NASA Release 69—124)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong would be first man to step on moon, according to NASA plans for July 16 Apollo 11 mission, Apollo Program Manager George M. Low told msc press conference. Armstrong, mission commander, followed by Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., lm pilot, would leave LM and spend 2 hrs 40 min walking on lunar surface, gathering rock samples, setting up experiments, and taking pictures within 100 ft of LM. Astronauts would not go farther, Low said, because “all that we need to carry out in deploying the experiment in doing all of the activities that we have to do on the surface the first time . . . can be done within the first 50 or 100 ft from the LM and we see no reason to go any further and use up a lot of energy walking as opposed to doing those things that we would like to do. . . .” (Transcript)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1968 was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A, Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Statler Hilton Hotel ceremony in Washington, D.C. National Aeronautic Assn, award was made annually for greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. toward improving performance, efficiency, and safety of air or space vehicles, (naa News; W Star, 5/8/69, A3)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, told Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, “Our intellectual resources—not our material resources—are the limits to what we can now achieve.” During hearings on H.R. 35, bill to promote advancement of science and education of scientists through institutional grants to U.S. colleges and universities, he said: “We hear it said that if we only spent as much money on urban programs as we did, say, on the atomic bomb project or on our space program, we could quickly solve the crisis in our cities. But let us not forget that we launched the Manhattan project and the space program only after, and not before . . . efforts in basic research over the previous 30 or 40 years had uncovered the knowledge which showed us how we could build atomic bombs or launch payloads into space. Neither the Manhattan project nor the space program could have been dreamed of 10 years before they started, because we did not even know enough to even formulate a development program. Now, in many ... of our present crises we are in the same position as far as technology is concerned. We do not know enough about certain technologies and . . . many social phenomena to justify mounting a concentrated, technically based attack on these problems now. We must . . . greatly enhance . . . measures to relieve immediate suffering and injustice. But at the same time we must encourage and support new efforts to learn more, to extend our base of fundamental knowledge in science, technology, social science, so that we can move sure footedly toward long-range solutions.” (Transcript)
Space program spinoffs of medical benefit to mankind were described by Howard A. Rusk, M.D., in New York Times. NASA’s Scientific Information Div. provided stockpile of knowledge indexed in computer tapes and distributed on microfiche. Collection of 250,000 documents increased by approximately 75,000 items annually. NASA Technical Utilization Div. selected inventions, ideas, and new techniques for use in nonaerospace activities, including medicine, and distributed them through eight regional centers. Under interagency agreement, NASA and hew Social and Rehabilitation Services Administration reported results of aerospace research to solve problems of 4 million physically or mentally disabled Americans of working age. Research had developed technique for sharpening x-rays, micrometeorite sensor to record Parkinsonian tremors, and technique for applying electrodes with spray of conductive material. (NYT, 8/10/69, 55)
Man’s knowledge of Venus, Mars, and moon had been enormously enhanced by unmanned Mariner missions, New York Times editorial said. They were relatively inexpensive and did not risk human lives. “Nevertheless, American political leadership has been so obsessed with sending a man to the moon that unmanned probes of the planets became the stepchildren of the national space program. There were times when even the continued existence of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—the center for these unmanned flights—seemed in doubt. Now, in the new phase of American space exploration begun in the wake of Apollo IPs historic achievement, the major cost-benefit advantages of Mariner type unmanned flights need to he more fully appreciated by Washington policy makers, and even more intensively exploited than in the past, even as the manned exploration of the moon continues.” (NYT, 7/31/69, 32) During July: NASA-appointed Astronomy Missions Board recommended long-range program in space astronomy to NASA. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director, had been appointed in 1967 to propose programs for 1970s. NASA published Board’s report in November [see Nov. 9]. (Text; NASA Release 69—149; NASA ossa)
In Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, J. F. Ter Horst commented on designation of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, as Secretary of the Air Force in Nixon Administration Cabinet: “It’s highly unlikely that the Nixon Administration will merge civilian and military space programs—they were back in 1958 when he was Vice President. But if it becomes easier to sell Congress a space budget with a military label than with a civilian one, Mr. Nixon undoubtedly will move in that direction. If he does, he has an uncommonly qualified administrator in Seamans.” (P Bull, 1/11/69, 14)	_
Former NASA Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), received Distinguished Service Medal from Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in Pentagon ceremonies. Award was for achievements with NASA from December 1964 to August 1969. Gen. Phillips had left NASA to become commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) in Los Angeles. (AFJ, 9/27/69, 8)
Space Task Group presented report The Post-Apollo Space Program: Directions for the Future to President Nixon at White House. It recommended basic goal of balanced manned and unmanned space program conducted for all mankind, with emphasis on increased utilization of space capabilities for services to man through expanded space applications program; enhancement of U.S. defense posture for world peace and security through exploitation of space techniques for military missions; continuing strong program of lunar and planetary exploration, astronomy, physics, and earth and life sciences; development of new systems and technology for space operations, emphasizing commonality, reusability, and economy through development of new space transportation capability and space station modules; and promotion of world community through program of broad international participation and cooperation. As focus for development of new capability, Task Group recommended U.S. accept long-range goal of manned planetary exploration with manned Mars mission before end of century. Activities leading to goal should include initial concentration on exploiting existing capability and developing new one while maintaining program balance within available resources; operational phase using new systems and capabilities in earth-moon space, with men living and working in that environment for extended periods; and manned exploration missions out of earth-moon space, using experience of earlier two phases. Schedule and budgetary implications of phases were subject to Presidential choice, with detailed program to be determined in normal annual budget and program review. Report outlined three possible NASA programs for manned Mars landing before century’s end. Option I would launch manned mission in mid-1980s and would establish orbiting lunar station, 50-man earthorbiting space base, and lunar surface base. Funding would rise from current $4-billion level to $8- to $10-billion level in 1980. Decision to proceed with development of space station, earth-to-orbit shuttle, and space tug would be required in FY 1971. Option II would include Mars mission launch in 1986, allowing for evaluation of unmanned Mars mission results before final designation of landing date and require about $8-billion maximum annual expenditure in early 1980s. Option III would include initial development of space station and reusable shuttles, as in Options I and II, but would defer decision on manned Mars landing date while maintaining goal of after 1980 but before close of century. Concurrent development of space transportation system and modular space stations would require rise in 1976 annual expenditures to $5.7 billion, while their development in series would entail $4- to $5-billion funding level. Recommended DOD options were: (A) program of full military space capability in case of overt threat to national security, (B) development of efforts to counter known and accepted projections of security threat and increase in development activities if threat increased, and (C) program of lower level system deployment with technology and support effort necessary for contingency planning on assumption that lessening of world tensions would reduce emphasis on national defense. At White House briefing following presentation, press secretary Ronald L. Ziegler said President Nixon had concurred in Task Group’s rejection of two other, extreme space programs, one to land men on Mars as soon as possible, regardless of cost, and one to eliminate manned flight program after completion of Apollo. He did not know when President would make decision on course to follow, but budgetary considerations would be major factor. (Text; PD, 9/22/69, 1291; NYT, 9/16/69, 1)
Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard announced cancellation by dod of Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program because of “continuing urgency of reducing Federal defense spending” and “advances in automated techniques for unmanned satellite systems.” Cancellation would save “several hundred million” of $525 million proposed for MOL in FY 1970 budget authorization. Remainder would be needed for termination costs and USAF unmanned space programs. Cancellation also would save $1.5 billion in FY 1970 through 1974. Since 1965 initiation of mol program, dod had accumulated much experience in unmanned satellite systems and “profited from both manned and unmanned space exploration of NASA” for “the many, advanced technologies in the mol effort.” Some mol technology and hardware would be used in other DOD unmanned space programs and dod was exploring with NASA “the usefulness of some mol developments to NASA programs.” (dod Release 491—69)
Into the New Realm,” exhibit of documentary history of U.S. Government in space from early balloon ascensions to origination of Apollo program, opened at National Archives in Washington, D.C. Exhibit included original of National Space Act of 1958, which created NASA, and copies of correspondence on establishment of U.S. space program from President Eisenhower; President Kennedy; first NASA Adminis
Apollo 12 congratulatory telegrams at msc suggested “crew members of Apollo 12 will not be lacking their own fan club,” Washington Post article said. Meanwhile, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Apollo 8 crew continued to receive fan mail. Biggest fans of space program appeared to be “little children and supporters of prayers in outer space.” (Lardner, W Post, 11/22/69, A6)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy in ossa, and Joseph Purcell, OAO Project Manager at GSFC, for their contributions to Oao II, at GSFC ceremonies. Dr. Frederick Seitz, nas president, received Distinguished Public Service Medal, special award, for leadership in solid-state physics. Without solid-state circuitry, Oao II would not have been possible. Additional awards were presented to 13 persons from Government, industry, and universities for Oao II efforts, gsfc oao project team, Atlas/Centaur personnel from LeRC, and launch operations personnel from ksc received Group Achievement awards, (nasa Release 69—78)
LaRC and JPL announced formation of management teams to direct Viking Mars 1973 program to send two instrumented lander-and-orbiter spacecraft to Mars in 1973. LaRC had responsibility for overall project management and for lander portion of spacecraft. JPL would manage orbiter portion and tracking and data acquisition. James S. Martin, Jr., was LaRC project manager, with Henry W. Norris named Viking orbiter manager at jpl. (nasa Release 69-54; jpl Release 512)
NASA announced decision to close Electronics Research Center at Cambridge, Mass. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told staff: “. . . we must effect reductions and consolidations across the board if we are to reshape our programs to meet the nation’s future needs in aeronautics and space. . . . We are simply faced with the hard fact that NASA cannot afford to continue to invest broadly in electronics research as we have in the past.” Phasing down of erc work would begin immediately. Final plans were in preparation for placement of personnel and disposition of real property in Cambridge. Center, which opened Sept. 1, 1964, had 850 employees. Six buildings, representing $30-million investment, were in final phases of construction, (nasa Release 69—171)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of nasc, issued statement on Administration’s attitude toward space program: “In response to those who would denigrate our space effort, I think it is clear that this Administration has already demonstrated its belief in the strength and potential of America’s space program.” Administration was taking steps to “evaluate the costs and alternatives available to us in extending the program once man has been placed on the moon and returns.” (AP, W Post, 5/22/69, A5)
In New York Times Magazine, Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, physicist, wrote: “. . . I would urge that we alter the U.S. space program as follows: First, make a firm decision to terminate the manned space program soon after the initial lunar landing. ... I would reserve the remaining Apollo craft for future unmanned missions to the planets and I would mothball the single-purpose manned space flight facilities. At the same time, I would continue a n.a.S.a. program of long-range space development aimed at advanced modes of propulsion, compact energy sources and improved long-distance communication. High priority would be assigned to the development of nuclear energy both for propulsion and for on-board power. “Second, greatly expand n.a.s.a.’s present program for exploiting applications of space science and technology. The potential of satellites for communications . . . needs to be enhanced by the development of new techniques. It should not be too difficult to develop orbital systems for the control of intercontinental air traffic. Perhaps the greatest benefits from satellites are to be expected in the survey and evaluation of earth resources, such as underground water, mineral deposits and plant-forest cover. . . . “Third, establish a high priority within n.a.S.a. for fundamental research using unmanned space vehicles ... 10 to 20 years in duration and . . . aimed at finding out more about our planet, the sun and the rest of the solar system. The most expensive—and probably the most dramatic—of these projects would be the planetary probes designed to fly by, orbit or land on the nearby planets.” (NYT, 2/2/69, 32—40)
Army Digest published interview on space spinoffs with Harry N. Lowe, Jr., Chief of Extraterrestrial Research Agency of USA Office of Chief of Engineers: Space program should return profit to Nation. Tangible spinoff results were being observed in medicine, communications, engineering, and architecture. Savings in building industry and related engineering fields alone would eventually exceed present cost of entire space program. “We have seen the world’s largest building put up at the Cape, and other scientific and engineering marvels at Huntsville and Houston. We have had to work with scientists and others to an extent never before necessary. We have had to develop and apply new concepts and standards of performance.” Extraterrestrial Research Agency work included design and construction concept for semipermanent lunar base, definition of effort to develop lunar construction capability, and studies with NASA of lunar vehicles and mobility. Analyses of lunar samples indicated no need for change in concepts of lunar construction. With water source and cheaper transportation, “man can colonize the moon.” (Army Digest, 11/69, 30-1)
Senate confirmed nomination of George M. Low as NASA Deputy Administrator. {CR, 11/26/69, S15140, D1126)
ComSatCorp announced selection of General Telephone & Electronics International as contractor for construction of earth station for satellite communications near Talkeetna, Alaska. Contract price was $3,558,000. (ComSatCorp Release 69—32) (1,098.2-km) apogee, 246.4-mi (396.6-km) perigee, 99.8-min period, and 82.0° inclination. Primary mission objective was to conduct correlative studies of latitude-dependent atmospheric phenomena during period of maximum solar activity. Secondary objectives were to search for celestial hydrogen Lyman-alpha radiation, conduct neutron and cosmic-ray observations, measure solar uv and x-ray radiation, make detailed observations of vlf radio emissions, and exceed one year of active, three-axis stabilization. By June 8, all experiments except one—Naval Research Laboratory’s x-ray spectrometer, which was expected to have humidity problems—had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Two 30-ft antennas had been deployed. Ogo VI was sixth and last spacecraft in NASA’s ogo series. Scientific instrumentation for Ogo Vi’s 25 experiments had been provided by 10 U.S. universities, 1 foreign university, 4 Government centers, and 5 private companies. Ogo VI joined four other operational Ogo’s— Ogo I (launched Sept. 4, 1964), Ogo III (launched June 6, 1966), Ogo IV (launched July 28, 1967), and Ogo V (launched March 4, 1968)—which had provided more than 1.2-million hrs of scientific data on earth-sun relationships and on near-earth environment. Ogo II (launched Oct. 14, 1965) had been turned off in November 1967. Results from ogo program included: first observation of protons responsible for ring of current surrounding earth at distance of several earth radii during magnetic storms; first satellite global survey of earth’s magnetic field, resulting in proposed new magnetic field model for International Geomagnetic Reference Field; clear identification of controlling influence of earth’s magnetic field on ion population; verification of existence of inward boundary (plasma-pause) surrounding region of stable trapped radiation; first evidence that region of low-eriergy electrons completely enveloped trapped radiation regions; first observation of daylight auroras; and first worldwide map of airglow distribution. OGO program was managed by GSFC under OSSA direction. LeRC was responsible for Thorad-Agena D launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 69—81, 69—92)
First notables to arrive at Cape Kennedy on eve of Apollo 11 launch included former President and Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson and Southern Christian Leadership Conference President, the Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy. Johnsons arrived in military aircraft assigned by President Nixon, to attend luncheon honoring James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator. Abernathy led 25 poor southern families to protest Federal funding priorities. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, met group of 150 poor people outside KSC gate where Abernathy requested 40 vip passes to launch, asked Dr. Paine to join fight against poverty, and urged that NASA technology be converted to finding new ways to feed poor. Dr. Paine agreed to admit members of group to launch and pledged to do what he could to adapt space-developed food concentrates to aid undernourished. “It will be a lot harder to solve the problems of hunger and poverty than it is to send men to the moon.” But, “if it were possible for us not to push that button tomorrow and solve the problems you are talking about, we would not push the button.” He said space program and science could be used to help solve poverty problems. “I want you to hitch your wagon to our rocket and tell the people the NASA program is an example of what this country can do.” The poor people said they would pray for Apollo 11 astronauts. By evening 500,000 tourists had arrived in Brevard County, site of ksc, with total one million expected by early morning. Air traffic had quadrupled, with 10 local airfields handling over 1,200 small aircraft, and 200 private jets. Aircraft were to bring Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, over 200 Congressmen, 60 ambassadors, 19 governors, 40 mayors, and other public figures July 16. More than 1,000 police struggled to control road traffic, and hordes settled to sleep on beaches from which they could see illuminated spacecraft on launch pad. (Weinraub, NYT, 7/16/69, 22; Greider, TV Post, 7/16/69)
In farewell speech to JPL as President of Cal Tech, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Science Adviser-designate to President-elect Richard M. Nixon, said: “I am sure that under the new administration a change in the general structure of the space program may occur principally because the Apollo landings for 1969 will be carried out. . . . [And] that ends an era, so to speak, in the space program which President Kennedy started when he proposed attainment of a landing on the moon by the end of this decade.” Question would be raised “in Congress and in the administration and by the 'people of the country, ‘OK we’re all through now, let’s save that four billion or five billion dollars a year and settle back and do something less expensive.’ I don’t believe that this is a very widespread view in the top levels of the new administration. I think the Apollo 8 program came at a very critical moment” to make everyone see that “by lifting the eyes of the people to something beyond this little planet on which we live that the spiritual effect . . . the elevation of morale which has occurred, the pride which the country has taken in this sort of achievement, ■ following on the many other achievements, is going to be a stimulus to redirecting the program, yes, but certainly not abandoning it, and deciding what are the great things that can be done in the future of the space program.” (Transcript)
At dod news conference, Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said current estimate of cost to Government of C—5A aircraft was $4,348 billion, increase of $882 million (25%) over original estimate of $3,466 billion on which Lockheed Aircraft Corp. contract was based. Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Robert H. Charles said usaf had not disclosed Feb. 1, 1967, “cure order” to Lockheed on aircraft procurement contract because of concern over its effects on financial community. He maintained data on cost overruns had been developed too early in program to be solid enough for publication and that subsequent firmer cost estimates had been made public. (Transcript; Corddry, B Sun, 5/3/69, A4)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, announced resignation of Albert F. Siepert, ksc Deputy Director (Management), effective Dec. 1. He would become Program Associate at Univ. of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research and project manager for large-scale organizational research study sponsored by General Motors Corp. Siepert had been executive officer at National Institutes of Health before joining NASA and had received HEw’s Distinguished Service Award (1955), Arthur S. Flemming Award (1950), NASA Exceptional Service Medal (1968), and NASA Distinguished Service Medal (1969). (ksc Release 464-69)
Administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson ended as President Richard M. Nixon was sworn in as President of U.S. Johnson had served U.S. space program continuously since Sputnik l in October 1957, first on Capitol Hill as Chairman of Select and then permanent Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. As Vice President under late President Kennedy, he had served as Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, post held by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey during Johnson Administration. (EH)
aiaa announced election of Honorary Fellows: Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Dr. Seamans, former NASA Deputy Administrator, was honored for “organizing the research, development and operational base which produced the Apollo program.” Honors would be presented at Oct. 23 banquet in Anaheim, Calif, (aiaa Release)
At first day ceremonies for commemorative moon landing stamp in Washington, D.C., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount presented Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, with albums containing 32 stamps each. He said: “In the largest sense we pay tribute today to the spirit of man. We cannot separate the accomplishments of Apollo 11 from those of Yostok 1; we cannot separate the contributions of Michael Collins, or Edwin Aldrin or Neil Armstrong from those of Goddard and Einstein, Kepler and Newton, Copernicus and Galileo. We know this. And in the knowing again we find hope. For if men of all nations, together, can achieve dominion over the heavens, men of all nations, together, can achieve peace on earth for men for all time.” Armstrong said astronauts had deferred cancellation of stamps until they were reunited in cm, July 22. They had then grasped canceler simultaneously and pressed it upon die-proof version of commemorative stamp affixed to unaddressed envelope. Cancellation date remained July 20, day of lunar landing. (PO Dept Release 135; Shandler, W Star, 9/10/69, A3)
President Nixon sent directive to Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Science Adviser to the President, asking assessment of proposal to appoint interagency committee to advise President on post-Apollo space program. Directive also asked report on “possibility of significant cost reductions in the launching and boosting operations of the space program,” with judgment on “how best to assess future developments in this area.” White House announcement from Key Biscayne, Fla., Feb. 8 said directive had asked assessment of recommendations that dod and nasa be directed to coordinate activities in this area. (PD, 2/17/69, 249; 3/10/69, 349-51)
Sperry Rand Corp. announced election of former nasa Administrator James E. Webb to Board of Directors. He had been vice president of company’s Sperry Gyroscope Div. in 1943. (Sperry Rand Release 2/6/69; sbd, 2/11/69, 140)
Soviet space program had been severely set back by “catastrophic explosion of 10-million-lb-thrust prototype booster during preparatory launch operations at Tyuratam last summer,” Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. U.S.S.R.’s manned orbiting platform (mop) program, “already at least a year behind schedule and proceeding slowly, has been further retarded because of the . . . failure. Last month’s triple Soyuz launch has emerged as a prime example of rescheduling necessitated by the booster’s absence and by the aftermath of shortterm and conflicting political decisions. . . . “Failure of the booster prototype was only one event in a largely chaotic year for the Soviet space program. During 1969 the Russians: shifted much of their large booster inventory to military purposes in connection with the Chinese border crisis”; postponed scheduled late spring launch of Soyuz VI “because all remaining non-military facilities were in turn preempted by a highly compressed lunar effort”; and hastily launched Luna XV “in an effort to prove, in event of an Apollo failure, that at least a one-way soft landing from lunar orbit could be performed unmanned and, alternately, that failure would not result in loss of human life.” (Av Wk, 11/17/69, 26—7)
Behind “computerized smoothness” of Apollo 12 countdown, there was “smoldering and sometimes explosive struggle” at ksc among scientists, engineers, and Government officials over how to run space program, John Noble Wilford said in New York Times. General uncertainty over future of NASA and of space priorities was fueling “internal feud” which began to be exposed after July Apollo 11 lunar landing. Successful Apollo 12 flight could intensify controversy by raising “stakes” in struggle. Scientists wanted greater emphasis on scientific experiments; scientist-astronauts were disenchanted at slim prospects of space flights; engineers, especially at MSC, resented scientists’ attitude. (NYT, 11/11/69, 1)
First day of public display of lunar rock at Smithsonian Institution attracted 8,200 visitors, including former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Webb said: “The rock represents all the work and all the submergence of personal ambitions that thousands put into the space effort. It proves we have the scientific, technical and managerial capability of expanding our space values for use under the' sea, on the land and in the air.” (Schaden, W Star, 9/18/69, B4)
At Apollo 11 splashdown party at Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D.C. —attended by Apollo 11 astronauts and wives—NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced new Apollo Achievement Award of lapel button and certificate. He presented awards to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller; former Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) ; and former Deputy Director of Apollo Program George H. Hage. (Beale, W Star, 9/10/69, FI)
Technologically and managerially, Apollo was difficult,” Englebert Kirchner said in Space/Aeronautics editorial. “Politically and socially, it was simple. Just the reverse is true about the great problems of our society. What is making these so hard to solve is not technology but serious disagreement about goals and priorities, about what is good for whom, who is to get what and who should pay for it. The space program does not hold the answer to these questions. Trying to find them in Apollo will only distort and therefore belittle an incomparable achievement. Apollo took us to the moon, to that shining disk in the sky that looks so unbelievably distant. Isn’t that enough?” (S/A, 8/69, 27)
l/g Samuel C. Phillips, NASA Apollo Program Director, became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) . Gen. Phillips had been Director of Minuteman program before assignment to NASA in January 1964 as Deputy Director of Apollo program. He was succeeded by Rocco A. Petrone [see Aug. 22]. (nasa Ann, 7/31/69)
Lunar Rock Conference was held at Smithsonian Institution, with participation of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator; Dr. Henry J. Smith, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator (Science); and Lunar Receiving Laboratory scientists. During conference NASA released PET Summary of Apollo 11 Lunar Samples, report of 60-day preliminary examination of 48 lbs of Apollo 11 lunar samples in lrl by university and Government scientists on NASA Preliminary Examination Team (pet). Report confirmed existence of unexplained erosion process on lunar surface indicated in Ranger, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor photos, “unlike any process so far observed on earth”; said unique chemical composition (that of silicate liquid) of Tranquility Base fines and igneous rocks “implies either the composition of the rock from which the liquid was derived differs significantly from that of the mantle of the earth, or that the mechanism by which the liquid was formed differs from analogous terrestrial processes”; and concluded there was “very good chance that the time of crystallization of some of the Apollo 11 rocks may date back to times earlier than the oldest rocks on earth.” Samples could be divided into fine- and medium-grained crystalline of igneous origin, breccias of complex origin, and fines. Crystalline rocks differed from any terrestrial rock and from meteorites in modal mineralogy and bulk chemistry. Erosion had occurred on lunar surface but there was no evidence it was caused by surface water. Probable presence of assemblage iron-troilite-ilmenite and absence of any hydrated phase indicated crystalline rocks were formed under extremely low partial pressures of oxygen, water, and sulfur. Absence of hydrated minerals suggested absence of any surface water at Tranquility Base since rocks were exposed. Rocks and fines showed evidence of shock or impact metamorphism; all rocks displayed glass-lined surface pits possibly caused by impact of small particles; and fine material and breccia contained gases that indicated they were derived from solar wind. Measurements on igneous rock indicated crystallization 3 billion to 4 billion yrs ago. Rocks had been within one meter of surface for 20 million to 160 million yrs. Level of indigenous volatiliz-able and/or pyrolyzable organic material was extremely low. All rocks and fines were generally similar chemically. Major and minor constituents were same as in terrestrial igneous rocks and meteorites, but differences in composition were significant. Elements that were enriched in iron meteorites were not observed or were very low in occurrence. No evidence of biological material had been found. Tranquility Base soil was fine grained, granular, cohesive, and incompressible, with hardness increasing at six-inch depth. It was similar in appearance and behavior to soil at Surveyor landing sites. (Program; Text; Science, 9/19/69)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Michael Collins, their families, and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, flew in presidential jet from Houston to New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles during day of cross-country celebrations. Three-hour New York visit included greeting at City Hall by Mayor John V. Lindsay, motorcade to U.N. for greeting by TJ.N. Secretary General U Thant, and ticker-tape procession to John F. Kennedy International Airport for departure to Chicago. New York Public Events Commissioner John S. Palmer estimated crowds at 4 million; other observers said there were fewer and blamed ahead-of-schedule appearance and TV coverage. In Chicago, welcoming crowd was estimated at 3.5 million. Mayor Richard J. Daley greeted party at Civic Center and presented medals symbolic of honorary citizenship to astronauts and Dr. Paine. Illinois Gov. Richard B. Ogilvie said, “To these first citizens of the new epoch, the people of Chicago and Illinois offer their profound admiration and respect.” Astronauts spoke to 15,000 young people in Grant Park before returning by helicopter to O’Hare International Airport for flight to Los Angeles. Mayor Samuel W. Yorty met party at Los Angeles International Airport. After brief ceremony, party sped to Century Plaza Hotel for reception preceding state dinner. (Lelyveld, NYT, 8/14/69, 1; Ober-dorfer, W Post, 8/14/69, Al; NASA pao)
Science published letter from Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, former NASA scientist-astronaut: Comment from NASA officials that he had resigned from NASA program because he did not want to become pilot was oversimplification. “The budgetary delays in plans for scientific space flights and the inability to carry on a reasonable amount of scientific research in the meantime were equally important reasons.” (Science, 10/17/69, 313)
Aerospace industry sales of $28.3 billion in 1969 were second highest in industry’s history despite anticipated decline of 4.1% from 1968 record of $29.5 billion. All areas of aerospace endeavor leveled off except nonaerospace sales by aerospace companies, which increased. Commercial aerospace sales, principally jet transports, were $5,800 million, down from $6,429 million in 1968. Trend resulted from phasing out of current transport models while jumbo jet production was beginning. Sales by aerospace industry to dod were $16.2 million in 1969 and $16.6 billion in 1968. Military aircraft sales totaled $10 billion in 1969 and $10.7 billion in 1968. Space sales dropped to $4,499 million from $5,108 million in 1968, because of approaching completion of Apollo program hardware phase and cancellation of mol. (Aerospace, Winter, 1970)
aiaa submitted to President Nixon’s Science Advisory Committee The Post-Apollo Space Program: An AIAA View. While “remarkable progress of the Apollo-Saturn lunar program has erased almost all doubt about man’s ability to travel in space and return safely,” program’s magnitude had overshadowed “very solid accomplishments” of unmanned satellites. It was based largely on technology available at its inception; neglected “growing accumulation of feasible, but undeveloped technology” in space vehicle design that could affect space transportation costs; and failed to specify goals beyond manned lunar landing. Report rejected single national space objective for next decade. It recommended programs to determine man’s usefulness in space over prolonged periods and to reduce cost of manned operations and urged Government to give high priority to multifaceted applications satellite program. It urged planning and funding for communications data relay, meteorology data, earth resources data, and navigational aids satellite programs and “well-integrated inter-agency plan to develop data-management subsystems.” aiaa considered Apollo Applications program and MOL of “substantially greater importance” than last four or five lunar landing missions and encouraged “their timely continuance.” It urged designs proceed for extensions of capability in aa and mol orbital hardware to permit continuation of manned orbital program after 1973, supported retention of at least one crew-carrying vehicle with increased capability for 1973—1975; encouraged early steps to commit to flight demonstration partially reusable low-cost space transportation system for 1974-1976; encouraged accelerated study of space station hardware to succeed aa program and MOL; and encouraged early steps toward commonality of NASA and DOD subsystems. It considered “commitment to an entirely new station” was “less urgent than commitment to a new logistics system.” aiaa recommended continued Apollo lunar program through at least two or three missions and then evaluation, as well as immediate beginning of “vigorous study and controlled funding” of advanced subsystems for 1973—1975 to permit continuation if early success provided support for extension. It recommended manned planetary exploration commitments await evaluation of current programs. Search for extraterrestrial life was “perhaps the most exciting and spectacular of all space-science program objectives” and might well serve as one of “central themes for set of balanced space goals for the 1970s.” ( a&a, 6/69, 39-46)
Aerospace Systems Laboratory had been established at Princeton Univ. to investigate U.S. space program and other broad areas of applied research, including transportation systems, New York Times said. Project was assisted by NASA and other Federal agency grants. (NYT, 7/14/69, 23)
President Nixon and his daughter Tricia {foreground) watched preparations jor the launch of Apollo 12 from ksc, while Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA A rimin' istrator, shielded Mrs. Nixon from rain. Seconds into flight an electrical discharge shut down the spacecraft fuel cells, but the astronauts corrected the condition. 10,000	ft with tops at 21,000 ft. During ascent observers on ground saw two parallel streaks of lightning flash between clouds and launch pad. NASA reported electrical transients, later attributed to electrical potential discharges from clouds through spacecraft to ground, had suddenly shut off spacecraft’s electrical power at 00:36 get and turned on numerous alarms in cm. Spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while crew restored primary power system. Commander Conrad radioed, “We had everything in the world drop out.” Control Center commented, “We’ve had a couple of cardiac arrests down here, too.” “There wasn’t time up here,” Conrad answered. Power system remained normal throughout rest of mission. Spacecraft entered planned parking orbit with 118-mi (189.9-kra) apogee and 115.0-mi (185.0-km) perigee. After postlaunch checkout CSM. separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and LM, code-named Intrepid, Onboard TV initiated after separation clearly showed csm transposing and docking with lm at 3:27 GET and ice on windows from rain frozen during liftoff. Crew ejected CSm/lm from S—IYB and conducted first SPS burn for translunar insertion. Slingshot maneuver placed S—IVB into earth orbit with 515,549.4-	to 560,429.9-mi {829,519.0- to 901,731.7-km) apogee and 93,213.2-	to 109,324.1-mi (149,980.0- to 175,902.5-km) perigee and period of 39 to 45 days, instead of heliocentric orbit planned, because of error in instrument unit. To ensure that electrical transients during launch had not affected lm systems, Conrad and Bean entered LM at 7:20 GET for housekeeping and systems checks. All checks indicated systems were satisfactory, Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse maneuver No. 1 was not necessary. Midcourse correction No. 2, at 30:53 GET, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 69.1 mi; third and fourth maneuvers were not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 47 min. Conrad and Bean began transfer to LM during translunar coast Y2 hr earlier than planned to obtain full TV coverage through Goldstone tracking station. The 56-min transmission, beginning at 62:52 get, showed excellent color pictures of GSM, intravehicular transfer, LM interior, earth, and moon. Gordon reported crew was in good condition. TV broadcast scheduled for 81:30 GET before lunar orbit insertion was canceled because of sun angle and glare on spacecraft windows. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 72.0-mi (115.9-km) perilune at 83:25 GET (10:47 pm est Nov. 17) after first sps burn. During first lunar orbit good quality TV coverage of lunar surface was transmitted for 33 min. Crew provided excellent descriptions of lunar features. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 76.1-mi (122.5-km) apolune and 62.5-mi (100.6-km) perilune at 87:47 get. Conrad and Bean transferred to lm for l^g-hr housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check and then returned to CM. CM Yankee Clipper, reported sighting Surveyor III and Intrepid on moon. Conrad opened lm hatch at 115:11 GET, descended LM ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Conrad reported seeing Surveyor HI spacecraft and said lm had landed 25 ft down-range from lip of crater. Conrad, inches shorter than Neil A. Armstrong, who had stepped onto moon July 21, had difficulty taking last step from ladder. When he touched lunar surface at 115.22 get (6:44 am est Nov. 19) Conrad said, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small step for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” He said lunar surface was soft and loosely packed, causing his boots to dig in as he walked, and sun was bright like a spotlight, lm had landed so gently its shock-absorbing legs were barely telescoped by gentle impact. Conrad recorded Bean’s descent to lunar surface at 115:52 get (7:14 am EST Nov. 19). Shortly after color TV camera was removed from mesa bracket, transmission was lost and was not regained for remainder of eva. Crew collected 40- to 50-lb contingency sample and reported mounds resembling volcanoes. Mounds were 4 ft high with flattened tops 5 ft wide and sides sloping out to 15- to 20-ft dia. Conrad said he saw neither breccia nor vesicular rocks, only basalts. Lithium hydroxide canisters and contingency sample were transferred to lm ; S-band antenna, solar wind composition experiment, and American flag were deployed as planned, alsep with SNAP—27 atomic generator was deployed 600—700 ft from lm. Shortly after deployment passive seismometer transmitted to earth signals from astronauts’ footsteps as they returned to lm. During deployment astronauts kicked up dust and some adhered to instruments. Overall effect would be determined through long-term measurements of system’s engineering parameters. Conrad and Bean dusted each other off and entered Intrepid after 3 hrs 56 min walking on lunar surface. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:33 get (10:55 pm est Nov. 19), 1 hr 40 min ahead of schedule. Astronauts stored lm TV camera in equipment transfer bag for return to earth for failure analysis. Conrad walked to alsep site to check leveling of lunar atmosphere detector. Astronaut movement on surface was recorded on passive seismometer and lunar surface magnetometer, eva traverse took crew to alsep deployment site, Head Crater, Bench Crater, Sharp Crater, Halo Crater, Surveyor III site, Block Crater, and back to lm. Astronauts walked 1,500—2,000 ft from lm, covering about 6,000-ft distance, their confidence and speed increasing with experience. After walk Conrad reported he had fallen once but Bean had picked him up without difficulty. Conrad rolled grapefruit-sized rock down wall of Head Crater about 300—400 ft from passive seismometer, but no significant response was detected. Crew obtained desired photographic panoramas, core samples, trench sample, lunar environment sample, and assorted rock, dirt, bedrock, and molten samples. They reported fine dust buildup on all sides of larger rocks and said soil color lightened as depth increased. Crew reported Surveyor footpad marks were still visible and entire spacecraft looked brown, as if something had rained on it. Glass parts were not broken. Crew retrieved parts of Surveyor III, including TV camera and soil scoop. They then retrieved solar wind composition experiment and stowed it in equipment bag, took stereo pictures near lm, and transferred all collected samples, parts, and equipment to lm. They dusted off, reentered LM, and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by 134:82,get (2:44 am EST Nov. 20), after 3 hrs 49 min walking on lunar surface in second eva period. While lm was on moon Gordon, orbiting moon in csm, completed lunar multispectral photography experiment and photographed Wall of Theophilus and future landing sites, Fra Mauro and Descartes. Film would be analyzed to aid scientists in planning for future sample collection and in extrapolating known compositions from returned samples to parts of moon that would not be visited. At 142:04 get (9:26 am est Nov. 20) lm successfully lifted off moon after 31 hrs 31 min on lunar surface, leaving lm descent stage. Astronauts brought back 95 lbs of lunar surface samples, parts of Surveyor III, films, and miniature flags of 136 nations, 50 U.S. states, and 4 U.S. possessions. A 1.2-sec overburn of lm ascent propulsion system caused by incorrect manual switching sequence prevented automatic shutdown of engine and resulted in insertion velocity 32 fps greater than planned, placing lm in orbit with 71.4-mi (114.9-km) apolune and 10.6-mi (17.1-km) perilune. Crew quickly recognized discrepancy, manually shut down engine, and used RSC trim maneuver to enter planned orbit with 53.3-mi (85.8-km) apolune and 10.1-mi (16.3-km) perilune. Rendezvous maneuvers occurred as planned and lm docked with csm at 145:36 get (12:58 pm est Nov. 20). TV was transmitted from csm for last 24 min of rendezvous sequence. Crew transferred with samples, equipment, and film to CSM; lm ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 5:17 pm est Nov. 20 about 44.9 mi (72.2 km) southeast of Surveyor III. Crash was detected by seismometer left on moon and produced reverberations lasting for more than 30 min. Crew made csm plane-change maneuver at 159:05 GET and took high-resolution and stereo-strip photos and tracked landmarks, to conclude planned photography of Fra Mauro, Descartes, and Lalande. antine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. cm was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and cm was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Pago Pago and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 12 mission objectives—to perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of mare area, deploy and activate ALSEP, develop techniques for point landing capability, develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment, and obtain photos of candidate exploration sites—were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor and corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding. All three crew members remained in excellent health and good spirits. Accomplishments included first use of hybrid trajectory, largest U.S. payload placed into lunar orbit (72,335 ibs after lunar orbit insertion), first demonstration of point landing capability, first use of two EVA periods, first recharge of portable life-support system, first double-core-tube sample, first return of samples from vehicle previously landed on moon, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, first multispectral photography from lunar orbit, and longest lunar mission to date. Apollo 12 was ninth Apollo mission to date, sixth manned Apollo mission, and second manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16—24, 1969) had proved capability to perform manned landing on moon and return and to retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; Mission Commentary; NASA Release 69—148; FonF; NYT, 11/15—26/69; W Post, 11/15-26/69; W Star, 11/15-26/69; B Sun, 11/15-26/69) November 14: President Nixon became first President to witness space launch while in office when he, Mrs. Nixon, and daughter Tricia viewed Apollo 12 launch at ksc. President called liftoff “spectacular.” Later he addressed NASA personnel in Launch Control: “. . . I know there has been a lot of discussion as to what the future of the space program is. ... I do think you can be assured that in Dr. Paine and his colleagues you have men who are dedicated to this program, who are making the case for it ... as against other national priorities and making it very effectively. I leaned in the direction of the program before. After hearing what they have had to say with re'gard to our future plans, I must say that I lean even more in that direction. ... I realize that in those within the program . . . there are different attitudes as to what the emphasis should be, whether we should emphasize more exploration or more in taking the knowledge we have already acquired and making practical applications of it. . . . We want to have a balanced program, but most important, we are going forward. America ... is first in space.” (Carroll, B Sun, 11/15/69, Al; PD, 11/17/69, 1601-2)
In message transmitting to Congress nasa’s Twentieth Semiannual Report, President Nixon said: “During this decade, we have successfully met many challenges and have achieved significant progress in our ability to utilize space for practical applications, scientific exploration, and expansion of man’s frontiers. We have subsequently landed astronauts upon the Moon, explored its surface, and returned these men to Earth. This historic event was made possible because of the solid foundation of a broad range of earlier activities, and through the skill and dedication of the many contributors to our space program.” (PD, 11/17/69, 1603; CR, 11/13/69, S14274)
NASA’s Apollo 10 lunar orbital mission was proceeding well toward launch readiness for 11:49 am EST May 18, Deputy Apollo Program Director George H. Hage told NASA Hq. briefing. Flight readiness test had been successfully completed April 9. Countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin April 27, completing cryogenic propellant flow May 2; crew participation in cddt would begin May 3. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot) would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad B—being used for first time—on eight-day mission in which crew would enter lunar orbit, separate lm from CSM, and pilot lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface. Mission would include 11 different crew operations on TV and Westinghouse Electric Corp.-developed “experiment involving color TV if we can develop it and get it prepared to fly in time to support this mission. If we are able to ... we would do most of the pictures with color TV rather than black and white. . . .” (Transcript)
New York Times Magazine profile quoted NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine: Late President John F. Kennedy’s decision to try to put man on moon by end of 1960s was “bold act that is standing the test of time damned well,” Dr. Paine had said. “Our ability to function now in a new environment a decade after Jack Kennedy is going to be a very challenging test for us. Do we understand that environment? Can we achieve a new consensus without the ‘Pearl Harbor’ of a Russian lead in space? We’re not really talking about the space program anymore. The space program is finished. You wouldn’t speak about Columbus’s voyage as the sail-powered water craft program. What Columbus’s journey was all about had nothing to do with water. It was the extension of man’s dominion, new life styles, new forms of government, new societies.” Dr. Paine believed U.S. had no choice but to push ahead. “A nation that turns down a challenge like this is a nation that’s on its way out.” (Buckley, NYT Magazine, 6/8/69, 34-63)
Aerospace industry was having its greatest week in history with Apollo 11 launch, said New York Times, but aerospace stocks remained in doldrums. Wall Street was “bearish about the industry and, from an investment standpoint, unenthusiastic about space.” Security analysts interviewed agreed Apollo 11 would have little effect on long-depressed stocks, which commenced decline in 1968; many were selling near lows for year. Aerospace industry was chief beneficiary of space program funds, but largest portion of $34 billion spent since 1960 had been allocated before “really spectacular shots” occurred. While Apollo program had been “treniendous boon to the aerospace industry and to the advancement of technology,” it represented small part of total industry revenues and outlook was for further decline. (Hammer, NYT, 7/17/69, 63)
Dr. Gene Simmons, msc Chief Scientist, told press at msc reported conflict between scientists and engineers in U.S. space program was “more apparent than it is real.” msc officials were making great efforts to increase scientific return from nine remaining Apollo missions. Dr. Simmons was “not sure there is this rift.” (W Post, 10/25/69, A9)
Merger of military and civilian man-in-space programs was major decision facing Nixon Administration, said Howard Benedict of Associated Press. Many observers felt it necessary because, under separate courses being taken by NASA and dod, costs of competing hardware systems “might explode out of proportion.” Congressmen had charged there was costly duplication in NASA’s orbiting workshop and DOD’s mol, both planned for 1971 launch, but with work on both so far advanced there was no turning back. Air Force Secretary, Dr. Robert Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, had said any attempt to combine two programs “would jeopardize the returns to each agency and would ultimately increase the cost. . . . These activities require different equipment, different orbits and different timing.” nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had said classified study to determine mol’s capabilities to accomplish NASA’s long-duration earth orbit objectives had shown extended mol “too limited to provide a significant, cost-effective step toward achieving NASA’s long duration objective.” Many observers believed technology and information for building national space station housing military and civilian personnel might emerge from the two programs. Another possibility was use by both agencies of similar rocket and spacecraft on separate scientific and military missions with equipment standardization providing “considerable saving.” (Huntsville Times, 4/8/69)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced President Nixon had nominated John H. Shaffer, Vice President of trw Inc., as Federal Aviation Administrator. Shaffer would replace Acting faa Administrator, David D. Thomas, who would remain as Deputy Administrator. (dot Release 2469)
Special Task Force report submitted to President Nixon Jan. 8 but not released by White House called for NASA revamping and shift in space priorities, John Lannan said in Washington Sunday Star. Panel, chaired by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Charles H. Townes, included Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, then NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. James A. Van Allen of Univ. of Iowa; Dr. Harry H. Hess, chairman of nas—NRC Space Science Board; and Dr. Walter Orr Roberts of National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report recommended continuation of $6-billion space effort, with $2 billion for dod and rest for NASA; disapproved of any commitment to large orbiting space station; and urged commitment to unmanned planetary probes. It considered NASA’s present structure inappropriate for post-Apollo program and urged bringing “an outstanding scientist into its top administrative ranks.” It was desirable to avoid manned versus unmanned operations argument and to focus on search for most appropriate role for human being in entire system. NASA organization was not “adapted to this approach.” nasc should be chaired by President rather than Vice President. Panel advocated lunar exploration and gave high priority to use of space for commercial and civil benefits. It urged space spending at Vl% to 1% of gnp and proposed U.S. intensify efforts toward international cooperation in space, Lannan reported. (W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
President Nixon’s Space Task Group had established that less expensive space operations in future depended on nasa and usaf development of lower cost boosters, J. S. Butz, Jr., said in Air Force and Space Digest. Joint effort on booster selection would be made within understanding signed by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Two major complicating factors existed: “First nasa and the Air Force must overhaul their bureaucracies.” Second was “requirement for a compromise between military and civil needs.” While usaf needed vehicle which could be launched quickly in large numbers and carry sufficient fuel for extensive space maneuvers, NASA wanted larger vehicle to carry more people and large cargo volume. More difficult would be choice of reentry vehicle. Both NASA and USAF wanted winged configuration for operational flexibility and airliner-style landings, but development costs would be high. (AF/SD, 6/69, 79—81)
Sen. Ralph W. Yarborough (D-Tex.) offered amendment to H.R. 11271, FY 1970 NASA authorization bill [see June 24], to increase funds for NASA R&D and program management from amount reported by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to amount passed by House. Increases would total $256.50 million in R&D and $6.35 million in research and program management. He said: “My amendment authorizes the bare minimum that we, as a nation, should commit to space. Its adoption is vital to the proper balance in our national priorities; it is vital to the future of our exciting and promising space program; and it is vital, in my opinion, to the interests and well-being of our country.” {CR, 8/7/69, S9383)
AIA released results of survey which showed expected decline of 4.5% in aerospace industry employment between September 1968 and September 1969, from 1,416,000 to 1,353,000, because of continuing decline in civilian space program and decreasing sales of civilian aircraft. Employment in aircraft production and R&D plants was expected to decline 4.6%, transport aircraft employment, 7%; general-aviation aircraft employment, 0.3%; and missile and space employment, 5.7%. Helicopter and nonaerospace employment, including oceanographic research, was expected to increase slightly. Scientists and engineers would continue to account for 16% of total aerospace employment. (Text)
Apollo 11 astronauts would leave three items on lunar surface to commemorate landing, NASA announced. Silicon disc, 1%-in-dia, would carry statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon; messages of goodwill from leaders of 73 countries; list of leaders of Congress and members of four congressional committees responsible for NASA legislation; and names of NASA’s top management, past and present. Statements, messages, and names had been etched on disc by process used to make microminiature electronic circuits. Each message had been reduced 200 times, to barely visible dot. Three- by five-foot nylon American flag with tubing along top edge would be erected on eight-foot aluminum staff on airless moon. Two other U.S. flags and flags from 136 nations and 50 U.S. states would be carried to moon and returned to earth. Plaque left on lm descent stage would bear images of two hemispheres of earth and inscription “Here men from the planet earth first set foot upon the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.” It would bear names of Apollo 11 crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins—and President Nixon, (nasa Releases 69—83E, 69-83F, 69-83H)
In Washington Evening Star, Crosby S. Noyes said: “. . . it would be a mistake to consider the space program itself as nothing more than a kind of inspirational stunt to show us what we can do if we really put our minds to it. The idea that once the demonstration is over, we should divert all of its resources to domestic problems is excessively simple-minded. Of all the resources that have gone into the space program, the money that is so much on everyone’s mind is undoubtedly the least critical. The major resources . . . are people and organization and a continuing process of research and application. These resources cannot be ‘diverted’ into new areas; nor can a program such as this be turned off and on again like a spigot. Once the process is interrupted and the concentration of talent is broken up, it will be virtually impossible to reassemble it.” (W Star, 5/22/69, A9)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Administrator, told news conference aboard U.S.S. Hornet he expected U.S.S.R. to land men on moon within 18 mos. “My guess is it’ll be much sooner than most people think.” He thought U.S.S.R. had lost race “by keeping their program so secret.” U.S. had encouraged suggestions from scientists throughout non-Communist world, while details of Soviet program were known only to “small elite.” Apollo 11 success would eventually lead to closer cooperation with U.S.S.R. in space exploration. “I don’t look for any early change in the attitude . . . but a steady interest on their part. I don’t see joint efforts but cooperation from time to time.” (upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 30)
Nixon Administration was responding to nasa requests for $200 million supplemental r&d funds by “emphatically ordering future reductions” in FY 1970 budget, said William J. Normyle in Aviation Week & Space Technology, bob had told NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to plan on $140-million loss despite conclusions of House subcommittees that NASA’s R&d should be increased $234.4 million. Until Nixon decisions on U.S. space future, cut would “wipe out” work on space stations, shuttle/logistics vehicles, and manned lunar exploration. Feasible future programs were being studied by President’s ad hoc committee which would report in September. (Av Wk, 4/14/69, 27-8)
Dr. George M. Low—veteran o) Mercury, Gemini, and Apolh pro-grams^was sworn in as Deputy Administrator of nasa by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Administrator, after Nov. 26 Senate confirmation.
Defense Secretary-designate Melvin R. Laird announced at press conference that Stanley R. Resor would remain as Secretary of the Army, Rhode Island Gov. John H. Chafee would be nominated Secretary of the Navy, and former NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would be nominated Secretary of the Air Force in Nixon Administration. (Wilson, W Post, 1/7/69, 1) usn saw post-Vietnam war need for modernization, with emphasis on nuclear-powered escort ships; usaf wanted new fighter, manned bomber, deployment of interim bomber, and revamping of U.S. air defense force. Dr. John S. Foster, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said: “The Soviets have four characteristics of special concern to the r&d community. They are technically advanced, they are strong economically, they have an aggressive military posture—and they work behind a veil of secrecy. The one that makes competition difficult is secrecy. To counter it, the United States must have technological superiority. We must have been there, technically, before them.” (W Star, 1/6—8/69)
U.K. radioastronomer Sir Bernard Lovell told press at U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station that Apollo 11 and Luna XV increased hopes for U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation because “this is the first time the United States has been demonstratively superior in a vital part of the space program. American approaches for collaboration may be received with sympathy in the Soviet Union as they can no longer regard themselves as masters.” (AP, B Sun, 7/23/69, A4)
At 12th annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C., sponsored by National Space Club, Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, said: “. . . we are witnessing another spectacular example of the utilization of scientific knowledge, accumulated by many generations of scientists, some famous and some obscure, who worked away in their laboratories trying to probe the secrets of nature. We have seen how once these secrets . . . have been revealed, engineering skills could be put to work. We see in our space program also an example of the reverse process. ... New technological developments lead to new techniques and new instruments which . . . speed up our basic work in science and lead to new ways of uncovering new secrets of nature. Thus, during these past ten years the advance of science has been enormously aided by the advance of space technology.” (CR, 3/12/69, S2755) Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to NASA’s l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) in absentia since Apollo 9 mission was still under way. Citation read: “For his personal direction of the Apollo program throughout development and into the final phases of flight to the Moon dramatically illustrated by the two successful all-up flights of the Saturn V and the error-free flights of Apollo 7 and the extraordinary flight of Apollo 8 to the Moon and back. His engineering skill and leadership throughout the development and execution of this complex program have made possible an outstanding American success.” Richard J. Allen of nasa Apollo Program Office Test Div. was awarded Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship presented to NASA employee adjudged “a deserving individual in disciplines applicable to science, astronautics and space administration.” Mitchell R. Sharpe of Systems Safety and Manned Flight Awareness Office, MSFC, received certificate, trophy, and $500 award for winning entry in 1969 Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay competition. (His Development of the Lifesaving Rocket: A Study in 19th Century Technological Fallout was released by NASA June 10 as msfc Historical Note 4.) National Space Club Press Award “for penetrating, consistently informed and lucid writing on all phases of the national space program” was awarded Evert Clark, Washington science correspondent, Newsweek. North American Rockwell Corp. received Nelson P. Jackson Award “for its major contribution to the success of Apollo during 1968.” (Program; msfc Historical Note 4)
Rep. Charles W. Whalen, Jr. (R-Ohio), inserted in Congressional Record results of annual opinion poll of his constituents which showed 51% preferred continuation of space funding at present level, 21% preferred cutback with reallocation of space funds to social welfare programs, 16% wanted acceleration of space program with increased funding if necessary, and 12% wanted none of these. (CR, 4/22/69, E3230)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole said: “. . . man’s flight to the moon and beyond could be the only means he has left of renewing his dwindling spirits. . . . The voyage of Apollo 8 around the moon last Christmas did more than any other single event last year to restore man’s faith in himself-—and that flight will pale beside an actual moon landing when it comes. ... It could just be that when man walks the moon for the first time it will be felt round the world as such a triumph of the human heart that its beat shall go on for a million years.” (W Post, 3/26/69, A27) March 27—April 8: NASA’s Mariner VII (Mariner G) spacecraft was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-19) booster on four-month, 193-million-mi, direct-ascent trajectory toward Mars—NASA’s second mission to fly past Mars during 1969 launch window. Launch vehicle performance was nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed its four solar panels, and locked its sensors on sun and star Vega. Because of several minor spacecraft anomalies during launch, spacecraft was kept in sun-Vega cruise while performance was evaluated. Star-lock override command was transmitted to spacecraft April 1; Canopus was acquired as planned initially and Mariner VII entered stable cruise mode. Midcourse maneuver was conducted April 8 to ensure that spacecraft would fly within 1,900 mi (3,057.7 km) of Mars Aug- 5. Primary mission objective was to fly by southern hemisphere and polar regions of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary mission spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 900-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mariner March 27-April 8: has* latmcked Mariner VII on an Atlas-Centaur booster as the second of two spacecraft in the Mariner Mars 1969 mission to take photograpks and collect data about [he surface and atmosphere of Mars. Mariner IV (oris launched Feb. 24. An April 8 maneuver ensured that Mariner VII would pass Mars Aug. 5. VII mission, except for flyby area, was almost identical to mission of Mariner VI launched Feb. 24 for investigation of equatorial region and scheduled to arrive at Mars July 31. (NASA Proi Off; NASA Releases 69-26, 69-12)
On nbc TV program “Meet the Press" NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, said there was possibility U.S.S.R. would land men and instruments on all planets before U.S. “The Russians have publicly taken the position that they are extremely interested in landing on the planets, and . . . one of the popular songs in the Soviet Union right now is a song about little apple trees growing on Mars.” NASA felt with Apollo lunar landing “we are really taking a lead in the ability to operate on all other bodies. . . . the technology we are developing . . . is a kind . . . that would be required.” If July lunar landing succeeded, “we will have enough hardware for nine additional flights to begin the exploration of the lunar surface. In parallel with that, we see activities in earth orbit which will be the precursors to the eventual emplacement of a large permanent space station, a laboratory in the sky.” NASA expected to find “surprising amount” to study on moon. “In fact, we have already radically changed our views of the moon just with the activities we have carried out in preparation for the Apollo landing. For example . . . men are beginning to seriously question whether there may have been water at one time on the surface of the moon. Indeed, whether the large mare areas, the smooth areas . . . may even have been the beds of ancient seas. As we get more and more familiar with the moon we realize how little we know about it. It will take those ten flights and many other trips to the moon before man really begins to understand his twin planet.” Dr. Paine said ijsaf’s mol and NASA orbiting workshop were “two very different projects.” NASA’s was “longer range program aimed at a very substantial facility which would be really a university campus type of research station in orbit.” mol was “program that is well advanced, and is designed to find out the military applications of space.” (Transcript)
U.S. News & World Report published interview with Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. Apollo 11 lunar landing would be “culmination of America’s satisfying everyone that it is indeed the leading technological nation that it thought it was before Sputnik blazed across the skies.” U.S.S.R. would continue to put great stress on space and move ahead steadily. “. . . there’s always the danger that we may feel we can relax now—having attained the lunar goal—and perhaps slack off. ... if we were not to start new programs now, I think the situation might well reverse and the Soviets might once again develop superior technological capabilities in space.” Space technology could affect future defense posture. In the past, “wherever man has flown farther and higher and faster, wherever he has developed new capability to observe from higher areas, to carry out operations in new media, this has had a major effect on the equations of international power. We’re quite confident that this will probably be true again in space.” Application of space to defense area was DOD’s job. “We do not consider Apollo applications as any kind of substitute for mol.” Journey of man to another solar system was “completely out of the realm of possibility” for next generation; “but in the more distant future, if it were ever possible ... to control the energy of nuclear fusion and adapt it in some efficient way to the propulsion of spacecraft, it might be possible to think in terms of longer voyages to another star.” Fundamental breakthrough would have to be made. Chance that life existed in other solar systems seemed “absolutely 100 per cent.” (US News, 7/7/69)
CBS presented interview with former President Lyndon B. Johnson which had been taped July 5. President Johnson credited space program with sparking “revolution of the 60s” and said, “We can’t discard space. We’re just beginning.” U.S. had enough money “to do all the things we need to do” in space, education, and health. “What we must have is the determination to do it.” He said his last act as president had been to send Apollo 8 photos of earth to 186 leaders of foreign governments. (W Post, 7/21/69, A7)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
Scientists from U.S., Canada, and France, participating in NASA-sponsored 25-day probe of aurora borealis Nov. 24 to Dec. 18, had discovered very high ratios of red oxygen emissions to blue nitrogen emissions in earth’s upper atmosphere, NASA announced. Higher measured ratios indicated many solar electrons that bombarded atmosphere might have been low energy. There might be more oxygen in polar atmosphere than at other latitudes, or high temperatures in upper polar atmosphere. Studies in airborne laboratory—NASA Convair 990 jet aircraft Galileo—also detected bombardment of earth’s atmosphere by protons. Comparison of light emission caused by protons and electrons would help explain particles’ origin. Measurement from six photometers and three spectrometers would provide explanation of newly discovered phenomena, (nasa Releases 69—165, 69—169)
International team of scientists might man first U.S. permanent space laboratory, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at London news conference. Work on project would begin about 1975 and additional sections would be added each year for decade, eventually producing laboratory for about 50 scientists. Dr. Paine, on his way to Paris Air Show, said it was too early to say if there would be permanent U.S. lunar space station or to predict if man would land on Mars. He had no information to support rumors of imminent Soviet moon landing. (Reuters, W Post, 6/5/69, E5)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences ordered favorably reported the nomination of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine as NASA Administrator. Nomination awaited approval by Senate. (NASA LAR, VIII/42)
Apollo 12 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility, arrived at Ellington afb, Tex., where they were greeted by 500 cheering persons, including their families and NASA officials, mqf was moved in motorcade to Lunar Receiving Laboratory, where astronauts would remain until Dec. 10. (DeLone, W Post, 11/30/69, A3)
Press conference on results of NASA’s Oao II orbiting astronomical observatory (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was held at NASA Hq. OAO Project Manager Joseph Purcell of GSFC said spacecraft’s five months of orbital operations had been “a fabulous success” and all spacecraft systems were operating normally. As of last week, he said, “we had 137 mission days. [Univ. of] Wisconsin [experiment] has been pointed to 846 different locations in the sky [and] 344 of those were unique objects that they were studying. SAO, the Smithsonian package, has been pointed at 483 separate locations and taken some 1,172 pictures.” (Transcript)
Portrait of James'E. Webb, second NASA Administrator (1961—1968), was unveiled in anniversary ceremony at Smithsonian Arts and Industries Building. Painted by Gardner Cox, portrait would eventually hang in NASA Hq. (Program; nasa Release 69—140)
Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post observed similarities among astronauts. Of 23 who already had flown in space, 21 were either only sons or eldest sons. Pattern tied in, he said, with psychologists’ beliefs that only and eldest children tended to achieve more in life because they were disciplined more and trained and treated better by parents. Astronauts also were athletic, showed academic excellence, and had intense love of flying, O’Toole said. (W Post, 3/2/69) Primary objectives were to demonstrate crew, space vehicle, and mission support facilities performance during manned Saturn V mission with CSM and LM; demonstrate LM and crew performance, demonstrate performance of nominal and selected backup lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) mission activities; and assess CSm/lm consumables. Multispectral photography experiment was carried for first time to provide photos of earth resources using several different film-filter combinations. Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft, carrying Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), entered initial orbit with 119.5-mi (192.3-km) apogee and 117.6-rai (189,3-km) perigee. After post-insertion checkout csm, code-named “Gumdrop,” separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, code-named “Spider.” Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm, and docked spacecraft was separated from 3rd stage with rcs burn. Two S—IVB burns placed stage on earth-escape trajectory. Crew conducted first docked SPS burn. On second day crew tracked landmarks, conducted pitch and yaw roll maneuvers, and increased apogee by firing sps engine three times. On third day, McDivitt and Schweickart entered lm through docking tunnel, evaluated lm systems, transmitted first telecast, and conducted first manned firing of lm descent propulsion system (dps). They then returned to csm and conducted fifth sps burn to circularize orbit. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fourth day and transmitted second telecast. Schweickart, recovered from earlier nausea, spent 37 min outside spacecraft, walking between lm and csm hatches, maneuvering on handrails, and standing in “golden slipper” foot restraints. He commented on sun’s brightness, photographed spacecraft and earth, and described rain squalls over ksc before he and McDivitt returned to csm. Scott opened cm hatch and retrieved thermal samples from csm exterior. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fifth day to perform csm—lm rendezvous. Scott separated csm from lm and fired csm reaction control system thrusters to place spacecraft about 3.4 mi (5.5 km) apart, lm dps was ignited twice to set up rendezvous, lm descent stage was jettisoned and LM ascent propulsion system (aps) was fired to set up conditions for circularization. Although problems were encountered with crewman optical alignment sight (coas) because of extremely bright reflections, radar and optical sightings backed up by earth tracking enabled spacecraft to dock successfully after being up to 114 mi (183.5 km) apart during 6%-hr separation. After McDivitt and Schweickart returned to csm, crew jettisoned lm ascent stage and maneuvered to safe distance while stage burned to propellant depletion and entered orbit with 4,309-mi (6,934.5-km) apogee and 142.2-mi (228.8-km) perigee. By end of fifth day 97% of Apollo 9 objectives had been successfully accomplished. On sixth through ninth days crew conducted sixth and seventh SPS burns to alter apogee, tracked NASA’s Pegasus III meteoroid detection satellite (launched July 30, 1965), took multispectral photos of earth, tracked landmarks, exercised spacecraft systems, and prepared for reentry. Final sps burn for deorbit on 10th day was delayed one revolution because of unfavorable weather in planned landing area, cm—sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal; spacecraft reentered during 152nd revolution and splashed down in Atlantic 180 mi east of Bahamas at 12:53 pm est March 13, 241 hrs 53 secs after launch, within sight of recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. Astronauts were welcomed by Guadalcanal crew and received congratulatory telegram message from President Nixon which said: “The epic flight of Apollo Nine will be recorded in history as ten days that thrilled the world. You have by your courage and your skill helped to shape the future of man in space. The three of you and the great team which enabled you to complete your successful mission have shown the world that the spirit of man and his technological genius are eager to begin an age of adventure, an age which will benefit all the people on this good earth.” All primary Apollo 9 objectives were achieved and anomalies were not serious enough to alter mission operations or flight plan significantly. First manned flight of lm qualified last major component for lunar landing mission. Apollo 9 was sixth Apollo mission to date and third manned Apollo mission. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4, 1968), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Second manned mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), proved capability of Apollo hardware and systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 69-29, 69-33; PD, 3/17/69, 400)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President’s Science Adviser, told aiaa board luncheon in Washington, D.C., that President’s Space Task Group had forged ahead with plans for new space program by Apollo program’s end but he did not see specific mechanism in Nixon Administration for handling “tremendous” aviation problems. He had raised question at first Task Group meeting, but budget squeeze had cut dot request for civil aviation research by two-thirds. Noise would be dealt with by Cabinet-level committee on environmental quality. President Nixon was “anxious to extend our technical and scientific collaboration with other nations.” Recent visit to U.S.S.R. by U.S. scientists had led to plans for more extensive collaboration in high-energy physics. (A&A, 4/69, 5; aiaa pio)
Ten NASA employees and four support contractors received special awards at White Sands Test Facility for participation in extensive Apollo propulsion system test programs, (msc Release 69—76)
In address at Clarkson College of Technology in Potsdam, N.Y., Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “We know that hydrogen bombs work (unfortunately)—the Lord made the Universe that way. And, of course, we know that (fortunately) fusion energy keeps the sun shining every day. Our great visionary dream is to find out how to unlock this energy for spaceship propulsion. This is a great challenge but consider the new tools that we have available: giant magnetic fields with superconducting magnets, tremendous power densities from lasers, the great energy of nuclear power, and new high temperature materials. These, with new plasma dynamic developments, may usher in fusion power in the eighties, the nineties, or in the next century. Harnessing fusion power for propulsion is an even farther-out challenge, but it could prove to be one of the more direct applications. We won’t have to convert the fusion energy to electricity; just fuse a couple of deuterium atoms and then let them blast out the back of the vehicle! “So fusion remains a tantalizing promise for the future. ... If we ever do achieve such propulsion, we’ll be able to move with some ease out from our little 8,000-mile-diameter Solar System. All of the 9 planets, 32 moons and 1600 known asteroids will come within reach of our vehicles. And, indeed, if we could achieve high efficiencies in a fusion propulsion process, we could talk of eventual relativistic velocities, of time compression, and of travel to the nearest stars.” (Text)
Total $21.35-billion investment “in the development and demonstration of a national manned lunar landing capability” was detailed by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “At the time of its establishment, the national goal of a manned lunar landing and return in this decade represented the most difficult technological endeavor ever to challenge the American nation. During this period, senior NASA officials in testimony before the Congress estimated the cost ... at between $20 and $40 billion.” Estimate was refined to approximately $19.5 billion in March 1964, with assumption “there would be a timely initiation of a follow-on program which would bear a portion of the relatively fixed cost required to develop and sustain this national capability.” Estimates then and annual reassessments had reflected total program cost, including cost of initial lunar landing. Lunar objective “was not simply an end in itself but, rather, provided the focus for the effort to attain space supremacy for whatever the national interest required.” In March 1966 NASA had furnished estimate of $22,718 billion based on assumption that there would not be timely initiation of follow-on program. In April 1969 NASA furnished estimate of $23,877 billion, which would still be valid if negative assumption had materialized. “But with the success of Apollo 11, we have the opportunity to utilize this demonstrated capability in a more meaningful way. By improving payloads and modifying spacecraft to increase lunar surface systems, we can enhance significantly the return of scientific data from both lunar orbit and the lunar surface.” NASA had met national commitment “at a cost nearer the lower end of the range of estimates” despite “unpredictable substantial inflationary conditions.” Actual cost accrued through July 31, 1969, was $21.35 billion, of which $2 billion was value of flight hardware available for future flights. Capital assets included were approximately $2.8 billion and were “of continuing national value.” Apollo was “triumph in management as well as in technology and engineering which united government, industry and universities in a common peaceful undertaking. At least one-half million people worked on the manned lunar landing program . . . during the eight years from its announcement to its initial success.” (Text)
