faa Deputy Administrator David D. Thomas announced his resignation and retirement, effective Feb. 15. He had joined faa as air traffic controller in 1938 and had worked his way up to second-ranking job in agency. Following resignation of Gen. William F. McKee in 1968, Thomas had served as acting faa administrator for eight months. (NYT, 1/19/70,71; UPl, WPost, 1/20/70, A12)
Technical progress made through space program was described by Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in commencement address at Whitworth College in Spokane, Washington: Chrysler Corp. was using computer-controlled equipment derived from Apollo checkout equipment to test distributors in its automobile ignition systems. U.S. Bureau of Public Roads had found automotive safety device that originated in Apollo spacecraft couches was trimming 97-km-per-hr (60-mph) impact to equivalent of 8 km per hr (5 mph) when used in conjunction with special highway guardrails. Nationwide insurance company had announced collision premium reductions of 20% for cars equipped with device. (Text) May 25:	Dedication ceremonies were held at Goddard Park in Auburn, Mass., memorial built by Auburn Rotary Club to honor late rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard. Park contained replica of first liquid-fuel rocket invented by Dr. Goddard and Polaris rocket donated by USN. (CR, 6/3/70, E5170)
TV commentator Walter Cronkite was named by Boston Museum, Boston, Mass., as 1970 recipient of Bradford Washburn Award for his “superlative presentation” of U.S. space program. Gold medal and $5000 honorarium were awarded annually in spring for “outstanding contribution toward public understanding of science, appreciation of its fascination, and the vital role it plays in all our lives.” (upi, NYT, 1/16/70)
NASA held series of three Apollo 13 post-recovery press conferences at msc hosted by NASA Administrator, manned space flight officials,' and technical specialists. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said although mission “must be recorded as a failure, there’s never been a more prideful moment in the space program.” Most impressive aspect of mission was “tremendous effectiveness in team work of our ground support operation .... From every state . . . we’ve had people. . . working to backstop the many different system decisions that had to be systematically and methodically faced up to and made. . . . The Flight Operations Directors . . . certainly demonstrated that flight controllers can operate under these very adverse conditions. They’ve been able to do things in a far shorter period of time than we’d ever thought possible be-1 fore.”	’ Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said basic procedures used for every phase of mission were predetermined. “For example, the burn made behind the moon . . . was a standard emergency burn that would be used in case the service propulsion system would not work on a normal lunar mission going into lunar orbit. Each one of these steps had been predetermined and also simulated. But putting them all together into a sequence of steps . . . and working out some of the detailed procedures on how to save power and how to save batteries; how to save water; those things were determined during the course of the flight, both by the men ... on the ground and by the astronauts.” (Transcript)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, sent memorandum to NASA officials on NASA’s receipt of President’s Safety' Award for reduction of injuries to NASA employees for past three years: “NASA has earned this award in the face of the ever present and peculiar hazards that are associated with the pioneer research operations of our aeronautical and space programs. ... Safety is reflected in the successes that we.. .have realized in our ventures in space. It is gratifying to realize that this award was based on achievements during the period of preparation for and completion of our first moon landings.” (NASA Hq WB, 8/31/70)
In profile of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., new OST Director and Science Adviser to President, New York Times said Dr. David’s goal was “to combine science and technology with the human factor in society.” Associate had said Dr. David was skeptical of value of manned space program and felt space program should be pushed in “very studied fashion.” (NYT, 9/15/70,26)
Electronics Research Center, Cambridge, Mass., was officially closed as NASA installation. Transfer to dot as Transportation Systems Center, announced by President Nixon March 25, would be completed July 1. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, had announced decision Dec. 29, 1969, to close erc because “NASA could not afford to continue to invest broadly in electronics research” in face of budget reductions. Center had opened Sept. 1, 1964. In December 1969 it had 850 employees engaged in advanced research in electronics for aeronautics and space, under Director James C. Elms. Six buildings were in final phases of construction. (NASA Steering Group, Rpt on Closing of NASA ERC, 10/1/70; PD, 3/30/70,446; NASA Release 69-171)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, delivered commencement address at Univ. of New Brunswick in Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada:<l.. .the Space Age, being only a decade old, has not (yet had time to develop a professional university curricula. Thus, we have not been able to hire graduates specifically trained in space and astronautical engineering. . . . This parallels the experience we had when solid-state electronics replaced vacuum tubes, and we had to move ahead by retraining people. ... It was also true at the start of the nuclear age, when we had to develop new nuclear power plants without the benefit of professionally trained graduates. The message for you here is that all of these programs were successful because the primary discipline that universities teach is intellectual discipline itself.” (Text)
Julian M. West, former MSC Special Assistant for Long Range Planning, was sworn in as consultant to Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. George M. Low. West would advise on potential space and aeronautics development programs. (NASA Release 70-164)
Dr. Eli L. Whitely, President of U.S. Congressional Medal of Honor Society, presented NASA with plaque honoring agency for “making America first in space.” Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, accepted plaque on behalf of NASA and other organizations that had contributed to space program. (NASA Release 70-87; Citation)
NASA announced plans to place White Sands, N. Mex., Test Facility on standby status in June 1971 because of reduced FY 1971 budget requests and reduction of Apollo program work. Move could reduce employment from 641 to caretaker force of 50 following completion of 1970-1971 tests of Apollo lm and Skylab program CMS and sms. Facility would be kept in condition for resumption of work in 60-90 days. In announcing decision Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said, “The NASA facilities at White Sands are unique and valuable. We plan to consider them carefully for possible use in future NASA programs, and to undertake a survey of possible uses by other government agencies.” (NASA Release 70-31)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received British Interplanetary Society awards commemorating man’s first lunar landing at special meeting of Society in London. Awards were silver replica of Apollo 11LM presented to NASA and gold medals for Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (Spaceflight, 5/70, 191)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, former msfc Director, was sworn in as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. (Off NASA Dep Assoc Admin)
World’s first female aquanaut team received special awards from Walter J. Hickel, Secretary of the Interior, during Washington, D.C., ceremony. Later Richard H. Sprince of NASA, who was project manager for team, said test of women’s ability to function in hostile environment was one reason NASA had joined Tektite program. Asked if NASA would consider bringing women into astronaut program, Sprince said, “We’ve got to start looking in that direction.” (AP, B Sun, 7/28/70, A3)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
Employee Assistance Center at NASA Hq. had mailed resumes of available former nasa employees to 600 prospective employers in effort to place about 200 personnel affected by budget cutbacks, NASA reported. Engineering was largest single category of jobs eliminated by reduction in force. Administrative positions made up second largest category, (nasa Release 70-168)
George A. Derbyshire, Executive Secretary of nas-nrc Space Science Board, died in Bethesda, Md., at age 52. He had been responsible for more than 20 scientific reports on lunar programs, space goals, and physics goals, and had directed scientific conferences on space program and planetary exploration. (WPost, 9/18/70, CIO)
In letter to Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, Elmer B. Staats, U.S. Comptroller General, recommended that award of ATS-f and ATS-G contract to General Electric Co. be reconsidered because of ambiguity in NASA’s instruction to competitors and one-week extension granted GE to submit its revised proposal. “It is our [gao’s] opinion that the established award selection procedures were not followed and that the procedures which were followed were defective.” Within two hours of receipt of GAO recommendation, Dr. Paine issued statement: “On April 9 I requested the GAO to conduct a review of the events leading to the selection of the General Electric Co. rather than the Fairchild Hiller Corp. to build two Applications Technology Satellites. “The General Accounting Office has reported to me that the Fairchild Hiller Corp. may not have been accorded an equal opportunity to submit a winning bid because of a one-week extension granted to General Electric who turned in the lower bid. “At the time the award was made, this time disparity was not known to the selecting officials. “NASA will therefore reopen the bidding to Fairchild Hiller and General Electric in strict accordance with our procurement regulations.” (CR, 7/9/70, SI0975-7; NASA Release 70-119; Text) Daniel J. Fink, Vice President and General Manager of General Electric Co. Space Div., issued statement in Washington, D.C., and Philadelphia, Pa. Conclusion of gao report “seems to rest on the single detail that Fairchild’s proposal was submitted one week earlier than ours. .. .both parties had the opportunity to inform NASA when they could submit their proposal and both parties responded accordingly. The Fairchild implication that this difference in time could have been used unfairly by General Electric by our learning our competitor’s price and changing ours is a shocking allegation. No such ‘leak’ occurred, and the gao report specifically states that there is no evidence to support that allegation.” Fink said facts were “that both parties competed hard for this important space program which has the potential of contributing greatly to our well being in this country and in several foreign countries where this communications satellite will be used.” (Text)
Assistant Under Secretary of State for Public Affairs and former astronaut Michael Collins addressed meeting of Foreign Service Wives Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “By the year 2000 or 2100, people will look back on the 1970s and find it incredible that cancellation of the space program was proposed______It is inevitable there will be colonization of other planets, despite the risks.” Collins told group he hadn’t been sure oi success of first manned lunar landing until he and colleagues were safely enroute home; “that was the first time I felt any certainty about it. ’ (W Star, 4/28/70, B7)
U.S. space program was “in a kind of limbo, waiting, really, to be reborn and reconstituted,” William Leavitt said in Air Force and . Space Digest. As Apollo stretched out, “NASA space planners are already working toward the first launch in 1972 of Skylab, which is really the unheralded beginning of the long-awaited US manned space-station program.” (AF/SD, 7/70,60-4)
NASA announced it had installed remote terminal for high-speed computer service in offices of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. recon (remote console) system—linked to computer at NASA Scientific and Technical Information Facility in College Park, Md.—would permit Committee members to make literature search of NASA’s worldwide collection of scientific and technical documents. Pilot project initiated by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Committee Chairman, would evaluate equipment over several months. Miller said it was first time agency of Executive Branch had been tied directly by computer to a committee of Congress. (NASA Releases 70-75, 68118)
NASA budget cutbacks would not substantially affect jpl, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press following conference with jpl leadership teams in Pasadena, Calif. “Our cutbacks will fall most heavily upon the manned space flight program.” Some 16 000 aerospace employees would be cut from Governmental payroll throughout California, Dr. Paine said. (Pottage, Glendale Ledger, 2/5/70)
AP quoted Soviet geophysicist Sergey Timofeyev as saying Europe had entered period of colder summers and winters because moon was closer to earth than usual. Situation created “atmosphere tide” that disturbed normal movements of warm and cool air. (NYT, 5/20/ 70) Among 32 NASA officials and scientists attending meeting were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Armstrong received tumultuous welcome from predominantly Russian audience, AP reported. During question-and-answer period before his report, Armstrong said that when he viewed earth from moon, “I thought it was impossible that a little island like that in the sky could have so many problems on it.” He had found it “more pleasant on the moon than on earth as far as gravity is concerned.” In report on experiences on moon, Armstrong said, “Since the sky is black the impression is somewhat like being on a sandy athletic field at night that is very well illuminated with flood lights.” Further improvement in mobility of pressure garments would improve ability of astronauts to carry out lunar experiments. At later session when Armstrong attended as observer, guards had difficulty restraining cheers of audience, which included 800 Soviet delegates and 420 representatives of 30 countries. AP said it was “dramatic and unusual” tribute to foreign visitors in U.S.S.R. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL scientist, reported to COSPAR meeting on study and comparison of 60 Surveyor photos taken in April 1967 and 20 Apollo 12 photos that showed moon’s extreme stillness. Photos indicated only one small pebble had moved during 31 mos at Surveyor III site. Rate of meteoroid impact or surface movement was low in area of Ocean of Storms where Apollo 12 and Surveyor III had landed. Camera and several portions of Surveyor spacecraft had coating of One dust stirred from lunar surface as Apollo 12 LM descended nearby. Only other change observed in Surveyor was that its white paint had turned to tan, “partly due to deposition of material on the spacecraft.” nas-nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1969: “Popular interest in the space program, which reached a high point with the first successful lunar landing, has diminished somewhat. Furthermore, a reassessment of national priorities has resulted in reduced financial support for space research and technology during the past year, and the support will probably be even more limited this year and next. It is our intention, despite these limitations, to try to maintain a reasonably balanced program, with continuing effort in all areas of space research in which we are currently engaged and to support mutually advantageous international cooperation in space research wherever possible.” (Text) Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov told meeting U.S.S.R. would launch two French sret earth resources satellites as part of 1966 French-Soviet agreement on scientific cooperation. French Roseau (Radio Observation par Satellite Excentrique a Automatisme Unique) program, with multisatellite payload to be launched in 1971-1972, had been postponed because of budgetary restrictions and sret (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique) had been retained. Joint French-Soviet space program also included plans for emplacement of French laser reflector on lunar surface by Soviet Luna spacecraft; stero, launching of French experiments for measurement of solar radio emission; and arcade, study of solar energy particles with French and Soviet equipment on board Soviet spacecraft. (NASA Release 70-73; upi. NYT, 5/24/70; Reuters, NY News, 5/24/70; AP, NYT, 5/26/70, 31; Reuters, B Sun, 5/26/70; AP, W Star, 5/27/70, All; SBD, 5/27/70, 125; jpl, Release 554)
Dr. Charles H. Townes, Nobel Prize winning Univ. of California physicist and member of NAS Council, was appointed Chairman of NAS-NRC Space Science Board. Dr. Townes had headed President Nixon’s task force to make recommendations on national space program in 1969. (NAS PIO; NAS-NRC-NAE News Rpt, 3/70; A&A 68)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, spoke during 10-day “Emphasis Space” program at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. on “very basic question” of why U.S. should be spending “all of this money out in space when we have so many problems here on earth.” He said answer was “indeed that human values have the highest priority. I would submit that the American space program is indeed a program that has tremendous human values. ... we in the space agency who are effecting technical change feel that history shows that the interaction between technical change and social change is extremely close. We believe that the activities that we are carrying out will have a tremendous impact on the way our children and our children’s children will live. We are in the business of creating new wealth and new power that can be used by all men.” Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said that lunar flights were “enhancing man’s knowledge of the environment in which he lives. .. .space has proven to date that it is something that man can use that is of benefit to man. . . . The question is do you want it used.” Space program was at point “where it is up to the people to decide through the government what uses we will put space to.” (Neb Wes Univ’s New Dimensions, 9/70; AP, San Diego Union, 5/3/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, reviewed results of Apollo 13 accident investigations and announced postponement of Apollo 14 mission to Jan. 31, in testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. LaRC Director Edgar M. Cort-right, Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, summarized prepared statement before Committee. Recommendations of Apollo 13 Review Board [see June 15] would be implemented before Apollo 14 was approved for launch, Dr. Paine said, csm systems would be modified to eliminate potential combustion hazards in high-pressure oxygen. Unsealed f&n motors would be removed from oxygen tanks and additional oxygen tank would be added to Apollo 14 CSM. Electrical wiring within high-pressure oxygen systems would be limited to stainless-steel-sheathed wires, and Teflon, aluminum, and other potentially reactive materials would be used as little as possible and kept away from possible ignition sources. Spacecraft and Mission Control warning systems would be modified to provide more immediate and visible warnings of system anomalies. MSC was reviewing spacecraft emergency equipment and procedures and use of csms and LMs in “lifeboat” modes. ossa, OMSF, and oart had been directed to apply Review Board recommendations throughout NASA and submit report on assessment and actions taken or proposed by Aug. 25. Lessons of Apollo 13 would be disseminated throughout industry and technical community. Dr. Paine had forwarded copy of Review Board report to Soviet Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh “so that lessons which might be learned from our accident can be applied to prevent a similar hazard to Soviet Cosmonauts.” Aerospace Safety Research and Data Institute at LeRC would conduct additional research on materials compatibility, ignition, and combustion at various g levels and on characteristics of supercritical fluids, expanding its review of oxygen handling in aerospace programs. Research would “be of direct long-term benefit to NASA in. . .future programs, and will help other sectors of the economy.” Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel would review NASA management processes in implementing Review Board recommendations and Apollo 13 Review Board would reconvene later in year. Postponement of Apollo 14 mission would move Apollo 15 launch date to July or August 1971, Dr. Paine testified. It was too early to detail costs and budgetary impact of modifications and program changes necessitated by Apollo 13 accident but best current estimate would be “in the range of $10 to $15 million of increased costs, which we plan to handle within our total Apollo budget.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers presented specific plans for reassessing all Apollo spacecraft subsystems. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, outlined actions planned to carry out Review Board recommendations. (Transcript)
NASA announced it would initiate studies and analyses of satellite and other data on Gulf Coast area in FY 1971 at mtf. In Washington, D.C., Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said activities would use data from Earth Resources Technology Satellites A and B, Apollo manned flights, and aircraft operations. Study would be supported by mtf laboratory and Slidell, La., computer facility in line with earlier NASA invitation to other Government agencies to collocate study and analysis activities at mtf. (NASA Release 70-98)
Soviet Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev (right) and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov (center right), who established a manned-flight endurance record in their 18-day Soyuz IX mission June 2-19, were welcomed at Washington National Airport by Astronauts Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left), and Neil A. Armstrong, Cosmonauts would tour U.S. gineers unemployed “and this number could easily double next year.1’ Major concern was “that in the future a new shortage of scientists and engineers will arise, based on the growing disenchantment with the unstable labor market for such skills,” Implications were clear: “We are losing the capability to react to a national crisis, should the need arise; we are losing the capability to undertake an Apollo-like adventure, should we in the future desire to do so; and we are losing a capability that today provides an inflow of dollars that exceeds the net positive balance or payments.” Cost of U.S. space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—decrease of $2.5 billion since 1966. In terms of Federal budget, $3.4 billion represented 1.7% or $17 for every person in U.S. “At the same time we are spending $400 per person for our domestic programs. ... In fact, this year’s increase in our expenditures for domestic programs was more than twice the NASA budget." Cancellation of entire space program would not significantly affect Federal spending on domestic programs. “But without the space program, without the capabilities it represents, what would become of the ‘scientific and technological lead’ this generation of Americans gave so much of themselves and their resources to achieve?” (Text)
Lunar Science Institute near MSC in Houston, Tex., was dedicated at ceremonies attended by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, other nasa officials, and some 70 space scientists who had gathered early for Jan. 5 opening of Apollo 11 Lunar Science Conference at MSC. Dr. Paine said, “This is the institution to help us bring all the expertise we need together to solve the riddles of the moon.” LSI, created by 49-university Universities Space Research Assn., had one-year contract with NASA, renewable annually. Facilities would be open to all scientists, including those from Iron Curtain countries. Dr. William W. Rubey, Univ. of California and Rice Univ. geologist, would be Director. (HPost, 1/5/70)
Nixon Administration was finding “no takers” in its efforts to replace Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator, New York Times said. Lack of NASA Administrator seemed “as much a reflection of the low level of attention that space commands among White House priorities as it is an indication of the unavailability of candidates.” Since Dr. Paine’s Sept. 15 retirement, U.S.S.R. had successfully launched 33 space payloads. (Lyons, NYT, 12/13/70, 50)
Agreement to ensure that space transportation system (STS) would be of maximum utility to both NASA and DOD was signed in Washington, D.C., by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. STS was to provide U.S. with “economical capability for delivering payloads of men, equipment, supplies, and other spacecraft to and from space by reducing operating costs an order of magnitude below those of present systems.” Program would include international participation and use. NASA would manage STS development, with project generally unclassified. STS would consist of “earth-to-orbit space shuttle.” Agreement established nasa-usaf sts Committee to conduct continuing review of STS program and recommend steps to achieve “system that meets DOD and NASA requirements.” Recommendations would include, but not be limited to, “development and operational aspects, technology status and needs, resource considerations, and interagency relationships.” (Text)
The Economist commented on resignation of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, “just at a time when the governments of western Europe are considering whether to throw what passes for their space.programmes, in with Nasa’s.” European governments “scare easily and do not co-operate easily with each other, let alone with the Americans, whom they subconsciously suspect of always having the technical emasculation of Europe in mind. Dr. Paine, placid, patient and unusually sensitive—for a Washington man—to other people’s susceptibilities, handled them as gently as nervous horses. A successor who is less imaginative, or more inclined to wear his emotions on his sleeve, will undo much of this work. This will not do much harm to the American space programme, but for Europe to miss this chance would be tragic.” (Economist, 8/1/70, 43-4)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received President’s Safety Award on behalf of NASA in White House ceremony. Award recognized Federal Executive departments and agencies which best safeguarded lives and health of Employees. Other 1970 winners were USAF and Civil Service Commission. (NASA Hq WB, 7/13/70, 2)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
In message read at opening of Warsaw exhibit of Apollo 11 lunar landing materials, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said, “It is our sincere hope and belief that Poland, with its rich scientific heritage, will play an important role in these [space] ventures.” (C Trib, 2/20/70)
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced intention to nominate Dr. T. Keith Glennan, former NASA Administrator, to be U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency with rank of Ambassador. Dr. Glennan would replace Henry DeWolf Smyth, who had resigned. Dr. Glennan had served as mfcmber of Atomic Energy Commission from 1950 to 1952, Nomination was submitted to Senate June 1. (PD, 6/1/70,703; 6/8/70, 734)
Awards ceremony to observe successful completion of more than four years of Saturn V launch vehicle test firings was held at mtf. mtf employees, contractors, and groups of Government workers received special plaques and awards. Guests included local, state government, and NASA officials. Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., presented flag flown around moon on board Apollo 10 to mtf employees to express Apollo astronauts’ gratitude, as facility marked last day of space operations, (msfc Release 70-229)
Atlanta Constitution editorial commented on resignation of Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator: “Dr. Thomas O. Paine didn’t ride the Apollo spaceships. But he will be remembered in the history of space exploration as the man who guided America’s space agency through its great adventure that ended in a moon landing.” Dr. Paine had “served his country well and deserves its thanks.” (Atlanta Constitution, 7/31/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at Univ. of Colorado press conference in Denver that Apollo 14 could have been pushed through for 1970 launch. “But we’re still doing the undone, the untried, every time we venture into space—and we’re not prisoners of a time program.” NASA had decided to take extra month with less strain on all concerned. “There is much to be changed because of the lessons learned from Apollo 13.” (Lindberg, DPost, 7/16/70)
President Nixon received 45-min briefing by NASA officials at GSFC on problems of Apollo 13 mission. Dr. John F. Clark, GSFC Director, said President was deeply concerned about mission’s difficulties. Later President entertained Danish Prime Minister Hilmar Bauns-gaard at White House dinner. President said: “I think tonight of three men ... in outer space coming around the moon . . . . I do know that they have the spirit of the Vikings. They are men of adventure. They are men of courage. Back home—I talked to the wives of two of the men and the mother of the one who is not married—they have women, who like the wives and the mothers of the Vikings of old waited at home with faith that their men would come back.” President, at his request, was informed during dinner of success of Apollo 13 maneuver which put spacecraft on homeward course. (PD, 4/20/70, 538; Lyons, NYT, 4/15/70, 1; Beale, W Star, 4/15/70, FI)
NASA announced appointment of Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs Robert F. Allnutt as Assistant to Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and as member of Apollo 13 Accident Review Board. Allnutt would be succeeded by H. Dale Grubb, President’s Special Assistant for Legislative Affairs. (NASA Release 70-60)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published The National Space Program—Present and Future, compilation of papers prepared for Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Papers represented attitudes of Government, aerospace industry, and academic community on objectives of national space program during next decade and funding level needed to support program. Statements had been prepared for hearings, originally scheduled for September and October 1970, that had been canceled because of press of legislative business and ‘‘uncertain status of the NASA appropriation measure” for FY 1971 because of Presidential veto. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, had urged that “new initiatives proposed for the 1970s represent not only a space program that will maintain our Nation’s leadership, but also an opportunity to utilize resources which will otherwise remain idle or grossly underemployed. In this sense the ‘real cost’ to the society of NASA’s programs for the 1970s is very low and the cost-benefit of these programs correspondingly high.” Dr. Thomas O. Paine, Vice president and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former NASA Administrator, said in statement that U.S.-U.S.S.R. discussion on common spacecraft docking had been “excellent step forward” in space programming. “The United States, Western Europe, Australia, Canada, and Japan should also work more closely together in the forefront of space science and technology, eliminating duplicative projects and obsolescent developments for purely nationalistic purposes. Space activities are inherently global; they challenge us to develop new international institutions as advanced as our technologies. Attractive new international arrangements should also be established for the developing nations to help them take full advantage for new application opportunities.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, urged vigorous space program with space shuttle as “cornerstone.” Answers to question “Why go to the moon?” would not be found in budget books and cost-benefit analyses but “in the hearts and minds of men, who, responding to a mystical, metaphysical imperative, join hands and reach out to the stars.” Committee found “clear consensus. . .that a vigorous aeronautics and space effort is in the National interest, since it sets the pace for the country’s technological advancement. There is also general agreement that a revitalized space program, given strong direction and adequate funding, is needed for the United States to retain its technological preeminence in the decades ahead.” (Text)
NASA held press briefing on preliminary results of Uhu-ru (Explorer XLII) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12). Mrs. Marjorie R. Townsend, sas-a Project Manager at gsfc, said launch went smoothly and only few minor anomalies had occurred so far: “We are running at higher temperatures than we anticipated seeing at specific angles with respect to the sun. . . .Because of this it took us longer to despin than we had anticipated. The despin dumps a lot of excess [heat] into the spacecraft so we had to turn it on for a while and then turn it off. . .until we did get it into nominal operation. As of this morning sas-a is working perfectly.” (Transcript)
NASA officials attended opening of art exhibit by Robert Rauschenberg at Fendrick Gallery in Washington, D.C. Exhibit included 25 lithographs from “Stoned Moon” series. Rauschenberg had been one of artists invited by NASA to witness Apollo 11 launch and convey impressions of first lunar landing mission. (Richard, W Post, 11/30/70, Dl ; Fendrick Gallery)
NASA announced appointment of members of Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright: Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong; Robert F. Allnutt, Assistant to NASA Administrator; Dr. John F. Clark, GSFC Director; B/G Walter R. Hedrick (usaf), Director of Space, DCS/R&D; Vincent L. Johnson, OSSA Deputy Associate Administrator (Engineering); Milton Klein, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office; and Dr. Hans Mark, ARC Director. (Off NASA Administrator; Wilford, NYT, 4/22/70,27)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences conducted hearing on S.R. 49, providing for Congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum at Roswell, N. Mex., as fitting memorial to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified: “Americans can ill afford to ignore the contributions of Robert H. Goddard in the history of the coming of the space age. Young Americans need to appreciate that what appear as unsoluble problems today are not new to man’s experience. Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s rocket artifacts and his lifelong labors should be an inspiration to each generation of youth as they grapple with their concerns of their day and their dreams of a better world of their tomorrows in a dynamic universe. This nation cannot afford not to have Robert H. Goddards in the future.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, testified: “It seems very important that we and our children after us never lose awareness of what key individuals such as Robert Goddard provided to a fuller understanding of the progress of mankind. He, like Konstantine Tsiolkovsky of Russia and Hermann Oberth of Germany, correctly theorized on the use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel with liquid oxygen for high-energy thrust. Based upon the liquid-hydrogen work at the Lewis Research Center, NASA developed the upper stages for the Saturn V which enabled us to achieve the Apollo missions to the moon.” Hearing took place on 44th anniversary of first successful launching of liquid-fuel rocket by Dr. Goddard. (Testimony; CR, 3/17/70, S3828-30; Huntsville News, 3/17/70)
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Dr. Raymond L.	Bisplinghoff, Dean of MIT School of Engineering, as NSF Deputy Director. Dr. Bisplinghoff had been NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, 1963-1965, and Special Assistant to NASA Administrator, 1965-1966. (PD, 8/17/70, 1068)
Failure of Government to define priorities in science and technology and stay with them was one cause of unemployment among scientists and engineers in U.S., Richard S. Lewis said in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Cutback in civilian space program was prime example: “The consequences of this retrenchment in the dissipation of human resources could hardly be more pronounced than if the Nixon Administration was phasing out space exploration—which it is not.” (Bull of Atomic Scientists, 4/70, 28-9)
Science article commented oh suggestions of President’s Science Advisory Committee panel that NASA devote more time to biomedical research: “There appear to be practical limits other than the budgetary ones on the expansion of basic studies in the manned space program. It will be a long time before astronauts on missions operate in conditions anything like those of the laboratory.” msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, and his staff “have been responsible for establishing medical protocols for the missions, in a way that balances the need for biomedical data with operational demands and the willingness and ability of the astronauts to cooperate. Some medical procedures are tedious, unpleasant, and even humiliating, and when the work load on astronauts is heavy, data gathering has to be limited. For this reason in part, then, tension between biomedical insiders and outsiders is likely to continue. At the same time the interests of the two groups are nearer to converging than ever before.” (Walsh, Science, 3/13/70, 1469-71)
Wall Street Journal editorial on Apollo program cutback: “Although the Soviet Union has never said so, it appears that its officials decided some time ago that their [space] program was too much of a drain on resources and had to be slowed. At a time when the U.S. Government’s budget is sinking deeper into the red, it’s certainly reasonable that this nation too should start getting a grip on its priorities.” (WSJ, 9/9/70)
upi reported in Washington Post that NASA report not yet made public acknowledged General Electric Co. was permitted to submit bid for controversial $50-million ATS-F and ATS-G contract one week later than the deadline its competitor Fairchild Hiller Corp. was required to meet. NASA denied knowledge of any leak to GE of Fairchild Hiller’s design and price. Report said Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had been told before he announced award of contract to GE on April 8 that both companies had submitted bids on same date —March 6. Actually, UPI said, Fairchild Hiller proposal had been submitted Feb. 27—NASA deadline—and copies were circulated among NASA personnel before GE proposal was submitted March 6. (Cassels, UPI, WPost, 6/13/70, E8)
Nixon Administration had decided against big space program for 1970s, Thomas O’Toole wrote in Washington Post. There would be “no set goal for landing men on Mars, no plan to colonize the moon and no sudden push to orbit a permanent manned space station above the earth in the next five years.” While space program would “not be allowed to shrink much” in 1970, Administration would ask Congress for no more than $3.7 billion for space in FY 1971, “the lowest request for space funds in almost a decade.” Low funding level meant space spending would not rise above $4 billion annually for at least several years and new programs would not be started in near future. (WPost, 1/11/70, Al)
Senate received President Nixon’s nomination of Col. James A. McDivitt (usaf), Apollo 9 astronaut and Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager at msc, to be brigadier general. (CR, 12/14/70, S20137)
Washington Post editorial commented on launch of Project Tektite II: “As the astronauts get ready to soar to the heights, it is worth mentioning that a group of aquanauts have sunk to the bottoms—in this case, the crew of Tektite II.... The drama of undersea exploration is considerably less than probes into outer space; but, in many ways, the world on the floor of the sea is more mysterious, more demanding—and potentially richer in what it offers mankind—than anything on the craterscape of the moon.” (WPost, 4/10/70, A18) April 11-17: NASA’s Apollo 13 (AS-508)—carrying three-man crew, LM-7 Aquarius and CSM-I090dyssey—was launched on lunar landing mission, but 56 hrs into flight toward moon mission was aborted because of SM oxygen tank rupture. In most serious inflight situation experienced in manned space program, crew foljowed lm “lifeboat” emergency plan, transferring to lm and using its systems and supplies to swing around moon and back to earth on fastest feasible course. Emergency procedures were used to make electrical power, water, and oxygen last to end of journey. Crew returned to CM and jettisoned lm before reentry and splashed down safely in Pacific April 17. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 185.5-km (115.3-mi) apogee and 181.5-km (112.8-mi) perigee. During 2nd-stage boost S-II center engine cut off 132 secs early and remaining four engines burned 34 secs longer than predicted. Space vehicle velocity after boost was 68 m per sec (223 fps) lower than planned, causing S-IVB orbital insertion burn to be 9 secs longer than predicted, but sufficient propellants remained for translunar insertion. Onboard TV was initiated at 1:35 GET for 5 1/2 min. Second S-IVB burn, on schedule at 2:41 get, injected spacecraft on translunar trajectory. csm separated from S-IVB and lm Aquarius. Onboard TV initiated after separation for 72 min clearly showed csm “hard-docking” with lm, ejection of csm/lm from S-IVB/IU at 4:01 get, S-IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) evasive maneuver, and spacecraft exterior and interior. First S-IVB APS burn, lasting 217 secs beginning at 6:00 GET, aimed stage for lunar target point so accurately that second burn was not required. S-IVB/IU hit lunar surface at 77:57 GET (8:10 pm est April 14) at 259 m per sec (8465 fps) and energy equivalent to 11.5 tons of tnt at 2.4° south latitude and 27.9° west longitude— 137.1 km (85.2 mi) from Apollo 12 seismometer that detected impact. Seismic signal for S-IVB/IU was similar to signal from Apollo 12 lm Intrepid that had impacted moon Nov. 20, 1969, but was 20-30 times larger and lasted 3 hrs 20 mins—four times longer. Signal was so large that ground command had to reduce seismometer gain to keep recording on scale. Suprathermal ion detector experiment (side) deployed by Apollo 12 crew recorded jump in the number of ion counts after S-IVB/IU impact. Instrument, in lunar shadow, recorded no ions at time of impact; count increased from few ions 22 secs after impact to 250 and up to 2500 before decreasing to few ions and back to none. Scientists speculated ionization had been produced by 6300 K to 10 300 K (6000°C to 10 000°C) temperatures generated by impact or that particles that reached up to 60 km (37 mi) had been ionized by sunlight. Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse correction No. 1 (MCC-1) was not necessary. MCC-2, for 3.4 secs at 30:14 get, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 114.9 km (71.4 mi). MCC-3 was not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 49 min, beginning at 30:03 GET, including dumping waste water from spacecraft fuel cells with moon visible in background. While joking with Mission Control, Swigert suddenly remembered that he had failed to file his Federal income tax return, but was assured that he could be granted an extension. “Hey, we’ve got a problem here,” Swigert told ground controllers. “This is Houston, say again please.” “Houston, we’ve had a problem,” Lovell replied. And Haise reported “a pretty large bang associated with the caution and warning. A few minutes later crew reported spacecraft was venting something—later determined to be oxygen—out into space. Astronauts could see blizzard of particles flying out of sm, presumably from ruptured tank. Despite desperate efforts improvised on board and suggested by Mission Control, nothing seemed to halt drop in oxygen pressure. Spacecraft dipped repeatedly, apparently because of venting gas. By 57:24 get, Mission Control reported tank No. 2 pressure was “slowly going to zero and we’re starting to think about the lm lifeboat.” Swigert replied, “Yes, that’s something we’re thinking about, too. We’ve been talking it over. ...” Decision was made to abort mission. Astronauts hurriedly had to salvage enough oxygen to supply CM during reentry and keep gyros operating until lm navigation equipment could be powered up. With only minutes of power remaining, crew fed oxygen into reserve tank and hooked up emergency batteries to csm navigation gyros until lm was powered up. Crew activated lm, powered down csm, and used lm systems for power and life support. Astronauts remained calm as they wrestled with procedures to stabilize spacecraft and stretch consumables. All information on April l !-17: Officials conferred at the flight directors' consote in the MSC Mission Operations Control Room as Apollo 13 astronauts attempted to bring (heir crippled spacecraft safely back to earth. Dr. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, leans an elbow on the console at far left. Circling to the right in front of him are Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager fames A. McDivitl; Deputy Director of Flight Operations Howard W. Tindall, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director at NASA Headquarters; and Dr, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations. Apollo Mission Director Chester M, Tee stands in front of Dr. Kraft. Sealed at the console (center, left to right) are Flight Directors Gera id D. Griffin and Glynn S. Lunney. Behind the console (left to right) are Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin and Vance D. Brand. Flight Dynamics Officer Philip C. Shaffer, Retro Officer fohn S. Llewellyn, Flight Dynamics Officer Charles F. Dreferich, and Lawrence S. Can/u, guidance navigation and control engineer at MSC. mission—including details of accident and emergency procedures— were made public immediately as data were received, Public’s apparent boredom at beginning of mission was transformed into deep concern for astronauts’ safety. Messages and offers of aid were sent to U.S, from world leaders and prayers were offered by religious leaders on every continent. MCC-4 was conducted with lm’s descent propulsion system (dps) at 61:30 GET, placing Apolio 13 on free-return trajectory around moon on which CM Otfyssey would splash down in Indian Ocean at 152:00 GET. Both lm guidance systems were powered up and primary system used for 263.4-sec dps burn at 79:28 get as spacecraft swung out from behind moon, two hours after closest approach. Bum produced 262-m-per-sec (860 fps) differential velocity, shortened predicted return time to 143:53 GET, and moved predicted landing point to mid-Pacific. After maneuver, passive thermal control was established and lm was powered down to conserve consumables. “Aquarius has really been quite a winner,” Haise said to Mission Control about three hours later. “When this flight’s all over we’li really be able to figure out what a LM can do.” During remainder of transearth coast crew continued emergency procedures to deal with shortage of water to cool LM electronic systems, decreasing temperatures in both cabins, and buildup of carbon dioxide in lm. Fearing that CM instruments needed for reentry might freeze, crew kept spacecraft in passive thermal control—“barbecue mode” of rotation to let sun uniformly heat all sides, Astronauts met cooling water shortage by filling every plastic bag they could with water from CM and carrying it to lm. Shortage of air-cleaning lithium hydroxide in LM was met by rigging combination of cm and lm cartridges; following instructions worked out on ground, crew built adapter and ran lunar spacesuit air hoses from LM fans through tunnel to connect to cm air-scrubbing canisters. Transmission of health data was eliminated and communications held to minimum to conserve electricity. Crew tried to keep warm by wearing boots carried for walking on moon, sleeping in narrow tunnel between LM and CSM that seemed warmer, and wearing extra clothing. Apr// 75-/7; MCC-5 at 105:19 get, by 15-sec LM DPS burn, decreased velocity by 2.3 m per sec (7.5 fps) and raised entry-flight-path angle to -6.52°. Crew partially powered up csm to check thermal conditions. Because of unusual spacecraft configuration (with LM still attached) and LM’s inability to survive reentry heat, officials on ground developed new reentry procedures and verified them in ground-based simulations. A 30-man team at MIT’s Charles S. Draper Laboratory worked throughout night studying stressed Apollo 13 guidance system and working out new trajectories. Simulations and programming of emergency problems were conducted by NR engineers in Downey, Calif., by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., in LM at KSC, and by Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and David R. Scott at msc, so that almost every move Apollo 13 crew made had first been proved out on ground. MCC-7 was successfully accomplished at 137:40 get with 22.4-sec LM RCSburn, resulting in predicted -6.49° entry-flight-path angle. Crew viewed and photographed SM when it was jettisoned at 138:02 get, reporting that one entire panel was missing near S-band high-gain antenna and that great deal of debris was hanging out. CM was powered up and lm was jettisoned at 141:30 get. SNAP-27 nuclear generator carrying 3.9 kg (8.6 lbs) of radioactive plutonium fell from lm into Pacific northeast of New Zealand. “Farewell, Aquarius, and we thank you,” Mission Control responded to spacecraft’s report “lm jettison.” “She sure was a good ship,” Swigert added later. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Odyssey splashed down in mid-Pacific southeast of American Samoa at 142:54 get (1:07 pm est April 17), 6.4 km (4 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Iwo Jima. Astronauts—exhausted but in good health—were picked up by recovery helicopter and were safely aboard recovery ship less than one hour after splashdown. Primary Apollo 13 mission objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected Fra Mauro area; deploy and activate ALSEP; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were not achieved. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced April 17 that Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, would be established to determine cause of accident. Apollo 13 flight crew performance was outstanding throughout mission; calm, precise reaction to emergency and diligence in configuring and maintaining lm was noteworthy. Despite lack of adequate sleep and low temperature in spacecraft, neither performance nor spirits faltered. Similarly, performance of flight operations team was outstanding in planning and aiding crew to safe return. Apollo 13 was 10th Apollo mission and third manned lunar landing attempt. Accident was first inflight failure in 22 manned flights in U.S. space program. Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) and Apollo 11
Washington Post editorial urged House to follow Senate in denying sst funding [see Dec. 3]: “For that was no idle expression of narrow interests or shallow sentiment on the Senate’s part; it was. . .almost an explosion of public concern, as surprising to the backers of the move as it was apparently shocking to the supporters of the sst.” What Senate vote said “was that somewhere out there, away from the corporate boardrooms and the offices of the Federal Aviation Administration and the corridors of Congress, a lot of people care more about the quality of life and the nation’s urgent economic and social needs than they do about breakfasting in London and New York at roughly the same time on the same day.” (W Post, 12/8/70, A 20)
mit oceanographer Dr. Henry Stommel commented in Science, on prospects for physical oceanography: “Is the dynamics of the ocean similar to or fundamentally different from that of the atmosphere? Only measurement will tell, and it will have to be measurement at a level of technological sophistication quite beyond the present level and beyond that proposed for routine monitoring. Access to somebody’s monitoring system, or to a few years of ship time, will not suffice to obtain the kind of information the scientist needs about the oceanic velocity field. Some carefully designed measurement programs are going to be needed—on a scale larger than an oceanographic institution can manage but smaller than the space program. To be useful scientifically, these programs will have to give first priority to questions of hydrodynamics. To date there is little indication they will do so.” (Science, 6/26/70,1531-6)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, opened testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA FY 1971 authorization: “Apollo 11 and 12 demonstrated that we can fly across a quarter of a million miles [400 000 km] of space, land with precision, carry out research and exploration, and return safely to earth. We met our commitments for the decade of the sixties. Now we must chart a new course for the next decade in space. The Congress again shares with the Administration the responsibility for continuing progress and leadership in space and aeronautics. At the same time, NASA is going through a difficult period of redirection, and austere budget goals must be met. This is therefore a time of great challenge. But I firmly believe that with your support we can continue to forge ahead in space exploration, in science, in applications, and in aerospace technology. The program which we will lay before you, although austere, provides for balanced progress toward the challenging goals for the 1970’s and the decades to follow.” NASA budget as it came from President included “major reduction in space program,” to achieve balanced U.S. budget in “time of inflation.” By reducing operating base, making selective cut-backs, and deferring new starts NASA had developed program permitting progress toward SpaceTask Group’s Option II goals, but at reduced pace, [see Jan. 13 and Feb. 2], Dr. Paine noted it was significant that, “in a sharply reduced total budget, we have been able to increase our space applications efforts. Our aeronautics effort will also continue to be strengthened.” He urged Committee to keep in mind that proposed program “could not be conducted in the face of further cuts.” NASA had no plans to fly astronauts in space between last Apollo flight in 1974 and the time space shuttle would be operative in late 1970s. “Any significant reduction in our FY 1971 request will further extend this gap in American manned space flight, and reduce other important programs.” (Testimony)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine addressed Economic Club of Detroit in last public appearance as NASA Administrator. He summarized NASA projections of potential space advances to year 2000-advances U.S., U.S.S.R., Western Europe, and Japan, alone or in concert, would have industrial and economic resources to realize. For both America and other countries, response to challenge would “determine their futures.” _ New space transportation system—with reusable space shuttle to make return trips to orbit with passengers and cargo, permanent orbiting space station, and automated and manned space tugs for emplacing and recovering satellites and for transportation between orbits—was “bridge to our future in space.” Space shuttle would be “nasa’s major single effort during the next ten years.” New approach to large payloads based on shuttle booster stage would offset termination of Saturn V after completion of Apollo lunar landings by 1972. Skylab program scheduled to start during 1973 would provide basis for final design of space station. Integrated lunar exploration in early 1980s could use station in lunar orbit as platform for descent to any portion of moon’s surface for up to 14 days. Broad, vigorous, unmanned program to explore planets in 1970s would be start of orderly program to visit every planet in solar system, blazing trail for manned trips to Mars and Venus before end of century. “The space in orbit two hundred miles [320 km] above the earth can be thought of as a vast new continent, equal in area to the surface of the entire globe.” Discovered only a dozen years ago, new continent would “become increasingly important as the leading world source of global information and communication services and then, inevitably, as a new home of men from earth.” Beyond solar system, automated and manned astronomical probes would “extend our understanding of the universe through more intensive investigations in optical and radio astronomy and space physics.” Before century’s end, man might find answers to “the overwhelming questions of man’s origin, his destiny, and of his uniqueness as the bearer of intelligence in the universe.” Man “may indeed be unique— but the odds against it approach a thousand billion billion to one. ... Every experiment so far has been negative, but the search will continue. ... We do not know what may exist, but we are upon the verge of knowing.” Of Apollo program Dr. Paine said, “History may record that the substitution of major international technical competition, in place of war, was the great and unprecedented peacekeeping breakthrough of our era.” Benefit on international social and technical change was “evident to all.” (Text)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, named Oran W. Nicks, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, as Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective immediately. Nicks succeeded Bruce T. Lundin, who had been named LeRC Director. (NASA Release 70-11; NASA Ann, 1/23/70)
Dr. James A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa physicist and discoverer of radiation belts encircling earth, said in Durham, N.H., that U.S. should phase out manned space programs. Maintenance of men in spacecraft “increases the cost of a given mission enormously and risks human life unnecessarily, and in a conspicuous and dramatic way.” Dr. Van Allen was in Durham to deliver first Spaulding Distinguished Series lecture at Univ. of New Hampshire. (AP, WPost, 11/6/70, A7)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at NASA Hq. news conference on future plans he was directing portions of space program to bring operations in line with FY 1971 budget. “We recognize the many important needs and urgent problems we face here on earth. America’s space achievements in the 1960’s have rightly raised hopes that this country and all mankind can do more to overcome pressing problems of society. The space program should inspire bolder solutions and suggest new approaches. It has already provided many direct and indirect benefits and is creating new wealth and capabilities.” Strong space program continued as one of Nation’s major priorities. “However, we recognize that under current fiscal restraints NASA must find new ways to stretch out current programs and reduce our present operational base.” NASA would “press forward in 1971 at a reduced level, but in the right direction with the basic ingredients we need for major achievements in the 1970s and beyond. .. .we will not dissipate the strong teams that sent men to explore the moon and automated spacecraft to observe the planets.” NASA would suspend Saturn V production indefinitely after Saturn V 515 completion, stretch Apollo lunar missions to six-month launch intervals, defer lunar expeditions during aap space station flights in 1972, and postpone Viking/Mars 1973 unmanned lander launch to next Mars opportunity in 1975. Number of employees in nasa program was expected to decline from 190 000 at end of FY 1970 to 140 000 at close of FY 1971. Positive aspects of space program for 1970s included Apollo missions through Apollo 19, use of one Saturn V to launch first experimental aap space station into earth orbit in 1972, Mars orbit by two unmanned spacecraft in 1971, launch of first Jupiter probe in 1972, launch of spacecraft past Venus to Mercury in 1973, and continuation of scientific satellite launches. Design of reusable space shuttle would be started and first experimental space station would be launched, as planned, in 1972. FY 1971 budget would permit proceeding with design of advanced space station as permanent base in earth orbit, continued work on nasa-aec nerva project, practical earth applications of space technology, and advances in applications of space technology in fields such as meteorology and communications. Although “austere,” space program for 1971 was “forward looking” and contained “basic ingredients needed for an effective space program in the 1970s.” It would “extend our space capabilities, expand our scientific knowledge, and make available new applications of benefit to people here on earth.” In response to question, Dr. Paine said he foresaw no shutdown of ksc and had no plans for closing other centers. Intended actions “represent a decision to proceed through the year 1971 and see what our studies turn up. I think it is important to realize these are very advanced, perhaps, and we have a lot to learn about the technological feasibility, the cost, schedules—and I wouldn’t want to say we now have a complete free road into the future. We don’t.” Asked if he thought NASA was close to point where “team started falling to pieces,” Dr. Paine said that “you can carry out space programs for the United States at a large number of different levels. I think the level we have now is a level we can take great pride in and I think the country in the 1970’s will be very proud of the achievements NASA will turn in.” (Transcript)
Public exhibit of lunar samples by nasa was described by George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, in letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of Special Ad Hoc Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Even with a reasonable allowance for overlap in our attendance figures for individuals who may have seen exhibits more than once, these figures indicate that over six and a half million people in the United States have seen a lunar sample.” Public displays had been accompanied by exhibit and supporting material so that viewers “come away.. .with some appreciation of its broader meaning.” nasa believed “exhibits at 15 major science museums to date, with 41 more planned for the coming year, in addition to the exhibit accompanying the Apollo 11 capsule to all 50 state capitals and the Smithsonian exhibit are especially effective.” (CR, 8/7/70, E7445-6)	_
President Nixon issued statement from Key Biscayne, Fla., on future of U.S. space program: “Having completed that long stride into the future which has been our objective for the past decade, we must now define new goals which make sense for the seventies. We must build on the successes of the past, always reaching out for new achievements. But we must also recognize that many critical problems here on this planet make high priority demands on our attention and our resources. By no means should we allow our space program to stagnate. But—with the entire future and the entire universe before us—we should not try to do everything at once. Our approach to space must continue to be bold—but it must also be balanced.” General purposes of space program should be exploration, acquisition of scientific knowledge, and use of practical applications to benefit life on earth. Six objectives of space program should be lunar exploration; planetary exploration, including eventual manned Mars exploration; reduction in cost of space operations; extension of man’s capability to live and work in space; expansion of practical applications of space technology; and encouragement of greater international cooperation in space. “A program which achieves these goals will be a balanced space program. . .which will extend our capabilities and knowledge. . .and put our new learning to work for the immediate benefit of all people. As we enter a new decade, we are conscious. . .that man is also entering a new historic era. For the first time, he has reached beyond his planet; for the rest of time, we will think of ourselves as men from the planet Earth.” President Nixon said NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, had met recently with space authorities of Western Europe, Canada, Japan, and Australia to “find ways in which we can cooperate more effectively in space.” (PD, 3/9/70, 328-31)
At NASA Hq. press briefing, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and program officers gave status of programs, plans for 1970s, and studies leading into 1980s. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, announced selection of Hadley-Apennine site for lunar landing of Apollo 15, scheduled for launch July 25, 1971. Site, cut by large gorge along base of mountains, was 3° east of moon’s center and 25° north of lunar equator on edge of Sea of Rains. Apollo 15 crew would collect material from base of Apennine Mountains, examine Hadley Rille area, sample fresh-looking mare and volcanic-like features, and deploy ALSEP. Apollo 16 would be launched in January 1972 and Apollo 17, in June 1972. High-priority landing sites were Copernicus, Davy, Descartes, and Marius Hills. To improve CSM return capability in emergencies after landing on moon, an LM descent battery and third tank would be added to Apollo 14 SM. Additional potable water would be generated and stored on way.tomoon. Douglas R. Lord, Deputy Director of Space Station Task Force, described plans for 12-man space station weighing 49 985-54 400 kg (110 000-120 000 lbs) that could remain in earth orbit for up to 10 yrs. Richard J. Allen of Space Shuttle Task Force said NASA was developing plans for shuttle with 100-mission reusable capability. Myers said dod was “very much involved” with shuttle activities. “We have a joint committee operating with the Air Force. . .for continuous communication and review of requirements.” He saw “possibility of international cooperation on certain flights and [U.S.] military use of the vehicle on others.” Myers said he had discussed with European officials possibility of participation in space shuttle program on three levels: orbit-to-orbit space tug, “cleanly separable and easily interfaced piece of equipment” that would probably be managed by European consortium and financed with European dollars; subcontracts from American companies to European contractors without transfer of American money ; and use of technological contributions from European national space activities and national aircraft establishments. (Transcript; NASA Release 70162)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, began NASA testimony on FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences [See Feb. 17]. Among FY 1969 aerospace accomplishments he noted that “the promising nAsa supercritical wing development moved from conceptual and wind tunnel work into preparations for full-scale tests at our Flight Research Center on a modified jet aircraft acquired from the Navy. These flight tests will begin in November 1970. Because of its potential for enhancing both the cruise performance and the operations economics of subsonic jet aircraft, this new NASA concept has generated widespread interest within the aircraft industry.” (Testimony)
The Economist commented on NASA Lunar Science Conference: “It has probably been a long time since so many scientists enjoyed themselves so visibly at a meeting or laughed so much or had reflected in their eyes the sheer pleasure of discovery that only children have. For the moment they are up and Nasa is down.” NASA was “between space programmes and is running short of friends and also short of cash as its budget is daily cut. The rate of moon shots has now been cut to two a year. This really ought not to please the scientists but it pleases them just the same since they have complained bitterly that they cannot conduct research at Nasa’s hectic pace and their work is suffering as a result. This is not exactly the happiest time to be a Nasa administrator waiting daily for the President’s next word but it is a wonderful time to be a moon man.” (Economist, 1/10/70, 15-6)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
General Electric Co. said it would not challenge NASA decision to reverse award of $50-million contract for ATS-F and ats-g [see Sept. 5]. In statement to press, Leon L. Farnham, General Manager of Spacecraft Programs at GE Valley Forge Space Technology Center, said GE still thought NASA decision was wrong but that the “further delay [of a court challenge] would be injurious to NASA and the total space program.” (Jones, W Post, 9/30/70, D9)
Impact of space requirements on U.S. computer industry was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, at ARCS (Achievement Rewards for College Scientists) Foundation Annual Scholarship Awards Banquet in Houston, Tex.: “In Project Mercury, ground-based computers were only required to determine quickly and accurately booster cut-off conditions. In Apollo, however, computers are used throughout the mission in real time, to calculate the trajectory to the moon and back, to compare three separate solutions for the lunar descent, to record and analyze thousands of bits of telemetered spacecraft information, to compare these to predicted values to detect trouble, and . .. to monitor the well-being of the crew. For Mercury, the computer program contained 40 000 computer words; for Apollo, a 1 500 000-word program was needed, while at the same time, the speed of the computers has increased sevenfold.” U.S. computer industry was doing $8 billion worth of business annually, paid highest average wages of any U.S. industry, and was “one of the most rapidly growing.” In 1960, U.S. exported $48 million worth of computers; in 1969, $728 million dollars worth. “U.S. computer exports have increased by over 1400 percent in the first decade of the space age. This impressive record was built on excellence of performance through continuing technological superiority. In a large measure it was the stimulus of NASA’s requirements that brought about these technological advances in the computer industry.” (Text) May 3; With exception of Mission Control, msc buildings normally open to public had remained open during Apollo 13 crisis, New York Times commented. Visitors could watch—from overhead catwalk in Building 5'—scientists and astronauts devising techniques for Apollo 13's return to earth. (Gordon, NYT, 5/3/70,7)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, would head six-man U.S. team to discuss possibilities for expanded U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space research at Moscow meetings during week of Jan. 18, 1971, NASA announced. Meetings would consider cooperation in scientific research by satellites, space meteorology, and space biology and medicine. Other members of team would be Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Adminstrator for International Affairs; Arthur W. Johnson, Deputy Director of National Environmental Satellite Service; William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary and Apollo 8 astronaut; and Robert F. Packard, Director of Office of Space-Atmospheric and Marine Science Affairs of Dept, of State. (NASA Release 70-223)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, began six-day visit to Australia to discuss space program cooperation. (Reuters, W Post, 2/13/ 70)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified before Subcommittee on Economy in Government of Joint Economic Committee on changing national priorities: “If we eliminate the space shuttle and the space station, then the NASA budget can be trimmed to a level below $3 billion per year throughout the rest of this decade. Such a decision will shift NASA’s priorities from sensational manned space ventures to space science and its applications. If the U.S. space program is restructured to this new pattern and the Apollo manned lunar program is allowed to run out, it should be possible to effect further economies in the NASA budget___” When nasa shifted to science base “it would be desirable that the scientific community give some expression of its sense of priorities for space science with respect to the rest of science. The quest for new knowledge of the solar system must be reckoned as pure or basic or fundamental research. As such, it should be related to the federal support of all other basic research.” (Testimony)
Teknika i Vooruzheiniye (Moscow) quoted Soviet Cosmonaut Georgy T. Beregovoy on future U.S.S.R. space program: “The Soviet Union is successfully carrying out a space research program designed for many years in the future. Its aims are determined by the needs of science and the national economy and the requirements of scientific and technical progress.” Prospects for development were “unfolding with the establishing of orbiting stations. ... Cosmodrome stations, extra atmospheric bases for geophysicists and astronomical observatories, and space laboratories for chemists will appear.” (jprs 50505,5/13/70)
National Space Club’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Ald-rin, Jr., and Michael Collins at 13th Annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. Astronauts were cited for successfully accomplishing lunar landing that “climaxed a decade of dedication and technological advancement, and gave millions of Americans pride in their country and its achievements.” Other awards included Goddard Historical Essay Award to Prof. John M. Logsdon of Catholic Univ. and Frank H. Winter of National Air and Space Museum and NSC Press Award to Thomas O’Toole of Washington Post. Astronautics Engineer Award was given to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; and Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award, to Grumman Aerospace Corp. for Apollo lm. (Program)
NASA FY 1971 interim operating plan news conference was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said principal decision was “how best to carry out the Apollo and other existing programs to realize maximum benefits from them while preserving adequate resources for the future. ... In our discussions, it became clear that the vitality of our national space program depends on a determined and vigorous continuation of plans for a reusable space shuttle followed by a space station in the manned flight program”; early development of erts, ATS, and HE AO; Grand Tour unmanned flights to distant planets; unmanned Viking Mars landers; Pioneer flights to Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter; and ‘a healthy aeronautical research program.” “With all of these considerations in mind. . .actions have been taken that will effectively reduce NASA’s FY 1971 budget request of $3,333 billion to an interim operating plan of $3.2687 billion.. .and to minimize NASA’s budgetary requirements for future years.” Budget request for Apollo was being reduced by $42.1 million to $914.4 million by canceling Apollo 15 and 19 lunar missions and by phasing down manpower levels at major Apollo facilities more rapidly. Although Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and nas-nrc Space Science Board had strongly recommended, after special review, that NASA carry out all six remaining lunar landing missions, NASA had “most reluctantly concluded that a reduction. . .should be made.” Remaining Apollo missions would be redesignated 14 through 17 and would be flown before start of Skylab operations in November 1972. Schedule would allow additional flexibility by providing Apollo hardware for possible use in Skylab, space station, or other programs where manned operations or heavy boost capability would be required. Advanced mission studies would be reduced by $1 million. Tracking and data acquisition network operations would be reduced $8 million by reducing number of manned flights and by more rapid phasedown in operating levels. Construction of facilities would be reduced to $25 million by deferring Polymer Research Laboratory at arc, Calibration Laboratory at MSC, and Multispectral Photo Laboratory at msfc and by rehabilitation and modification effort and facility planning and design. Research and program management minimum operating budget would be established at $678.7 million, amount included in previous appropriations bill and $13.6 million below NASA’s FY 1971 request. Dr. Paine said NASA had concluded “that it is prudent and realistic. . .to make these decisions now.. .to avoid more drastic and disruptive actions which would result if the decisions were postponed until later in the fiscal year. We also no longer have the capability to prepare in parallel two Apollo spacecraft, as would be required to maintain an option to reach a later decision on the number of Apollo missions.” Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers explained Apollo schedule changes: Apollo 14 would be launched as planned Jan. 31, 1971, followed at six-month intervals by Apollo 16 (renamed Apollo 15) with advanced capability for greater exploitation of lunar exploration, Apollo 17 (renamed Apollo 16), and Apollo 18 (renamed 17), last launch in series. Beginning with Apollo 15 launch in July, eva would be increased from two periods to three and man-hours per mission, from 18 hrs to 40 hrs. Weight of landed scientific payload would be doubled, from 227 kg to 454 kg (500 lbs to 1000 lbs); SM experiment package would be added; and range and efficiency of surface operations would be increased by improved suit mobility, improved life support system, and addition of lunar roving vehicle. Crew for new Apollo 15 would be same as previously planned—Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin. Skylab core module would be launched by Saturn V in November 1972, as scheduled, and would be revisited by Saturn IBs and csms up through June 1973. Beyond that, activities would be “at a standstill as far as orbital operations are concerned until the shuttle comes on line, hopefully in the 1976-77 time period.” (Text; Transcript)
Senate passed S.J.R. 193 appointing former NASA Administrator James E. Webb as Citizen Regent of Board of Regents of Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 4/27/70, S6234-5)
Development of Fluorel, which could be applied by spray to fireproof material against temperatures to 1500 K (2200°F) was described by Jerome F. Lederer, Director of Safety, OMSF, in interview released by AP. Compound was developed by Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co. under direction of msc engineers. Fluori-nated copolymer paste developed to reduce flammability hazards in spacecraft consisted of 20% of Fluorel solids homogenized to form methylethylketone solution. It had been designated Refset L-3203-6 by manufacturer, Raybestos-Manhattan, Inc. Fluorel would be among nonflammable and fire-resistant materials developed for U.S.' space program and reviewed by NASA for industry and Government agencies at safety conference at msc in May. (AP, NYT, 1/12/70, 10; nasa Release 70-7)
Recommendations on conduct of “comprehensive review and analysis of the complete NASA acquisition process from determination of requirements through final contract award” were requested by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, in memo to Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs. NASA procurement policies were “sound ones which have in general fairly treated our contractors while giving NASA excellent value for its money,” Dr. Paine said. But NASA was now planning programs in “changed economic environment with more limited resources.” (NASA Release 70-146)	.
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, submitted his resignation, effective Sept. 15. In letter to President Nixon at Western White House, Dr. Paine said: “Now is an appropriate time for a change of command at NASA, and this coincides with my wish to return to private life. During my direction Americans orbited the moon and walked on its surface, achieving our boldest national goal on time and within budget. We have made the transition to the post-Apollo internationally oriented space program of the 1970’s, and the Congress has approved the new direction and pace in the 1971 budget. We will shortly publish a prospectus for man’s conquest of space through the year 2000 which charts a long-range plan for future progress. . . . It has been a privilege and honor to have led the nation’s space program through critical times. . . .Iam most grateful to you for having given me this unique opportunity to serve my country during mankind’s first journey to another world.” Dr. Paine later told press in San Clemente, Calif., he had accepted challenging position with former employer, General Electric Co., involving “important national problems and technical opportunities outside aerospace and defense” fields and assured them that resignation had “absolutely nothing” to do with budget cuts. President accepted resignation with deep regret and expressed gratitude for Dr. Paine’s “outstanding leadership” of U.S. space program: “Your contribution to man’s knowledge of the Earth as well as the heavens has been major, and the course you have done so much to set will help guide our efforts for years to come. . . . You have earned a unique and permanent place of honor in the history of man’s exploration.” (PD, 8/3/70,997; Lyons, NYT, 7/29/70)
North American Rockwell Corp. had begun testing world’s largest known rotational machine under NASA contract to evaluate human performance in rotating environment, New York Times reported. Four-man crew would live in machine for one week and perform mechanical chores and decision-reaction tests in LaRC study, to approximate conditions in space stations of late 1970s. Bulletshaped crew module 12 m (40 ft) long rotated at 4 rpm, which was best approximation of space station obtainable, according to NR Program Manager, Dr. James A. Green. (Wilford, NYT, 8/15/70)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Safely home, the Apollo 13 crew stepped aboard the U.S.S. Iwo Jima recovery ship after splashdown in the South Pacific. Leaving the helicopter (at top, from left) are Astronauts Fred W. Raise, Jr., James A. Lovell, Jr., and JohnL. Swigert, Jr. Li the once-tense Mission Operations Control Hoorn at msc (at bottom), Dr. Donald K. Slayton (left of center), Director of Flight Crew Operations, shook hands with Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee as arriving Astronaut Lovell appeared on the TV monitor. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Dkector, stands behind Lee, with Flight Control Division Chief' Eugene F. Kfanz sitting at the console in front. (July 16-24, 1969) manned missions had successfully landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (NASA Proj Off; FonF, 4/16-22/70, 253-5; W Star, 4/12-14/70; NYT, 4/15/70; 4/18/70; 4/19/70; W Post, 4/15/70; 4/18/70, Al; msc Hist Off; Off NASA Administrator)
Society that could afford to spend as much as U.S. did on cokes, cosmetics, tobacco, and liquor could afford its space expenditure, William H. Bayley, NASA Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, said in jpl Lab-Oratory. Between 1959 and 1969 U.S. had devoted $30 billion to space program, $40 billion each for cosmetics and soft drinks, almost $80 billion each for cosmetics and soft drinks, almost $80 billion for tobacco, and some $110 billion for alcoholic beverages—about four times cost of space program. Annual space expenditure had been about one half of 1% of gnp, and about 1 /20th of defense expenditure. Most expensive space program had been Apollo at $24 billion, 93% of which was spent for goods and services provided by private industry. To date, “no money at all has been spent on the Moon or planets; it has all been spent right here on earth.” (jplLab-Oratory, 4/70,4-19)
nae President Eric A. Walker announced election of 51 engineers to NAE membership. They included Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for “contributions to the proposal, formulation, and management of Project Apollo”; Gerhard Neumann, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. Aircraft Engine Group, for “contributions to the development of variable stator compressors and high by-pass turbofan engines for jet aircraft”; Kendall Perkins, Corporate Vice President, Engineering and Research, of McDonnell Douglas Corp., for “contributions to aerospace technology, and engineering management in the design of aircraft and spacecraft”; and Dr. Paul Rosenberg, President of Paul Rosenberg Associates, for “pioneering contributions to space pho-togrammetric systems, radar prediction techniques, information storage and retrieval, and the kinematics of human spine motion.” (NAS-NRC-NAE News Rpt, 4/70, 1)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, to be U.S. representative to International Atomic Energy Agency with rank of Ambassador. (CR, 6/25/70, S9950)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine’s resignation as NASA Administrator became effective. He was honored at Bolling afb reception and testimonial dinner given by Dr. George M. Low, who would be Acting Administrator until appointment of successor. Dr. Paine told guests he believed requirements of U.S. space program “are not understood at the highest level of our official life” and said he was confident NASA budget would be approved despite President’s Aug. 11 veto of Independent Offices and HUD appropriations bill. U.S., he said, “must be the first nation to put in the first skylab and space stations. We must look to the post-dog-sled era of lunar exploration and develop a more permanent type of lunar exploration.” Dr. Paine warned that NASA must “face the reality that in the 70s the Soviet Union will attempt to overtake us. ... We will be tested against a strong and vigorous Soviet program.” U.S. had “held out the olive branch.. .but if the cold war is extended into space, then NASA will be ready to meet any threat that may develop in space.” According to Washington Evening Star, it was first time Dr. Paine had publicly cited threat of Soviet military supremacy in space. Later, in interview following dinner, Dr. Paine said he meant NASA’s charge was to keep U.S. in forefront of space technology and to be ready to hand that technology to dod if required. He believed defense against icbm might yet be space-based. If so, NASA should be in technologically superior position because of space station, shuttle, and other concepts. (W Star, 9/16/ 70, B8, C7)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, addressed Inland Daily Press Assn, in Chicago on U.S. achievement and leadership in science and technology and “danger that exists today that we will soon lose the capability that gave us this achievement and leadership.” Capability built by NASA in 1960s was rapidly diminishing. Recent study had shown 35 000 aerospace scientists and en
Atlantic magazine article said U.S.S.R. had “used aid and trade, backed by its newly acquired sea power, to build a vast arc of influence around the northern rim of the Indian Ocean and up as far as the home islands of Japan.” Included were “two large mooring buoys laid near the Seychelles Islands in connection with the Soviet space program.” They provided “refueling base for the Soviet flotilla.” {Atlantic, 5/70)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President for 1969 (dated January 1970). He said: “The year 1969 was truly a turning point in the story of space exploration —the most significant of any year in that still brief history.” U.S. had achieved “most prominent of our goals in space—one which had long been a focus for our energies. As we enter a new decade, we must now set new goals which make sense for the Seventies. The space budget that I am submitting to Congress reflects my view of a balanced space program, one which will build on the progress we have already made. Our space and aeronautics program has benefited this Nation in many ways. It has contributed to our national security, to our educational, transportation, and commercial strength, to our scientific and medical knowledge, to our international position and to our sense of the dignity and the capacity of man. And the story is only beginning. We have made long strides into the future during the past year; now we must build on those accomplishments in the coming years and decades.” (Pres Rpt 70[69]; PD,2/9/70; 146)
After return to earth crew, lunar samples, and spacecraft would be quarantined under procedures similar to those for Apollo 11 and Apollo 12. Apollo Mission Director, Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), said continuation of quarantine—thought unnecessary by many scientists—was based “solely upon the fact that a segment of the scientific community considered the hilly upland site to constitute a new lunar environment.... The bio tests . . . physical science, and organic chemistry analyses, have found absolutely no evidence of any life forms or precursors of life.” To reduce risk of lightning from high-potential near thunderstorms which had affected Apollo 12, NASA had tightened rules for launching in bad weather. Spacecraft would not be launched if nominal flight path carried vehicle through cumulonimbus clouds, within 8 km (5 mi) of thunderstorm cloud, or within 5 km (3 mi) of overhang from a cumulonimbus cloud; through a cold front or squall lying clouds extending 3000 m (10 000 ft); through middle cloud layers 1800 m (6000 ft) or more deep; or through cumulus clouds with tops 3000 m (10000 ft) or higher. Capt. Lee said although Apollo vehicle was well protected, lightning discharge did occur and NASA officials were “doing everything we possibly can to avoid it, without restricting ourselves unduly” to never launching at all. (Transcript)
Blue Ribbon Defense Panel, with Gilbert W. Fitzhugh as Chairman, submitted to President Nixon Report to the President and the Secretary of Defense on the Department of Defense. Report offered 113 recommendations, including top-to-bottom dod reorganization, removing Joint Chiefs of Staff from involvement with day-to-day problems of war, streamlining military staffs, reorganizing all U.S. combat forces under three main operating commands, and abandoning contracting policies that led to cost overruns and weapons that didn’t work. Panel had been appointed by President and Secretary of Defense in 1969 to study dod problems. (Text)
Election of Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, as a Vice President and his appointment as Group Executive, Power Generation Group, were announced by General Electric Co. Both positions were effective Sept. 15, date on which Dr. Paine’s resignation from NASA would become effective. (GE Release)
Achievements of U.S.S.R. Luna XVI mission were praised in Washington, D.C., by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator: “The Soviet Union’s reported success in obtaining lunar material, depositing it in a sealed container and launching it from the moon’s surface on a return trip to earth with the Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft is a major engineering and scientific achievement. We wish the Soviet Union and its scientists success in completing this exciting mission.” NASA would “look forward to sharing in the information which will be developed by an analysis of the samples.” (Schmeck, NYT, 9/22/70, 11)
Chemist Dr. Gustaf O. S. Arrhenius of Univ. of California at San Diego said in interview that he was working with NASA on plans to expand U.S. space program by sending unmanned spacecraft on “mission to an asteroid.” He said idea had been presented to NASA in 1969 by Dr. Hannes O. Alfven, 1970 Nobel Prize winner in physics. (UPI, NYT, 11/4/70)
Report on the Closing of the NASA Electronics Research Center was released by Planning Steering Group for erc closing. Report was prepared by Deputy Administrator for Administration Boyd C. Myers II, Steering Group Chairman, and members of group; ERC Task force; and DOT. Following ERC closing on June 30, 1970, new DOT center functioned “reasonably well.” All but 85 former ERC employees had jobs; NASA had programs and equipment it needed. DOT had ample equipment for new center and 27 universities were pursuing new work relevant to NASA interest. “Most important, the government and the nation were in a position to fully utilize a national capability of nearly $60 million in facilities and equipment and over 740 highly capable people on new programs. NASA had retained the highest priority work and related equipment.” Move was almost completed in six months but personal equipment packing and shipping and disposition of leased space would take about 60 days. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator at time of ERC closing, had directed disposition priorities: people first, program second, and physical facilities third, with every employee placed in appropriate job at higher salary. “While these objectives could not be entirely achieved sequentially, there was no question about the prime importance Dr. Paine placed on the actions affecting each individual employee.” (Text)
nae announced election of retired General Electric Co. Vice President Clarence H. Linder as first full-time nae President and Dr. Chauncey Starr of ucla as Vice President. Dr. Thomas C. Kava-nagh of Praeger-Kavanagh-Waterbury and of Madigan-Hyland was reelected Treasurer and J. H. Mulligan, Jr., Secretary. Among those elected to Council were Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, and Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, NASA consultant, (nae Release; nae Bridge, 6/70,1)
Ten msc employees had applied for joint patent on device and process for recovering water and its constitutent elements from lunar soil, NASA announced. Chemical process used hydrogen and solar energy to reduce iron oxides and produce water vapor, which could be electrolyzed to yield oxygen and hydrogen. Calculations showed process could produce 0.5 kg (1 lb) of water from 45.4 kg (100 lbs) of lunar soil; if iron oxides were first concentrated magnetically, yield increased to nearly 6.4 kg (14 lbs) of water from 45.4 kg (100 lbs) of lunar material. (NASA Release 70-202) Washington Post editorial commented on Soviet Lunokhod I: “The appearance of this vehicle, as well as the landing on the moon and return to earth of Luna 16, makes it clear that the Russians hope to regain some of the prestige they lost in the race to land men on the moon.... In terms of the American space program, this new success of the Russians should have little impact other than to persuade the administration and Congress not to cut back its funds any further. There is no logical reason for NASA to go like gang-busters in an effort to match the Russians in unmanned space exploration since the decision has already been made to proceed with a scaled down and more rational space program. The first big trophy in space activities went to the Russians, the most recent big one to the Americans, and it is reasonable to suspect that future ones will be divided between the two nations.” (WPost, 11/20/70, A26)
NASA held Hq. briefing on space station and shuttle programs for representatives of 17 nations, eldo, esc, and esro. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said foreign participation was step in NASA’s continuing efforts to inform other nations of post-Apollo program planning so that they might determine extent to which they wished to participate in it. (NASA Release 70-41)
NASA officials would meet with Soviet counterparts to discuss possible compatible space docking arrangements in Moscow Oct. 26-27, NASA announced. Discussions were outgrowth of correspondence during year between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences. Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh had proposed Moscow meeting in Sept. 11 letter to NASA and had invited NASA to select dates. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, had accepted invitation and proposed dates in Sept. 25 letter. Keldysh had confirmed acceptability of dates. NASA officials attending meeting would be: Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director; Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; George B. Hardy, Chief of MSFC Program Engineering and Integration Project; Caldwell C. Johnson, Chief of MSC Spacecraft Design Office; and Glynn S. Lun-ney, Chief of MSC Flight Director’s Office. (NASA Release 70-173)
At White House press conference former astronauts Michael Collins, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, and William A. Anders, NASC Executive Secretary, described arrangements that had kept President Nixon informed on Apollo 13 crisis. President had had access to direct TV, radio, and telephone contact with MSC Mission Control. He had talked with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, and Astronaut Frank Borman there. Collins and Anders had set up “squawk box” into Mission Control outside President’s office and briefed President and his staff on developments. President’s chief concerns had been CM-SM separation, and crew’s safety and physical condition. Collins said, “The fact that we had this incident really changes very little. We have always known that such a situation could develop and he [President] does not feel that it should unduly cloud the future when it comes to space exploration.” (Transcript)
Editorial by Robert Hotz in Aviation Week & Space Technology outlined space outlook for 1970: “Space will. . .see some titanic struggles in the market-place as the key programs in the space transportation system of the mid-1970s come up for contractor selection. Many observers will be misled by the relatively small dollar increases in Fiscal 1971 space budgets. Many new programs can be initiated with the same level of funding that was required for the Apollo era, plus some heavy reprogramming of existing projects that are approaching technical obsolescence much faster than any planners imagined. By judiciously paring its present programs and getting only a modest boost for Fiscal 1971, NASA can lay the foundations for the next decade’s major space program. Military space, temporarily deflated by the manned orbiting laboratory cancellation, will trend toward a broader program involving several major new fields. Commercial and non-NASA space will provide a modestly expanding market, and the big battle between celestial and terrestrial communications is shaping into a major clash.” (Av Wk, 1/12/70, 11)
International reaction to Apollo 13 emergency continued: Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, General Secretary of World Council of Churches, said in Geneva that people of world were praying for astronauts. In Santa Ninfa, Sicily, devasted by earthquake in January, Mayor Vito Bellafore said, “After the first Apollo success people did lose interest; it seemed that it was only a mechanical exercise. Now we see again the human drama, and all of our worry is for those three lonely men.” London Times said Apollo 13 would leave “scar on the American space program.” Best outcome of accident would be “greater sense of deliberation in the exploration of space.” (Lyons, NYT, 4/16/70, 1)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, held press conference at NASA Hq. to comment on his resignation, submitted July 28: “When I faced up to the job in the Space Agency. . .there were two major responsibilities. . . . One. . .was the meeting of the commitment. . .[to] land on the Moon within the decade. . .and the second was to lay out the post-Apollo program which would follow. . . . The action that was taken yesterday by the Congress in conference, which essentially gave us more than ninety-eight percent of the monies that the President had approved for the 1971 budget, but more importantly followed a very intensive review by Congress of the proposals we had made for the new space program of the seventies, in many ways represents a major step forward in the second concern which I had, which was to lay out the post-Apollo program and secure initial approval for it in the Administration and the Congress.” NASA “had reached the point where the person who heads up the space program should be prepared now to devote very many months to the prosecution of this new program. . .and it was my conclusion that this was an excellent time for a change of command at NASA, since, for personal reasons, I could not give it the many months of continuing activity which would be required.” Questioned about future space projects, Dr. Paine said he had found “great depth of support” for space program in U.S. and in foreign countries. Space program was valuable to Nation and world, was on solid foundation, and would probably be funded by Government on its present level or a little higher. He identified key issues facing NASA in FY 1972 budget as future of Apollo program, particularly with suspension of Saturn V production and continuing need to reassess best use of each booster, and question of relative priority within limited resources of space shuttle, space station, space tug, scientific missions, application of satellite programs, and increased aeronautical r&d. “It’s very important. . .that we take a very long-range view because, the direction that the space program takes in the 1970’s is indeed going to cast a shadow through to the end of the century.” (Transcript)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, addressed American Newspaper Publishers Assn, in New York: “Our mental concepts and life habits are Earth-oriented. The ability to go the Moon or Mars is regarded as something less than important, and this is only natural. But I am firmly convinced that the space program will prove to be one of the most important, creative, and beneficial to mankind ever undertaken by the United States. ... I think we must clearly establish in this new decade our goals and objectives as an agency first, and then define the hardware needed only after we know exactly where we are headed.” Hardware “on hand or that would be fine to develop” should not “tell us where we’re going.” (Text) U.S. detection in 1950s of Soviet radar three times size of football field was described before Association by Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering: “It was so big that when we first found out about it we were hesitant even to identify it as a radar. Much later we learned that it was far too powerful for most of the applications we could imagine. Assuming it was a radar, many argued that it made sense only as part of a detection, tracking and control network for satellites. The non-radar proponents even tried to make it into such things as a space communications system. The location of the first such radar argued that. . .this equipment probably would form part of an abm system.” (Text)
In Science editorial, Preston Cloud of UCLA Dept, of Geology said: “Planet Earth, seen from space, appears as a fragile and limited life-supporting system in a vast emptiness. That such a view is, in fact, an accurate one is now more widely accepted than it was not long ago, before Earth’s problems of overpopulation, overconsumption, limited resources, and environmental degradation attained the limelight. The danger is that a government and public now deluged by doomsday prophecies and bemused by equally confident reiterations that technology will cure all may hesitate in coming to grips with the problem, in the hope that, given time, it will go away.” (Science, 3/6/70, 1323) Of three supporting Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launches from WSMR two experiments were successful and were recovered. Third was recovered but pointing-control system had not trained experiment on sun. (NASA Releases 70-39, 70-28)
Agreement under which 50 astronauts and wives would rhare $100000 for each program in series of TV documentaries on U.S. space program had been announced by David L. Wolper, President of Wolper Productions Inc., and Louis Nizer, New York attorney for astronauts, AP reported. (W Post, 9/23/70, B4)
Use of aerospace management to solve social problems was advocated by Albert J. Kelley, Dean of Boston College School of Management, in Astronautics A Aeronautics. “In the quest for application of technology to domestic and other internal problems, aerospace management with its ability to marshal resources to solve complex problems may well be the greatest [space program] spinoff. In addressing current and emerging problems, the most urgent tasks will be to identify the parts of the problem that can be solved by existing technology, to recognize the parts of the problem that need more r&d, to identify the resources needed to solve all elements of the problem, and to organize the resources and efforts and get the job done,” (AAA, 8/70,46-52)
Finance was one of main reasons for resignation of Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator, Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. At 48, Paine had four children in college and private school. His NASA salary was $42 500 per year “which after taxes barely pays for his children’s schooling, his housing and his everyday expenses.” While “nobody at GE will discuss it,” Dr. Paine apparently would move into “executive suite” at General Electric Co. “whose chairman (Fred Borch) makes $275,000 a year and whose four top executives under Borch all make more than $200,000 a year.” (W Post, 7/30/70, A2)
Apollo II Astronauts Michael Collins (left) and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (right), were presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Dr. Robert C, Seamans, Jr. (center (eft), Secretary of the Air Force. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, represented Astronaut Nei! A. Armstrong, who was unable to be present. veloping itpr for use by NASA on Nimbus-E, scheduled for launch in 1972. (essa Release 70-28)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, in invited testimony on space benefits and potential, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that during first 12 yrs in space U.S. orbital payloads had increased 10 000 times, from Explorer I’s 14-kg (30.8 lbs) to Apollo 13’s planned 136 000 kg (300 000 lbs); speed record 13 times, from 3000 km per hr (1900 mph) to 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph); and flight altitude 10 000 times, from 38 400 m (126 000 ft) to 377 400 km (234 500 mi). Astronauts had logged 5843 hrs in space, safely flying 113 400 000 km (70 472 000 mi). Twelve Americans had orbited moon and four had walked on its surface. NASA had launched 155 unmanned spacecraft to return scientific and practical data, 23 in cooperative international programs. “Today we live in a different world because in 1958 America recognized the challenge of space and boldly made the required national investment to meet it. Since then over a billion children have been born all around the world, the first space age generation. Because of the space program they will learn a new science, a new cosmology, and a new view of man and his destiny in the universe. . .. Today’s children can look ahead confidently to new opportunities and to great new strides that man will make in the twenty-first century.. . . Their generation will view the earth as a whole for the first time, and be able to deal with technology, with science, and with philosophy as a unified experience, common to all men of the blue planet earth.” Appendixes to prepared statement described NASA’s technology utilization program: 1.6 million scientific and technical publications distributed in 1969, including 3 211 500 microfiche copies; contribution to U.S. schools including spacemobile project, which had reached 3 306 410 students live and 20 391 500 via TV in 1969; and space research laboratories built at 34 institutions of higher learning during 1960s, in which more than 1000 students had worked towards doctorates. NASA had received 968 830 letters in 1969; its exhibits were viewed by 37.6 million persons and its films, by 9.8 million directly and by 248 million on TV. News media coverage of NASA activities in 1969 included 3497 newsmen from 57 countries accredited to Apollo 11. (Testimony; Schlstedt,B Sun, 4/7/70)
Transition of World War II aircraft industry into 1970 aerospace industry was traced in Air Force magazine by Karl G. Harr, Jr., aia President. Increased performance had increased complexity. Average 1944 combat aircraft had carried 454 kg (Vi ton) of avionic gear; 1948-1950 counterpart needed three to five times as much. Weapon revolution did not signify end of manned aircraft era; it brought forth “new family of aircraft of substantially improved capability.” First operational “barely supersonic” 1954 fighter had been followed by succession of more advanced fighters. “The complexity curve took a sharp upward turn, taking the cost curve with it,” with corollary decline in numbers of aircraft produced. Fewer aircraft were needed because of individual aircraft’s superior performance. With advent of supersonic aircraft production, guided missile output became significant portion of industry workload. Big push had come in 1954 when missile procurement topped billion-dollar level for first time. “Undoubtedly, the space program was the dominant influence in history’s most explosive decade of technological advance. There were two primary contributing factors: breadth and acceleration.” Breadth of program required continual probing of new research frontiers across spectrum of almost every scientific and technological discipline. “The acceleration of effort imposed by the lunar-landing timetable necessitated a forcing of technology, compressing into one decade the normal advance of several.” (AF, 9/70, 84-8)
Cause of July 23 failure of ion engine on board orbiting Sert II had been identified and could be prevented in future, LeRC announced. Project Manager Raymond J. Rulis said beam from neutralizer had eroded and broken off small piece of metal from one of two grids at back of engine. Metal, attracted by forces of electric field between screen grid and accelerator grid, had been welded between grids by high voltages and had caused short circuit that shut down grid power lines. Although damaged thruster on Sert II could not be repaired, erosion problem could be prevented in future by relocating neutralizer and redirecting its beam to eliminate localized wear on grid. Second ion engine on board Sert II was operating satisfactorily after more than 1300 hrs. Engine would be shut down in late November for three months while spacecraft was in earth’s shadow and then restarted to complete six-month test. (LeRC Release 70-49)
Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), discussed space program spinoff on House floor: “Between 1965 and 1971 NASA awarded grants and research contracts for 1640 programs to 223 colleges and universities in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The total university expenditures by NASA from 1959 through 1969 totaled $2.7 billion and contributed to this Nation’s educational goals by the development of new scientific disciplines, technologies and educational facilities.” NASA’s educational efforts in secondary and elementary schools had been “many and varied, but one of the unpublicized and most important has been its programs to assist underprivileged youth in the inner city. The problem has been tackled in a number of locations by a wide variety of techniques, including special materials, instructors, and so forth.” (CR, 4/21/70, H3317-25)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Kenneth M. Smith, President and Chief Executive of Windecker Research Inc., to be faa Deputy Administrator. He would replace David D. Thomas, who had resigned. (PD, 3/30/70,421,447)
Press editorials commented on President Nixon’s statement on Nation’s space program. New York Times: “If the President’s program is fulfilled pn schedule, the economics of space activity—both its costs and its dividends for nonscientists here on earth—will be revolutionized. The reconnaissance activities of earth resources satellites have enormous potentials for aiding agriculture, forestry, the search for new minerals, and the exploitation of the seas. The prospect of communications satellites that can broadcast radio and television programs directly to homes everywhere offers exciting new perspectives for further unifying all peoples, while simultaneously raising delicate political problems. . . . When it becomes available, the reusable space shuttle will. . .facilitate construction of a permanent manned orbiting space station that will open up new areas of scientific and economic activity in the near neighborhood of earth.” (NYT, 3/9/70) Washington Evening Star: “The 1970’s promise to be an exciting decade in space, not just a comedown from the exhilaration of the initial moon landings. The next 10 years will be even more satisfying if another of the President’s goals—increased international cooperation in space—is realized. To that end, Soviet space scientists have been told about the U.S. plans. The Russian leaders would do well to consider the economies and other benefits that could come from pooling skills and resources as man reaches farther and farther beyond his planet.” (W Star, 3/9/70) Washington Post: “It was appropriate that President Nixon should announce his proposed plans for exploration in space on the last day in this century when a total eclipse of the sun was visible in the United States. Opportunities to make strides in learning about our universe do not come often and must be seized when they arrive. The scientists. . .did the best that could be done in Saturday’s brief moment of darkness to learn more about the forces in the sun that dominate our solar system. And the President seems to have done about the best that can be done with the resources now available to keep our space program on the right track. “The emphasis the Administration is giving to unmanned flight activities—the commitments to launch vehicles in 1977 and 1979 for grand tours of our outermost planets are the most exciting—will test the willingness of the nation to spend huge sums on basic research. The future programs of NASA, at least for the next decade, will have little of the appeal that seized the public during the race to land men on the moon first. And the worth of these programs, in terms of knowledge they may yield about the solar system and the usefulness of that knowledge, is difficult to appreciate fully. The test in the future will be whether we are willing to pay for these probes for knowledge without the exhilarating experience of watching the first man step onto the moon’s surface, and of beating the Russians.” (W Post, 3/9/70)
Environmental scientist Dr. H. Peter Metzger filed suit in Federal Court in Denver, Colo., to block static nuclear rocket test scheduled for January in Nevada as experiment for possible future deep space probes. Metzger charged aeC-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office had failed to comply with National Environmental Policy Act requirements that test be fully studied and reported to other agencies for comment. Defendants named were Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman; Milton Klein, Space Nuclear Propulsion Office Director; and Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator. (NYT, 12/19/70, 14)
Accomplishments of Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, retiring Presidential Science Adviser and OST Director, were described in Science. Dr. DuBridge was credited with influencing Nixon Administration to moderate space program, initiating steps to meet electric-power generating-capacity crisis, contributing to President’s renunciation of biological warfare, and assisting “modest recovery in the fortunes” of nsf. (Walsh, Science, 8/28/70,843-3)
NASA Hq. press briefing cited background events leading to scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. Moscow meeting on compatible space docking procedures and hardware [see Oct. 12]. Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said government-to-government discussions with U.S.S.R. had begun in 1962 “when some substantive possibilities were explored and. . .first agreements were reached.” These had included coordinated meteorological satellite projects, joint mapping of earth’s magnetic field in space for joint use of Echo satellites, and joint approach to publication of U.S. and U.S.S.R. achievements,in space medicine and biology. There had been “continuing overtures” since 1962, which “moved to a more accelerated pace beginning in.. .April 1970, when Dr. Paine took a personal interest in the problem and addressed a number of letters. . .to academician Keldysh.. .President of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union.” Compatible docking procedures had been discussed for first time by Dr. Paine and Soviet academician Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov in New York in April 1970. Subject had been discussed on subsequent Moscow visits by Dr. Philip Handler, NAS President; Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman. First formal proposal for exploration of subject had been made by Dr. Paine in letter to Keldysh July 31, 1970. Frutkin said U.S.S.R. had chosen compatible docking for discussion out of “long list of initiatives from the U.S. side.” Space rescue and joint experiments had not been discussed. Release of news of impending U.S.-U.S.S.R. discussions’ [at future iaf space rescue committee meeting] from iaf conference in Constance, Germany, Oct. 8 had been coincidence; NASA overtures had been direct, not through iaf. (Transcript)
Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) introduced S. 4430, “Economic Conversion Act” to create Economic Conversion Commission composed of government and industry representatives including NASA Administrator. Measure would require that 1216% of each contractor’s profits from space and defense work be held in trust by commission to finance implementation of conversion plans developed by contractor and to pay benefits to workers who might suffer during transfer to civilian production. (CR, 10/2/70, S16995-7003)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, NASA oart, at Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and NASA officials. (Daily Appointments Calendar)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, released statement: “Red China has apparently become the fifth nation to launch an Earth satellite with its own booster following the Soviet Union, the United States, France and Japan. Working in close cooperation with the U'S., Canada, Britain, France, Italy, Australia, and the European Space Research Organization (esro) have flown Earth satellites. This new development has been anticipated for some time. ... It is a dramatic demonstration of the determination of the Chinese leaders, despite many problems, to put science and technology very high on their list of national priorities.” (Text)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of William M. Huey, special consultant to faa Administrator and Deputy Administrator, to fill new position of faa Deputy Assistant Administrator for General Aviation Affairs, (faa Release 70-89) Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, said in speech at meeting: “nasa and the aerospace industry are not uniquely qualified to solve our domestic problems. The domestic problems, including those of the physical environment, are largely social, economical, and political. The need for new technology, for research and development, does exist in some areas, but certainly is not the driving force in obtaining solutions.” Solutions “must come from sociologists, economists, and politicians—not engineers and scientists. We in aerospace should. . .assist wherever and whenever we can: We have developed techniques of management that may apply; there are technological problems that we are qualified to tackle; and there are areas where space technology, and the applications of space technology, apply directly. We should assist, but we should not think or encourage others to believe that we can solve all of our domestic problems.” Space program had “one major deficiency—a gap in manned space flight after Skylab, a hiatus of four years or more when no American will be in earth orbit, or anywhere in space.” Gap had to be accepted because of lack of funding. Decision to cancel Viking or delay space shuttle would be wrong. “Viking is the major scientific experiment of the decade, and a delay in starting the shuttle would only delay the hiatus, not eliminate it.” If shuttle development was advancing when gap occurred, Dr. Low believed gap would not be “unacceptable.” NASA was building “the next generation of space vehicles, a generation that will far surpass existing capabilities to explore space, to use space, to live and work in space.” (Text) Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) told meeting: “Our space program is being viewed with increasing skepticism. Future historians will smile at the irony of our situation. Immediately following the fantastic feat of sending men to the surface of the Moon and back in safety, our national resolve in expanding this effort faced a mounting wave of domestic criticism. The irony of homo sapiens for the first time standing upright on his planet and not availing himself of his full ability to explore and experiment in the universe. The irony of not moving forward as aggressively as possible from a new beginning almost as fundamental as the beginning of life itself.” (SBD, 10/23/70, 23) Work of dot Transportation Systems Center, formerly NASA erc, was described by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe: Center was “already working on harbor advisory radars for the Coast Guard, phased array radars for the faa, crash sensors for the Federal Highway Administration, and alcohol detectors for the National Highway Safety Bureau. In communications we are studying wayside systems for tracked air-cushion vehicles and data links from ground controllers to cockpit displays. Computer systems are being adapted to automated scanning of highway traffic films and simulation of ground and air traffic patterns controllers must learn. The architecture of large, real-time computers for air traffic control systems is also under study.” (Text) JPL engineers Ronald F. Draper and Thomas R. Gavin* said technology for long-lived, unmanned spacecraft for Grand Tour flybys and separate orbiting missions to Jupiter and outer planets was well advanced for 1977 and 1979 missions. Thermoelectric outer planet spacecraft (tops) under development at jpl would use radioisotope thermoelectric generators, with nuclear energy supplying power beyond range where solar panels and batteries were effective. Scientific experiments and spacecraft control problems would be handled by self-test and repair (star) computer with sufficient backup units for 10 to 15 yrs operation, (jpl Release 564) Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director for Biomedical Engineering, announced that final two Apollo missions would land at Descartes, upland valley surrounded by craters, and Marius Hills, near Imbrium Basin. Sites had been selected because material there would furnish new data on age and origin of moon. (AP, W Star, 10/ 20/70, A4) Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director, received $5000 aiaa Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for “outstanding management and leadership in directing the planning and operational control of all United States manned space flight missions from the first Mercury suborbital mission through the first Apollo lunar landing.” Dr. Maxime A. Faget, MSC Director of Engineering and Development, received $500 Spacecraft Design award for ‘‘outstanding leadership and technical ability which resulted in the conception and design of this nation’s first manned spacecraft, the Mercury capsule system.” Glynn S. Lunney, Chief of msc Flight Director’s Office, received $500 Lawrence Sperry Award for “outstanding performance as a flight director during the Gemini and Apollo manned space flight missions; for exceptional leadership, professional skill and personal dedication which contributed to the success of this Nation’s first manned lunar mission, and particularly during the flight of Apollo 13.” Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div. of NASA oart, received John Jefferies Award of $500 and certificate for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aerospace medical research.” Von Karman Lecture award of $1000 and travel allowance of $1500 was awarded to Dr. Erik L. Mollo-Christensen, mit meteorologist, (aiaa Release; msc Roundup, 9/25/70, 1) NASA and dot sponsored session on national aeronautical programs, with Charles J. Donlan of NASA omsf as theme chairman. Exhibit was prepared by LaRC, LeRC, and arc. Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy, chaired panel discussion on problems facing aeronautics in U.S., including vehicles, airport systems, and airway systems. Historical session, “American Advancement into Space,” was chaired by Royal D. Frey of usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb and Dr. Loyd Swenson of Univ. of Houston. Organized by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, session heard description by Col. John A. MacReady (usaf. Ret.) and Sally MacReady Liston of early experiments to combat known and unknown hazards of first attempts to climb into space, narrative by l/g William E. Kempner (usaf, Ret.) of flight of Explorer I into stratosphere, description by Cdr. George W. Hoover (usn, Ret.) of usn developments leading to space, and story by Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf, Ret.) of XB-70. (Program; NASA Hist Off) On Oct. 24 Tass announced that Zond VIII had circled within 1120 km (696 mi) of moon, studied space, photographed moon, and was returning to earth. Spacecraft splashed down in Indian Ocean Oct. 27 and was recovered by Soviet vessel Tama. Tass said spacecraft brought back “extremely important photographs needed for studies of the geological and morphological qualities of the moon.” Zond VIIIwas eighth spacecraft in Zond series and second spacecraft to land in water; first had been Zond V (Sept. 15-22, 1968). Zond VI(Nov. 10-17, 1968) and Zond VII(Aug. 8-14, 1969) had circled moon and returned to earth with data and photos, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; Gwertzman, NYT, 10/22/70, 1; SBD, 10/28/70, 249; 10/29/ 70, 256; B Sun, 10/28/70, A5; SF, 4/71, 138-9)
White House announced appointment of r/a Don A. Jones as Acting Director of National Ocean Survey and of Dr. John W. Townsend as Acting Associate Administrator of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (noaa) until offices were filled under provisions of noaa reorganization plan. Adm. Jones was member of essa Commissioned Officers Corps and had been Director of Coast and Geodetic Survey since 1965. Dr. Townsend had been essa Deputy Administrator since 1968, Chief of NASA Space Sciences Div. 1958-1959, and gsfc Assistant Director and Deputy Director 1959-1968. (PD, 11/2/70,1457)	,
Scripps Howard newspaper survey had shown NASA’s rocket building program “all but grounded” because of budget cuts, Washington Daily News reported. With last rocket of $9.3-billion Saturn project nearing completion, layoffs of scientific and technical personnel had reached 80% in some areas. At peak of 11-yr Saturn project, NASA had employed more than 125 000 engineers, scientists, and technicians to build 37 Saturns including 15 Saturn Vs. “Today only 10 000.. .are still with the space program. And the boom towns that built, tested and launched the rockets. . .are starting to deflate.” At Seal Beach, Calif., NR had said only 1743 out of 10 800 engineers and technicians who built Saturn V 2nd stage were still employed, an 84% decline. At New Orleans, Boeing Co. and NASA had laid off all but 1800 of 11 994 Saturn V lst-stage builders. NASA was constructing only 21, smaller and less expensive, rockets for planetary exploration. Two of five kinds of rockets used to explore space and launch satellites were out of production and no new rockets were being developed. (Kirkman, W News, 8/21/70)
Abolition of 21-day quarantine for astronauts returning from moon was recommended to NAS panel by NASA officials and representatives of Interagency Committee on Back Contamination. Panel Chairman, Dr. Allan H. Brown of Univ. of Pennsylvania, said his. group would relay decision to NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. (UPI, NYT, 2/18/70, C17)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., told news conference at Coast Guard Academy in New London, Conn.: “In the past it has taken a war to force technology to advance at an abnormal rate. The space program did it in peacetime, and to me this makes much more sense.” Swigert defended proposals for Mars exploration: “If we can learn more about our solar system and have those benefits accrue to the economy, I would say it is worthwhile.” (AP, W Post, 9/10/70)
Survey of U.S. news coverage in five most important Soviet newspapers Jan. 1 to June 30, 1970, was published by Washington Post. U.S. space program, including Apollo 13, had been mentioned 30 times. U.S. economic problems had received 89 mentions and reports of U.S. “sick society,” including crime, had appeared 82 times. (Astrachan, WPost, 7/13/70, Al)
Short circuit in oxygen tank No. 2 caused combustion within tank. “This in turn caused the pressure and a temperature within the tank to increase. The tank then ruptured. This rupture. .. caused the pressure in the compartment in which the tank is located to increase which then caused. .. the big covering panel in the Service Module to blow off.” Panel hit high-gain antenna and knocked it out, causing brief loss of data. Preflight events of possible significance included change of motors of fans inside tank at Beech Aircraft Co. plant early in manufacture. “Later on the tank, itself, was.. .moved from one spacecraft and installed in spacecraft 109 and during the removal from spacecraft.. .106, it was jarred or dropped an inch or two [5-10 cm].... Finally, during the loading and unloading of the tank during the countdown demonstration tests at the Cape there was an anomaly which made it very difficult to get the oxygen out of the tank. This was several weeks before the flight and a new procedure not previously tried was used in the detanking”—gaseous oxygen “was pumped into the tank and released again, the heaters were turned off and on....” Board was investigating connection between events and accident and would submit final report to Dr. Low and Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, about June 1. (Transcript)
Actions in response to Apollo 13 Review Board Report [see June 15] were recommended by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, in memo to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. They included oxygen tank modifications, addition of third oxygen tank on Apollo 14 and 15, modification of fuel-cell oxygen reactant valve to separate Teflon-coated wires from oxygen environment, caution and warning system modifications, addition of second-level limits sensing in Mission Control Center, comprehensive review of consumables and emergency equipment in lm and CM, and tests and analysis recommended by Review Board. (Hearing, Sen Com on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Apollo 13 Mission Review, 6/30/ 70, 52, 57)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified in NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Our most serious problem in recent years has been our inability to hire newly graduated scientists, engineers and administrative professionals in sufficient numbers. The average age of NASA employees is now increasing 8/10 of a year each year. While we were able to hire 965 graduating college students in 1966, the number dropped to 738 in 1967, 567 in 1968, 253 in 1969, and an estimated 180 in 1970.” NASA Civil Service staffing would decline from 31 350 at end of FY 1970 to 30550 at end of FY 1971. Of this reduction, 600 would result from phasing out of erc employees. Total of 200 would be reduced at manned space flight centers and NASA Hq. (Testimony)
Experience in space program, Borman said, “has been the most rewarding of my life. This new opportunity will enable me to work with a major industrial firm, continue an association with the space effort and to devote a substantial amount of my time through the Foundation to many issues which have interested me for a long time.” (NASA Release 70-14)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, confirmed to press in Washington, D.C., that he had proposed George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for post of NASA Administrator being vacated by Dr. Thomas O. Paine on Sept. 15. Rep. Fulton said he had made recommendation in telegram to President Nixon July 31. (Lan-nan, W Star, 8/31/70, Al)
South African surgeon Dr. Christian N. Barnard, heart transplant pioneer, toured msfc and addressed NASA audience. He asked for closer cooperation between heart transplant research and space program so that studies of effects of weightlessness could be more closely observed. (Marshall Star, 2/25/70, 1)
NASA announced it had issued rfps to potential experimenters for scientific investigations based on data acquired during erts missions A and B, scheduled for 1972 and 1973 launch. Missions would be first in U.S. space program devoted exclusively to study of earth’s environmental resources from space. They were designed to improve methods for managing resources, erts a and B sensors would obtain image data in visible and infrared spectrum using spectral ranges previously studied by instrumented aircraft and verified by Apollo ^experiment in March 1969. Proposals were due April 15, 1971. (NASA Release 70-117)
Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial on President’s space goal message: “Underlying the message seemed to be one word—flexibility. And because the space program deals with the unknown, it is reasonable to accept flexibility as a necessary factor.” (C Plain Dealer, 3/8/70)
Initial plans for international docking system that would eliminate current “key-in-lock” approach of U.S. and Soviet space programs had been presented by NASA representatives at Oct. 26-27 U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation meetings in Moscow, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. U.S.S.R. had reciprocated with detailed plans of docking system similar to Apollo’s. “While the proposed American scheme is a long-term project,” NASA engineers believed “the Apollo system and the new Soviet one are enough alike to be modified for compatibility.” (NYT, 11/21/70)
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel submitted report to NASA in form of letter to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, from panel chairman, Dr. Charles D. Harrington. Panel found that Apollo 13 Review Board procedures and scope of inquiry had “proved effective in their task.” Board had “performed a thorough and technically competent analysis in the reconstruction of the factors contributing to the Apollo 13 abort.” Panel “found no evidence and no reason to doubt the technical validity of their determination and findings.” (Hearing, Sen Com on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Apollo 13 Mission Review, 6/30/70,51, 56)
Western Europe wanted full partnership in U.S. post-Apollo space program and access to any inventions that emerged from it, Theo Lefevre, President of European Space Conference, said at Brussels meeting. Conference of 13 nations asked Lefevre to visit Washington, D.C., in September to examine financial and political conditions of European participation. Conference agreed to establish new space agency to replace eldo, ESRO, and cets and develop program to give Western Europe operational systems of telecommunication satellites, 1978-1980; begin joint program with U.S. for air traffic control satellites; finance studies for weather satellites; and proceed with construction of Europa 1 and 2 rockets and development of Europa 3. (AP, NYT, 7/25/70)
NASA’s intention to assist Texas with problems of pollution and preservation of natural resources and environment had been announced by Texas Gov. Preston Smith, Houston Chronicle reported. Governor had asked NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, for access to “vast wealth of scientific information” in Earth Resources data bank at MSC. Data would include remote sensor material from aircraft and satellites over Texas and its coastline. (H Chron, 3/22/70)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, addressed Fourteenth General IAEA Conference in Vienna: “The industrial and technological advances being made in the world are creating increasing demands for electric power that is cheap, abundant, safe, reliable and clean. In my country, the estimated total electrical generating capacity for 1970 is about 300 000 megawatts. I believe that a realistic estimate of the projected growth of our electrical generating capacity by the year 2000 is about 2 100 000 megawatts, which will require adding the equivalent of a total of 1 800 power plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each.” On global scale, “some 5000 new electric generating plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each would be needed over the next 30 years.” (Text) Predominant theme of conference, was that reusable shuttles would substantially lessen cost of practical uses of space. There was little talk of manned space stations or exploration of other planets. Discussions centered on use of satellites for communications, air traffic control, and weather forecasting. European public had become “cool to manned space flight,” New York Times said. ESRO head, Dr. Herman Bondi, said at conference, “We have grown up with the impression that everything in space is devilishly expensive.” Belgian aerospace executive Maurice Desirant said European efforts at joint space programs had been handicapped by pressures to perform national feats. Now, however, European countries had become “more and more aware of the dangers.” They had seen money wasted on duplicated efforts which had achieved limited results. Lefevre said that, to be effective, European contribution to major space effort must be under leadership strong enough to override any differences arising from “divergent technical points of view, reasons of industrial competition, economic whims for national politics or finances.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers outlined shuttle plans. Payload of 22 680 kg (50 0OO lb) had been halved. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/23-24/70; NYT, 9/26/70, 11) September 23: Roy P. Jackson, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div., was named NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective Nov. 2. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, also announced appointment of Oran W. Nicks, who had been Acting Associate Administrator of OART, as Deputy Director of Langley Research Center, effective Nov. 2. Vincent L. Johnson was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective immediately. (NASA Release 70-155)
Institute for Strategic Studies in London had released annual report, The Military Balance, 1970-71, Reuters said. July survey had shown U.S.S.R. could deploy 1300 ICBMs—246 more than U.S. But U.S, “promises to increase its warhead lead” with three-warhead system on Minuteman III rocket with 12 900-km (8000-mi) range. U.S. also was converting submarines to take 10-warhead Poseidon missile. U.S.S.R. had been testing three-warhead system. Report estimated that U.S. had more than 6000 nuclear warheads fitted to missiles capable in theory of reaching Soviet territory, while some 2000 Soviet warheads were fitted to missiles with range to hit continental U.S. U.S. had 656 submarine-launched ballistic missiles; U.S.S.R., 280. (Maynes, WPost, 9/4/70, A18) Septembers: NASA announced it had reversed April 8 decision to award $50-million ats-F and ATS-G contract to General Electric Co. and would award contract to Fairchild Hiller Corp. instead. Decision was based on Aug. 26 report of ats Procurement Review Committee (PRC) and recommendations of Selection Panel appointed by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, July 16. Panel concurred with PRC finding that procedural discrepancies had not affected outcome of competition and that cost difference between final proposals was not significant as basis for selection, but that important technical differences existed in which Fairchild Hiller was superior. It did not concur with PRC conclusion that Fairchild was superior in nearly all aspects of organization and management. (NASA Special Release; Memo of Decision)
U.S. space program problems were described in Washington Post by Thomas O’Toole: U.S. needed to begin development of space shuttle “now, which in a way is the worst possible time for it.” Country was “weary of big new space projects, particularly while the spectacular Apollo project is -still unfolding. . . . Also, the space agency is without an appointed administrator, which means that NASA cannot exercise its full role with Congress or the White House.” NASA managers “go on sailing a skipperless ship. But what they find more disturbing is the feeling that nobody at headquarters cares whether the ship gets a captain or not.” It was no secret that “men who run the space program are deeply disappointed in the Nixon Administration.” They felt “that the White House neither understands nor cares to understand what the space program means or what it can do for the country.” There was feeling Congress had ceased to care, too. House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight had canceled hearings on Apollo future because, “outside of Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, none of the subcommittee members was concerned enough. . . .to agree to the urgency of the hearings.” (WPost, 9/27/70, Bl) September 28:	Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying American Science & Engineering, Inc., experiment to study x-ray spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on President’s space goal message: “President Nixon’s ‘low profile’ space program represents a realistic appraisal of the American temper at this time. Without the Russians nipping at our heels, apparently, there is little public pressure to keep space exploration and development going at better than a jog. It’s worth noting, however, that although Mr. Nixon has accepted implicit funding limitations reflecting both his own anti-inflation drive and public opinion, he hasn’t really slammed any doors.” (P Bull, 3/14/70) The Economist commented: “Nasa’s future plans may not brighten the back of cereal boxes but they are solid, varied and balanced. The dangers from now-on are not likely to be financial but technical: the space shuttle will be hard to make.” (Economist. 3/14/70,53)
Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as CM pilot on Apollo 13 mission April 11, Dr, Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced. Mattingly, exposed to German measles, had not developed immunity and was expected to show symptoms of disease next week. “The recommendation of ApriMO: nasa announced that Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as cm pilot on Apollo 13 mission. Cancellation of the mission had been considered following Mattingly's exposure to German measles. Below, Dr. George M, Low (left). Deputy Administrator, conferred with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at April 10 launch status meeting at Kennedy Space Center. everyone. . .was unanimous that Apollo 13 be launched tomorrow,” Dr. Paine told press at ksc. Decision was made after Swigert demonstrated in intensive training that he could replace Mattingly on short notice. “When it comes to the problems you can get into in the command module. . Jack [Swigert] literally wrote the book on the malfunctions and how to overcome them,” Dr. Paine said. Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said Swigert had performed critical maneuvers flawlessly in training. “Our simulator people said it couldn’t be done. . .but we anticipated more problems than we had. We were all surprised. It went very smoothly.” (Wilford, NYT, 4/11/70, 1; O’Toole, WPost, 4/11/70, Al)
On first anniversary of Apollo IVs first manned lunar landing, Apollo 11	Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, visited Apollo 11 spacecraft exhibit at state capitol in Jefferson City, Mo., and received plaque from Missouri Gov. Warren E. Hearnes. Later they flew to New York, where they presented 113 g (4 oz) lunar sample to U.N. Secretary General U Thant. Sample would remain on exhibit at U.N. Presenting sample, Dr. Paine said: “What the full significance of Apollo will be to the world of the future, no one can yet predict. We must await the verdict of history. But as we continue to learn and to explore, I am inclined to think that our first moon landing may some day be thought of as the turning point when man first demonstrated that he can open new worlds, where eventually exciting new extraterrestrial societies will be founded. Mankind will move onward to settle and colonize other worlds, and the United Nations will encompass new territories, if not new dimensions.” NASA centers and tracking stations around world celebrated anniversary throughout week. (NASA Release 70-125; upi, NYT, 7/21/70; Text)
Uhuru (Explorer XL]I) Small Astronomy Satellite was (aimdied into an equatorial orbit by Italy Iron the San Marco launch platform off the coast of Kenya, East Africa, on Kenya’s Independence Day. “Lfhuru" was the Swahili word for “freedom." Boosted by a four-stage Scout vehicle to map x-ray sources both within and beyond the Milky Way Galaxy, the satellite was the first launched for the United States by another country. At left Mrs. Marjorie Townsend, project manager, discussed satellite performance with a colleague during p re flight tests at Goddard Space Flight Center. During first day of operation Uhuru was expected to collect more data than had been obtained with sounding rockets in past eight years. Satellite’s Jong observing time, rather than the few minutes for sounding rockets, would permit observation of x-ray sources from 30 to 50 times fainter than those observed thus far, probably increasing number of observed x-ray sources from 540 to several hundred. Uhuru was first in series of three explorers in Small Astronomy Satellite program to survey sky above earth’s atmosphere and identify x-ray, gamma-ray, UV, and infrared sources. It was first U.S. satellite launched by another country. Under NASA and Univ. of Rome agreement NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team, trained at Wallops Station, conducted assembly, checkout, and launch services on cost-reimbursable basis, sasb would be launched in October 1971 and SAS-C in December 1972. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 70-203)
NASA released text of Oct. 29 agreement with Soviet Academy of Sciences for joint efforts to design compatible space docking and rendezvous arrangements. Agreement had been confirmed by exchange of notes between Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy. [See Oct. 29.] (nasa Release 70-210)
Atlas of the Universe by Patrick Moore was published by Rand McNally & Co. Volume contained almost 1500 maps, drawings, and charts, many provided through cooperation of NASA and U.S. Geological Survey. Book had foreword by Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, and epilogue by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, former NASA Administrator. (Gordon, W News, 11/16/70)
dod announced General Dynamics Corp. was receiving $191 297 000 as final payment for cost overruns on production models of F-lll aircraft. Original contract, managed by Aeronautical Systems Div., had been for $3 251 947 744. (dod Release 693-70; WSJ, 8/26/70,4)
Press comment on Apollo program cutback: Washington Post editorial: “There has rarely been a major program that has gone up the hill and down again as fast as has the manned space program. Just a year ago NASA was riding high on the success of Apollo 11. Now it is scratching operations and scrambling for money to keep even a portion of the original program and its progeny in business. This, in our view, is bad because if it is carried too far it threatens to turn the entire manned space effort into the most spectacular (and most expensive) stunt in history instead of the first step in a genuine effort to learn a little more about some of the secrets of the universe. NASA’s decision to focus on the future rather than on a full study of the moon will help at least to keep the option of a worthwhile space program open.” (WPost, 9/6/70, B6) Richard D. Lyons in New York Times: When U.S. politicians first proclaimed national effort to land men on moon influential scientific leaders had scoffed. “A decade later the scythe of discontent with Apollo has swung full circle. Now it is the politicians who are attacking the program while the scientists wring their hands over lack of support.” Nixon Administration had “not been kind to the space program, although the President repeatedly stated that he supports it enthusiastically. The main reason is money, or the lack of it, which was almost no object when Apollo was bom.” (NYT, 9/6/70, 4:7)
House passed S.R. 193, to provide for appointment of former NASA Administrator James E. Webb as Citizen Regent of Board of Regents of Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 5/4/70, H3828-9)
Second volume of third edition of new Soviet encyclopedia Bolshaya Sovetskaya Entsklopediya—to go on sale in October— displayed “factual approach” to U.S. space program, AP said. Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong received half-column biography and small photo as first man to walk on moon. Apollo missions were given nearly two pages, including two-column photo of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., on moon and diagram of lunar landing. (AP, LA Times, 911110)
NASA Hq. briefing on FY 1971 budget, held Jan. 31, was released. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had said: “We are putting into motion with this budget a program which does not advance toward a single climactic event. It follows the recommendations of the Space Task Group Report’s Option II, although at a reduced pace. The budget to implement the recommendations, however, is austere and, as a result, does not take full advantage of our total capability. But the new program has the flexibility to accommodate this reduced budget in FY 1971.” Lowest NASA budget since FY 1962 “means substantial cutbacks and deferrals in a number of programs. Our best current estimate is that the total nationwide employment on NASA work—which was once 420,000 people—will decline from current level by another 45,000, to about 144,000 people by the end of fiscal year 1971. The impact will be felt in many sections of the country. This is regrettable, but the Administration has faced the hard fact that these steps must be taken to achieve a fiscally responsible balanced budget in this time of inflation. .. .this budget level, which we hope will be NASA’s lowest level, is strongly oriented to the future. The necessary reductions.. .have not been made ‘across the board.’ We have made careful selections and decisions.” NASA would preserve strong future capability centered on development of economical, reusable space transportation system including shuttle, space station, and reusable nuclear rocket; continue efforts on practical applications of space technology for early practical benefits on earth; continue lunar exploration with Apollo vehicles and Apollo Applications earth orbital workshop flights with hardware previously under procurement; continue, “but with stretchouts and deferrals,” balanced program of planetary exploration and scientific investigations in space focused on potentially exciting discoveries; continue increasing emphasis on aeronautics; and maintain “essential cadre of NASA’s technical, operational, and management capabilities on which the continuing and future position of the United States in space depends.” [See Jan. 13.] Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly during briefing had replied to question that planned fund request for space station and shuttle had been for $250 million to $260 million— supporting Task Group’s Option II, to provide operational systems in 1977—but request had been cut to final $110 million. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said program should give CY 1978 operational date. Dates for Mars mission were not yet planned. Michoud Assembly Facility and Mississippi Test Facility were among NASA installations to be affected by budgetary action, Lilly had said. Plans on Michoud would be to “complete the last of 15 Saturn 5’s in 1970; then we will be carrying on activities for the storage, repairing and refurbishing of the 1-B and the Saturn 5 stages, providing the engineering and support necessary for the flights through 1974, and maintaining the capability to restart or reinitiate the production of Saturn 5’s; maintaining the capability to accept new work.. .and. . .attempting to find other, users of that facility in New Orleans.” At mtf, Saturn V static test firings would be completed. “Then, the plans in our budget are to mothball the facilities. Personnel will be phased down.. .to essentially a mothball or caretaker mode.” NASA was working with other agencies to seek other uses for that location. (Transcript)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced appointment of Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, effective March 1.	Dr. von Braun would be succeeded by his deputy, Dr. Eberhard F.	M. Rees. Dr. Paine said: “It is essential that we bring NASA’s best talents to bear on our future space planning.” NASA must select its “new space ventures with the best critical judgment and make every dollar count. Dr. Wernher von Braun has an unmatched record of looking to the future to choose the most promising avenues of technical advance. He brings to his new assignment sound vision, insight, and technical competence. .. .” (msfc Release 70-19; NASA Release 70-13)
Apollo 13 editorials: Baltimore Sun: “The simple, grateful ‘welcome home’ spoken throughout the world yesterday not only lifted a burden of dread; it celebrated a new and unforgettable triumph in man’s exploration of space and his own resources of courage and ability at their highest.” (B Sun, 4/18/70) New York Times: “Only in a formal sense, Apollo 13 will go into history as a failure . . . Apollo 13’s booster rocket was sent crashing into the moon on schedule, and that did produce some useful and important scientific data. But in a larger sense, Apollo 13’s flight was enormously productive. The emergency which so gravely endangered its crew turned this flight into a crucial—though unintended— experiment in space rescue .... The lessons learned from this near-disaster will help save spacefarers who are still unborn. And Apollo 13’s ordeal must raise more insistently than ever the question of creating an international space rescue organization with the rockets, crews, and other necessities required to give aid to distressed travelers in space.” (NYT, 4/18/70) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “The very real triumph of Apollo 13, the successful return of a crippled craft, could help the United States space program. What NASA can learn from its inquiry into the cause of the accident could further advance space science and technology —and safety. Certainly further evaluation of the space program’s timetable is in order. But man learns from his failures as well as from his spectacular achievements.” (C Plain Dealer, 4/18/70) New York News: “President Nixon has very fittingly proclaimed tomorrow a day of national thanksgiving. And with that attended to, the U.S. space research and exploration program should proceed full-speed ahead, with special reference to more manned moon shots, and the sooner the better. To falter or fail now would be. . .unworthy of Americans or America.” (NY News, 4/18/70) Nature: “One of the striking features of the past days has been the sheer competence of the people who have been concerned on the ground as well as in the sky. As always, NASA has put on a good show, and there is more to this than the mere capacity to keep a stiff upper lip or even to diminish real dangers.” NASA had functioned “superbly” during daring exploits. “A part of the secret has been that there have been enough men on hand to think of everything, or nearly everything. Another has been the logic of the planning.” Conduct of Apollo would be “monument to the way in which pure reason can accelerate complicated technical developments. Nothing decided in the next few months should diminish the importance of this brilliant demonstration. Those who are inclined to complain that there had been an accident should, rather, wonder why it has not happened before.” (Nature, 4/18/70* 197)
U.S. reaction to Apollo 13's successful splashdown: Sign at msc was changed from “Our hearts are with the Apollo 13 crew,” to “Sigh of relief party here tonight.” Mission Control broke into applause before whipping out traditional cigars to fill huge room with blue smoke. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, observed that mission had not been complete failure. Spacecraft had gone around moon—feat that would have caused sensation two years before. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said later in day, “I’m a little tired and bedraggled but I’m feeling 10 or 20 years younger than I did yesterday.” In New York, thousands watched recovery on giant TV screen at Grand Central Terminal. Loud applause sounded when capsule appeared in sky, at splashdown, and when astronauts appeared. Hot dog stand operator at Vanderbilt Ave. and 47th Street assured pas-sersby, “It’s all right.” Long strands of multicolored ticker tape and bushels of confetti poured from skyscraper windows. At City Hall, Mayor John V. Lindsay said, “Now they are safely back and New Yorkers join with men everywhere in saying’welcome home.’” Church bells pealed throughout Nation. Traffic came to standstill in Indianapolis, Los Angeles reported no crime for brief period, and dice stopped rolling in Las Vegas briefly. Richmond, Va., department store manager, watching crowd before store TV set, said everybody “had a quiet smile, but it was curious the way they stood iooking at all that good news—silently and almost as if they were still praying.” (WPost, 4/18/70, Al, All; NYT, 4/18/70, 1, 13)
Japan’s space goals were described in Aviation Week & Space Technology: “Japan is redirecting the orientation of its national space program with the ambitious goal of placing a series of advanced satellites into orbit by the mid-1970s.” Plans provided for variety of payloads, including comsats, navigation, and geodetic satellite packages. “If successful, and if the funding to support it is forthcoming, [Japan’s] satellite and booster technology will outstrip that of the older programs of western Europe, placing Japan third in line behind the U.S. and the Soviet Union.” (Brownlow, Av Wk, 2/23/ 70, 75-85)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
Federation of American Scientists held Washington, D.C., news conference to protest extensive advertising campaign by American Security Council asserting U.S.S.R. had taken lead in strategic nuclear weaponry. Dr. Herbert Scoville, Jr., head of fas Strategic Weapons Committee presented chart showing U.S. had 1710 long-range missiles and 550 strategic bombers, for total of 2260 delivery vehicles. Soviet force had 1518 missiles and 150 bombers, or 1668 delivery vehicle total, and was building 390 additional vehicles. (Beecher, NYT, 10/27/70, 13) In exchange of basic information on docking systems NASA officials described Gemini and Apollo techniques, procedures, and docking adapters and Skylab project. Soviet team described plans for future system similar to Apollo’s, with tunnel between spacecraft to accommodate docking apparatus. Agreement was reached that 12 specific technical elements required further joint study, including guidance systems for rendezvous, docking hardware, coordinate systems, and reference markings. Teams agreed on November exchange by mail of supplementary technical information and subsequent meeting in March or April to organize three joint working groups, to meet alternately in U.S. and U.S.S.R. to develop compatible hardware and procedures. (Transcript, NASA background press briefing, 10/29/70)
usaf announced award of additional $78 million to General Dynamics Corp. to cover cost of overruns on F-lll aircraft and said further overrun payments were forthcoming. USAF had announced award of $191.3 million to General Dynamics Corp. Aug. 25 as final payment for cost overruns on production models of F-l 11. (WSJ, 12/1/70) During November:	usaf total-force concept for 1970s was described in Air Force and Space Digestby Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force: Increased numbers and total payload of Soviet icbms and Soviet deployment of abm system could reduce effectiveness of U.S. land- and sea-based missiles. “We are deploying abm protection for our missile fields and strengthening the penetration capability of our missiles with the deployment of mirv. But . . .effectiveness of our missile forces will tend to vary, depending upon the length of time it takes us to respond to new Soviet capabilities.” Dispersed manned bomber force with quick reaction would provide stability. “It might be possible to undermine the effectiveness of either missiles or bombers alone, but to counter both at the same time would be a vastly more difficult problem.” B-l bomber represented most economically feasible means to retain stabilizing capability. “Given the decade of leadtime involved, we must expedite the development of this aircraft.” With Soviet fighters “becoming superior to our own,” air-to-air combat was “primary concern in our development of the F-15, which will have superior capability for close-in, highly maneuverable combat” and “provide the effective weapon system necessary to defeat any enemy fighter. . . .we are convinced that effective close air support will continue to be a vital mission.. .and that an aircraft especially tailored for that role is required. . . .we are proceeding with the development of the A-X. To modernize our airlift capability, we are relying heavily on the C-5, which will produce a revolution in air mobility.” In 1973, “with the C-5 in the inventory, projections indicate that we will be able to move an Army division with equipment and six fighter squadrons with support units to Europe in less than one week.” (AF/SD, 11/70,68-71)
News conference on results of Apollo 12 lunar surface experiment’s was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, said first anniversary of alsep was “scientific and technological triumph. The design specification was for one lunar day and night. Our design goal was for one calendar year.” Year after deployment alsep had received and processed over 6500 commands, had undergone 2600 533-K (500°F) swings of temperature, and was still being operated remotely 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said unmanned vehicle, such as U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I, could not explore surface as well as men could because men could deploy more equipment more effectively, perform more experiments, and collect more samples. He noted that Apollo 11 had collected 22.7 kg (50 lbs) of samples; Apollo 12, 34 kg (75 lbs); and Luna XVI, 90 g (0.2 lb). Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory said seismic events were being recorded at rate of about one per day; some were impacts from grapefruit-size meteoroids and some appeared to be small moonquakes. In region of Apollo 12 station there were at least nine places at which moon-quakes occurred “every month at or near the time when the moon comes closest to earth in its monthly orbital cycle.” Most active zone for moonquakes was about 193 km (120 mi) southeast of al-SEP, near rilles in Fra Mauro crater, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Charles P. Sonett of arc said data indicated moon’s temperature increased very slowly with depth below surface, probably rising no higher than 1273 K (1332°F)—too cool for molten core characteristic of volcanic body. Dr. Conway M. Snyder of jpl described behavior of thin cloud of ionized gas detected after ascent stage was crashed into moon. Solar wind of ionized particles should have blown the gas downwind; it traveled upwind and was detected by alsep instruments. Cause of acceleration of the particles was unknown. (Transcript; Schmeck, NYT, 11/19/70,32; O’Toole, WPost, 11/19/70, A14)
President Nixon sent message to Congress setting forth Federal Economy Act of 1970: “I propose reduction, termination or restructuring of 57 programs which are obsolete, low priority or in need of basic reform. These program changes would save a total of $2.5 billion in the fiscal year 1971.” Among “most significant” items in total savings effort was space program. “After the recent successful Apollo missions, scientific needs for more manned lunar explorations were reassessed. We concluded that fewer manned expeditions to the moon were needed, and production of additional Saturn V launch vehicles and spacecraft has been suspended. Eight Saturn Vs remain in our inventory for manned flights during the early 70s: Savings as a result of these and related space research decisions total $417 million in fiscal year 1971 appropriations.” (PD, 3/2/ 70,271-5)
nsf problems in stabilizingiU.S. basic science research during FY 1971 “with budgetary squeezes on mission-oriented agencies such as NASA, and aec, and Mansfield-amendment effects rippling through dod,” were described by nsf Director William D. McElroy in interview published by Astronautics & Aeronautics magazine: “We can identify positively right now the order of $70 million [in basic science research] that has been previously supported by other agencies. .. .we don’t have $70 million additional money to pick that up, so there is going to be a squeeze here.” Though nsf FY 1971 budget would show $73-million increase over FY 1970 amount of $438 million, only $10 million could be earmarked for picking up programs cut by other Government agencies, (A&A, 12/70, 12-14) During 1970: U.S. orbited 38 spacecraft in 28 launches—including Apollo 13's CSM Odyssey, lm Aquarius, and S-IVB stage intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 88 payloads in 81 launches; France, 2; Italy, 1 (for NASA on NASA launch vehicle); Japan, 1; and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 21 orbited by dod in 17 launches and 17 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for NATO and 1 for dod. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launch of Apollo 13, but mission was cut short by an oxygen tank rupture. Three-man crew, taking emergency measures and using lm as “lifeboat,” returned safely to earth after looping around moon. Analysis of Apollo system and modifications necessary to prevent or meet future emergencies and reevaluation of Apollo program caused rescheduling of Apollo 14 from 1970 to early 1971 and reduction in number of remaining Apollo missions from six to four. Unmanned program included orbiting of Intelsat-III F-6, Intelsat-Ill F-7, and Intelsat-III F-8 comsats for ComSatCorp; Noaa I meteorological satellite for noaa and prototype meteorological satellite Itos I; NASA’s Nimbus IV in support of world weather program; Uhuru (Explorer XLII) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched for NASA by Italy); Serf II Space Electric Rocket Test; and Ofo Orbiting Frog Otolith, carrying two bullfrogs. Launched as secondary payloads were Oscar V(U.S.-Australia) amateur radio-propagation satellite carried on Itos I; DOD’s Topo 7 geodetic satellite, on Nimbus IV\ RM Radiation/Meteoroid Satellite, on Ofo; and Cepe Cylindrical Electrostatic Probe Experiment, on Noaa I. Almost 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched to altitudes between 160 and 1600 km (100 and 1000 mi) to study space physics and astronomy, including 19 during solar eclipse. One of the 19 detected unexpectedly high amount of neutral hydrogen streaming into earth’s atmosphere. Meteorological sounding rockets included 46 Nike-Cajuns and more than 200 boosted Dart and Areas rockets. About 60 high-altitude balloons—including one carrying Strato-scope II optical telescope—were launched to altitudes as high as 45 700 m (150 000 ft). In joint NASA-USAF lifting-body program M2-F3, HL-10, and X-24A lifting-body vehicles made 22 flights. HL-10 reached mach 1.86 (1970 km per hr; 1224 mph), setting new lifting-body speed record. M2-F3 made its first glide flight and X-24A made its first supersonic flight, reaching 1223 km per hr (760 mph). In aeronautics, YF-12A aircraft made 60 flights in joint nasa-usaf research program. Boeing 747 jumbo jet began commercial operations, and maiden flights were made by usn F-14A Tomcat air superiority fighter, Lockheed L-1011 airbus, and Douglas DC-10 airbus. C-5A cargo transport was delivered to Charleston afb for operational use. SST development continued—amid much debate over costs, sonic boom, and environmental pollution—with Congress approving funding through March 1971. Full-scale hypersonic research engine was tested for first time in LaRC’s 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel at mach 7.4, and thick supercritical wing was flown on modified usn T-2-C aircraft. Other aeronautical research included studies on runway slipperiness, v/stol avionics, aircraft noise, landing radar, and pilot warning indicators. dod space program included orbiting of last two Vela nuclear detection satellites, Topo I geodetic satellite (launched by nasa), and U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat (launched by nasa). In joint NASA-AEC effort, SNAP-19 and SNAP-27 radioisotope generators completed one year of continuous operation on lunar surface, candidate fuel element for nerva completed 10 hrs of electrical corrosion testing, and Peewee-2 experimental reactor was fabricated and delivered for testing in early 1971. U.S.S.R.’s 88 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 2 Lunas, 1 Zond, 1 Soyuz, 1 Venus, 2 Intercosmos, 4 Meteors, and 5 Molniya Is. Unmanned Luna XVI landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. Luna XV/flanded on moon and released Lunokhod I unmanned explorer that traveled across lunar surface and conducted experiments by ground command. Venus VII landed on planet Venus and transmitted data on Venusian surface and atmosphere. Only manned mission was Soyuz IX, which carried two cosmonauts on 18-day earth-orbital mission, a new space endurance record. Two countries orbited their first satellites: Japan launched Ohsu-mi and Communist China launched Chicom I. France launched two satellites—Dial, carrying West German wika minicapsule, and Peole applications satellite. (Pres Rpt 71)
In Science editorial, Brown Univ. scientist Dr. A. Hunter Dupree outlined changes that would shape new U.S. science policy: dod had lost ability to justify support for basic research and to attract many scientists. “If the scientists knowledgeable in military research, who provide one of the groups with the best chance to change the course of events with competent criticism, lose touch with the Department of Defense completely, an unparalleled disaster could ensue. Yet, a reordering of the relation of the scientific community to the Department of Defense cannot be postponed.” Scientific community needed to pay more attention to environmental problems. Space program “must find a role for itself with predominantly scientific objectives and a steady state of funding.” Social sciences must receive greater emphasis. Justification of Federal support for research in universities must emphasize goal of building healthy institutions in national interest. And support for education “must contemplate a national research program with a radically different mix of disciplines from that recently prevailing.” (Science, 7/10/70,131)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, accepted Franklin Institute’s William M. Vermiyle Medal on behalf of NASA at Philadelphia ceremony. Award cited NASA for “a decade of unprecedented managerial, scientific and technological achievement culminating in the incredible triumph of landing men on the Moon and returning them safely to earth.” NASA was first organization to receive medal; previous awards for outstanding contributions in industrial management had been made only to individuals. (Franklin Institute Release)
Kenneth M. Smith, former President and Chief Executive of Windecker Research Inc., was sworn in as faa Deputy Administrator. (FAA PIO>
Agreement under which U.S. Coast Guard would conduct National Data Buoy Development Project at MTF had been signed by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Adm. T. R. Sargent, Acting Commandant of USCG, NASA announced. Agreement established basic operational support and reimbursement relations between NASA and USCG. Slidell, La., NASA computer facility also would be available to project. (NASA Release 70-114)
President Nixon submitted nominations to Senate: Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, as U.S. Representative to 14th Session of General Conference of International Atomic Energy Agency; Dwight J. Porter as Deputy U.S. Representative to IAEA; and Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, as alternate representative. President announced appointment of George M. Wolfe as an alternate U.S. representative on ICAO Council and accepted resignation of J.D. Braman as Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and Urban Systems, effective Oct. 1 (PD, 9/14/70, 1196,1197)	.
Between June 30,1970, and June 30,1971, there would be reduction of from 1000 to 2000 in number of aerospace contractor personnel at msc, NASA Deputy Administrator George M. Low said during meetings with press and staff at MSC. Civil service employees would be reduced by 49. (Maloney, HPost, 2/3/70)
Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at National Press Club Luncheon in Washington, D.C., denied interest in running for office of Senator from Wisconsin: “I’m a public servant and I intend to be that way.” He hoped to devote “next two years at least” to helping develop strong, well-balanced space program. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/30/70)
Testimony on Apollo 13 mission was given before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator; Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director; and Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was unable to attend. Dr. Paine said: “The Apollo 13 mission was a failure. We did not succeed in America’s third lunar landing attempt and we were therefore unable to explore the moon’s Fra Mauro formation. This hilly region remains a high priority objective in our lunar program. . .. We cannot yet say which of the remaining Apollo missions will be sent there. Although the Apollo 13 mission failed, we regard the recovery actions that followed.. .as a gratifying success which will contribute greatly to the nation’s space flight competence.” There was no reason “why this setback should be—or should be made to be—the occasion for a major change in the course of the nation’s space program. We have clearly demonstrated the basic soundness of the Apollo system and of our operational procedures. ... From a technical standpoint, there is no question but that we are prepared to move forward in the 1970’s with the space program we have outlined to you....” Dr. Paine said President Nixon “fully shares this view.” (Testimony) Dr. Petrone testified: “This long arduous voyage continuously presented the challenge to balance the spacecraft systems required to perform necessary functions against the availability of consumables, of water, electrical power, oxygen, and the lithium hydroxide to remove the carbon dioxide. The options available to flight and ground crews in every case permitted acceptable courses of action to be selected. During this emergency situation, the remaining systems performed in an outstanding manner meeting the unusual demands placed upon them. At the same time, the flight and ground crews demonstrated exceptional confidence in meeting these sets of unusual circumstances.” Mission ended with “set of consumables which were within about two percent of what we had predicted back at 63 hours or about seven hours after the problem occurred,” Lunney told Committee. “If the consumable posture. . .had worsened or if we had absorbed another failure. . .we would have had to resort to scheduling communication times with the crew.” Although probably within 12 hours to 24 of running out of most critical consumable, water, “had we proceeded into.. .duty cycling the communications gear onboard, we probably could have stretched that period.” Astronaut Lovell described crew’s feelings during crisis: “We soon realized that our only hope of survival was to go into Aquarius, power up its systems and use the systems and the consumables on board. . .for a return home. And it was here that we realized that it was now a case of survival.” Spacecraft was on trajectory that “would have entered us in a sort of permanent orbit, some . 230. . .thousand miles [370 000 km] in apogee, and maybe a thousand [1600 km] or so in perigee. ... Again, the ground came through, and gave us. . .the free trajectory burn, which was required to get us back to earth. My main concern at this point was to get this spacecraft back within the earth’s atmosphere.” (Transcript)
Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, announced establishment of Civil Systems Projects Office at jpl to “develop applications of the laboratory’s capabilities for solution of problems in medical engineering, public safety support, urban land use and transportation.” Office would be headed by Howard H. Haglund, former Surveyor Project Manager, (jpl Release 548)
U.S.S.R. was spending two percent of gnp on space and U.S. one half of one percent, Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Div. of Library of Congress, said in speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. U.S.S.R. gnp in 1969 was estimated at $420 billion; U.S. total was $931 billion. Successful Soviet launches had totaled 44 in 1966,74 in 1968,70 in 1969, and 40 thus far in 1970. Largest element in Soviet space program had been photo-reconnaissance. U.S.S.R.. had led U.S. in payload launch weight every year since launch of 83.5-kg (184-lb) Sputnik in 1957 except 1969. Total payload weight for U.S.S.R. was 2 million kg (4.5 million lbs); for U.S. total was 1.9 million kg (4.25 million lbs). (B Sun, 8/20/70. A3)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, received 1970 “World Citizen” Award of Civitan International at organization’s 50th annual convention in Atlanta, Ga. Citation was for “accomplishments as leading pioneer scientist and engineer” in space program “which has already resulted in successful flights to the moon and untold scientific advances for the benefit of mankind.” Only previous recipients of award were Sir Winston Churchill and President Dwight D. Eisenhower. (Thompson, Atlanta Constitution, 7/1/70)
Value of space program to national defense was discussed by samso Commander, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), before Executives’ Club in Chicago. Program had produced “greatly improved military communications, strategical and tactical; the ability to detect and monitor nuclear detonations anywhere in the world; new capabilities for precise navigation of fast-moving aircraft, ships, submarines or land vehicles; and a variety of capabilities for early warning and other defensive space systems.” First defense comsat system had been transmitting “substantial load of voice communications between Washington and Vietnam since 1967. It can also handle highspeed digital data such as tactical reconnaissance photographs. Improved adaptations of this 26-satellite initial system have been developed for the United Kingdom and NATO.” In year’s time “we will be launching a still further improved Phase II United States system with greater traffic handling capacity, higher reliability and longer life expectancy.” First experimental satellite had also been launched “in development of a new tactical communications capability that will enable troops. . .to communicate with each other in spite of intervening obstacles like mountain ranges or enemy forces. Another new defense capability was built into our vela satellites. . .launched in October of 1963 to monitor the nuclear test ban treaty.” Velas had become “oldest man-made functioning systems in space; they still respond to command, although their duties have largely been taken over now by more advanced versions.” Velas had performed scientific chores like “monitoring the level of solar radiation during manned space flights, to ensure against danger to the astronauts.” usaf navigation satellites under study would permit pinpoint accuracy in navigation of supersonic aircraft and surface and subsurface vehicles. They held promise for prevention of midair collisions. “We’re also doing extensive studies on a space shuttle system that would be. . .a reusable space booster capable of supporting both military and civilian space operations.” It could put satellites into orbit, service satellites operating in space, supply manned space station, or assist in rescue of astronauts in space emergencies. (Text)
Apollo 13 editorials: National Observer: “At a time when Americans were becoming bored with successful flights to the moon, the ordeal of Apollo 13 reminded the nation of the dangers and difficulties of space. But because of courage, care, and uncommon resourcefulness—because, in fact, of history’s most dramatic field expedient—the astronauts made their way safely back to earth. The first walk on the moon was a wonder of wonders, but the return of Apollo 13 was the gladdest moment of them all.” (National Observer, 4/20/70) Wall Street Journal: “Assuming all feasible precautions are taken, then, the issue of death potential should not really be a major factor in assessing the space program, and particularly the very costly moon program. That program should be judged on whether any gains from it are proportionate to the totality of its costs. Some scientists and laymen believe the costs are disproportionate. At any rate, that is the proper criterion for weighing the future of space exploration, not the admitted and awesome danger of death in eternal orbit.” (WSJ, 4/20/70)
Budget limits had caused cancellation of one lunar landing and stretchout of remaining seven Apollo missions into 1974, Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in interview following LSI dedication in Houston, Tex. Eighth lunar landing had been dropped to permit use of Saturn V rocket to launch first U.S. space station in July 1972. (UPI, NYT, 1/5/70, 1)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, told Cleveland, Ohio, press conference LeRC would receive $22-million increase for FY 1971.	“We expect Lewis to play a very significant role in the space station-space base evolution. The challenge in electric power alone is one that will keep Lewis people going indefinitely.” Dr. Paine was visiting NASA centers to explain effects of FY 1971 budget cuts. (Lewis News, 2/13/70, 1)
Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, announced formation of Mariner Venus-Mercury Office at jpl, headed by project manager Walker E. Giberson. (jpl Release 543)
Space/Aeronautics editorial commented on Apollo 13 accident: “It has shown us how vulnerable are the men who go into space in their tiny, fragile capsules. It has stunned us into the realization that accidents can and will happen in space, that not every mission will run off like clockwork, that manned space flight is, and will always be, dangerous. Public awareness, finally, that this is so could immeasurably strengthen the space program. If so, Apollo 13 may prove to be one of the most important missions we have flown to date.” (S/A, 5/70,21)
Senate confirmed nomination of Col. James A, McDivitt (usaf), Apollo 9 astronaut and Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager at MSC, to be brigadier general. (CR, 1/2/71, S21852)
As Apollo 13 approached critical point in efforts to return safely to earth, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press in Houston, “The performance of the entire NASA team with the remainder of this mission will undoubtedly have an effect on a view that Congress has of the activities that we are proposing for the future.” Specific problems encountered by Apollo 13 were “things that will be reviewed by the Congress.” (Wilson, W Post, 4/15/70, A13)
New York Times editorial commented on substitution of Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., for Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II on Apollo 13 mission. “The decision adds a new note of tension and a new reason for worry in what will be—despite the brilliant success of the two earlier moon trips—an exceedingly dangerous venture whose maneuvers require the most precise possible coordination among all three crew members. In the entire history of the space program there can have been few if any more difficult or more hotly debated choices faced by the program’s top leaders.” {NYT, 4/11/ 70,30)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, spoke on future of national space program before aiaa in Washington, D.C. He said he thought if U.S. “can still afford foreign travel, still afford Scotch whiskey, can still afford to buy our wives Italian shoes, it is mainly due to the space program.” Unprecedented growth in U.S. economy during first decade of space could have been accomplished only “by such programs as demanding as the landing of men on the Moon.” Endeavor focused science and technology “into a direction that raises the entire plateau of knowledge and the plateau of engineering to enable you to do better things.” (Program; SBD, 12/4/70,133)
Management of U.S. and Soviet space programs were compared in Science by Dr. Foy D. Kohler, former U.S. Ambassador to U.S.S.R., and Dr. Dodd L. Harvey, both of Univ. of Miami: Programs had been roughly equal in complexity and in input of resources. “If, as has been asserted, the U.S. moon undertaking represented a task equal in technological complexity to the total of all the great tasks performed by man from the building of the pyramids through explosion of the atom bomb, hardly less can be said of Soviet space enterprise.” Soviet investment in space program had been comparable to that of U.S., “if not substantially greater.” Both programs had depended for success on effective organization and use of existing organizations and expertise and both had required extensive organizational and administrative innovations and new management techniques.In both programs most of basic scientific knowledge and technology already existed. Organization and management had been complicated by necessity of serving both military and nonmilitary objectives and by pressures of diverging national interests. Both programs represented “organizational triumphs of a high order.” Aspect of U.S. moon landing now generally forgotten was “that a number of knowledgeable people were convinced it could not be done.” Programs differed in that “to the Soviet regime.. .the name of the game in space has been ‘the system,’ not scientific and technological excellence as such.” In U.S., National Aeronautics and Space Act “reflected the operation of the representative process at what could be called its best.” Its provisions “subjected space activities to continuing congressional control in accord with long-established processes.” U.S. space effort represented “new sort of partnership between government, industry, and universities. . . a partnership that has benefited and strengthened each of the participants without impinging on their interests and integrity.” Soviet space effort had had less impact on national economy than had U.S. effort. Soviet sources had revealed continuing shortcomings in computer technology and hardware upon which space program was dependent. Soviet scientists and technologists not directly engaged in space program did not receive direct knowledge of space program’s technical discoveries and innovations and were denied use of research tools and techniques employed. “The Soviets themselves are evidencing increasing agitation over their inability to match the United States in transferring ‘great prestige’ and ‘great accomplishments’ in science and technology to meet the general needs of society.” Authoritative statement indicated U.S.S.R. intended to triple space expenditures in next few years, while in U.S. “prevailing national mood seems to be moving strongly against investments for the future in favor of maximum utilization of resources for the immediate betterment of conditions of life.” This raised question, “Has the whole operation represented but another highly successful one-shot exercise in crisis management, or has it represented incorporation into American society of a new way to organize, systematically and purposefully, the development and use of scientific and technological resources to the furtherance of national goals?” (Science, 9/11/70,1049-56) On Sept. j7 LunaXVIentered near-circular lunar orbit with 110.1km (68.4-mi) altitude. Tass said ground controllers put spacecraft into elliptical orbit with 104.6-km (65-mi) apolune and 14.5-km (9mi) perilune. Rocket firing thrust spacecraft toward moon and braking rockets were fired 295 m (968 ft) from lunar surface. Main braking rockets were shut down 19.8 m (65 ft) above surface and Luna XVI softlanded on moon’s Sea of Fertility at 10:18 am Baykonur time (1:18 am edt ) Sept. 20. Scientists at Bochum Observatory in West Germany monitored spacecraft’s signals and reported TV pictures transmitted during and after landing were of excellent quality. After collecting lunar samples and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna XVI lifted off from moon. It had spent 26 hrs 25 min on lunar surface. Tass announced that spacecraft’s mission was the “solution of a radically new task—automatic unmanned delivery of lunar ground to earth.” Samples, Tass said, were obtained with earth-operated electric drill that penetrated to 350 mm (13.7 in) and were placed in container by a “manipulator” and hermetically sealed in. Spacecraft’s landing stage was used as launch pad for liftoff from moon on command from earth. After liftoff spacecraft entered “ballistic trajectory of flight to the earth close to the predetermined one.” Luna XVI entered earth atmosphere at 10:00 am Baykonur time (1:00 am edt) Sept. 24 and parachuted onto steppes of Kazakhstan 26 min later, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered by helicopter for delivery to Soviet Academy of Sciences. Luna XVI was first unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. In last mission in series Luna XV had landed on moon July 21, 1969, but had not returned to earth. (.NYT, 9/13-25/70; B Sun, 9/22/70, Al; SBD, 9/18/70, 78; 9/25/70, 102)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, during U.S.S.R. visit, told Soviet Academy of Sciences that he favored increased space cooperation and that development of space stations and shuttles was “most important” method of practical space usage. “I have found in my discussions with my Soviet cosmonaut colleagues that their objectives in space are very much the same as ours.” Armstrong said he would be glad to be member of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space crew. He felt Soyuz IX experiments in earth measurements would be useful to U.S. space program. In answer to question, Armstrong said he would ask “if I could take my family along” in volunteering for three-year Martian mission. (Clarity, NYT,, 6/4/70, 27)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, discussed further opportunities for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space with Soviet academician Dr. M. D. Millionshchikov during luncheon given by Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., nominee for posts of ost Director and Science Adviser to President Nixon, at Cosmos Club in Washington, D.C. (NASA Off of Admin; Paine speech text, 9/14/70)
Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service published United States and Soviet Progress in Space: How do the Nations Compare? Report by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Div., summarized 12-yr efforts of major space powers. U.S. expected to have spent by June 30, 1970, just over $56 billion on combined military and civilian space programs in which some half million persons had been employed. It was likely U.S.S.R. had “committed a similar amount of resources.” U.S. space employment had peaked; Soviet had not, “as judged by their rising number of launchings.” There was no evidence that total Soviet aerospace industry was as fully equipped as U.S., but missiles of differing design philosophies seen in Moscow parades suggested “more than one design and development team for space work just as in Soviet aviation.” Each country seemed adequately equipped with launch pads. U.S.S.R. claimed nationwide tracking system but relied on ships to fill gaps. U.S.S.R. was still using icbm with 1400-kg (3000-lb) thrust and improved staging to boost 4700-kg (10 400-lb) Vostok and 6600-kg (14 500-lb) Soyuz. Proton launch vehicle had carried 16 800 kg (37 000 lbs) to earth orbit and might have potential to lift 27 200 kg (60 000 lbs) with circumlunar capacity of 6000 kg (14 500 lbs). “We have not yet seen the very large Soviet vehicle confidently predicted by NASA officials the last three years. Lesser Soviet launch vehicles account for unmanned programs.” There was no sign of Soviet breakthrough in fuels “but their engines are run at relatively high pressure, increasing efficiency.” There was no sign that solid-fuel rockets had been used by U.S.S.R. for space purposes and question of Soviet development of nuclear rocket was “highly speculative.” Soviet work on electric rockets had reached only “early proof-of-principle” stage. U.S. Saturn V was “clearly the best operational weight lifter in the world.” Odds were “overwhelming” that Vladimir Komarov had been only Soviet Cosmonaut killed in space so far. “This is because the Russians have followed a conservative approach to manned flight with heavy vehicles allowing much redundancy in equipment.” There seemed to be “little difference between the Soviet and U.S. space programs as to general purpose and direction.” About three fifths of U.S. flights were conducted for dod; similar heavy military emphasis existed in U.S.S.R. “Soviet Union has a large and regular program of military support flights including use of satellites for photographic observation, electronic listening, weather reporting, communications relaying, and ship navigation.” U.S. did not have fob program, “because it does not regard them as necessary or desirable. The Russians obviously do, for reasons not wholly clear.” While assessment could not be conclusive, “suspicion remains that a capability to inspect and destroy satellites has been created” by U.S.S.R. In space applications, U.S. “has held a clear lead from the earlier days of the space program, and this experience has permitted us to move ahead to more advanced systems while the Soviet Union was still working hard to catch up.” U.S.S.R. had made greater effort in number of lunar and planetary flights, “but so far has not gained as good results as we have from a more modest program.” Some 14% of Soviet flights had been in escape mission category and 8% of U.S. flights. Reasonable assumption was “that manned flights by the Russians to the Moon will come as soon as they solve their present problems of unreliability of hardware.” Question of U.S. and U.S.S.R. going to moon together “has been asked more in rhetorical sense than as a concrete offer by either side.” No assessment of prospects could be made “without forecasting the future political climate which is beyond our present capabilities.” (Text)
Apollo 14 Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in Houston that he was concerned that cutbacks in space program, with ensuing layoffs, might lead to poor workmanship at KSC, “I think we would be naive if we didn’t assume that people are unhappy.” (IY Post, 7/12/ 70, A5)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for $2.8-million Life Support Technology Laboratory at LaRC. He said decade of space exploration had been characterized by progress in scientific knowledge and practical benefits to man. New laboratory would contribute to future U.S. efforts to learn more about universe. Laboratory was dedicated “to the welfare of man in space and to the solution of the problems that must be overcome before he can stay there.” (Langley Researcher, 6/12/70,1)
