Kansas City Times editorial commented on appointment of Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator: Dr. Fletcher had “earned respect at Utah as a master of administrative analysis and detail, a man able to wring the last measure of usefulness out of every available dollar and, at the same time, to command intense loyalty from those who work with him. No qualities are likely to prove of more service to a man responsible for leading the American space program out of its nadir of tight money and flagging morale.” (KC Times, 3/11/71)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during hearing on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation: Recent agreements had been directed toward “achieving common objectives,” not “exchange of technology.” Review of relations between NASA and U.S.S.R. “suggests that we should exercise considerable caution in assessing the prospects for prompt and effective implementation of these agreements.” But U.S. negotiators of October and January agreements had observed “definite improvement” over past decade. Negotiations had been “more straight forward, less political. ... A closer kind of relationship seems to be intended by the Soviet side. The top level of the Soviet Academy for the first time participated directly. The negotiations were attended by the first instances of meaningful access to Soviet facilities.” Dr. Low said he had “spent a half-hour or more inside the Soviet simulator with a young Russian engineer who explained in detail the working of that spacecraft and answered every question that I had. Later on, I was in the docking and rendezvous trainer with one of their cosmonauts and was allowed to attempt to fly a docking of one Soyuz against another. I did not succeed in bringing the two together. In addition, in January our delegation was invited to the principal Soviet tracking station in the Crimea. Unfortunately, the time available . . . did not permit us to make this visit, but we have every intention of doing so in the future.” Advocating “air of cautious optimism,” Dr. Low said U.S.S.R. had, “in effect, met the schedules laid down in the first agreement with a variance of only a few days. In any event, we have laid out and agreed to specific milestones for an even-handed exchange, so that neither side will gain more than the other.” In response to question, Dr. Low said military components of U.S. and Soviet space programs had not been discussed at NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings. (Transcript)
New York attorney Paul Sawyer was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator on nasa Public Affairs Program. Sawyer was member of law firm of Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim, and Ballou, (nasa Release 71—46)
Dr. James C. Fletcher was sworn in as nasa Administrator by District of Columbia Superior Court Judge James A. Belson as President Nixon, Mrs. Fletcher, and Dr. George AT, Low, Deputy Administrator {behind), watched in the Presidents office. director De E. Beeler, frc Deputy Director, was named Acting Director with Bikle acting as an adviser. (NASA Release 71—77)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh told session of Soviet Party Congress that “we must to a large extent apply [space activities] to the solution of practical problems. Armed Forces Journal later observed that previously, U.S.S.R. had spoken mostly of furthering “scientific knowledge” as basis of its space program. (AFJ, 6/71, 54r-9)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented LM similar to those used for Apollo 11, 12, and 14 lunar landings to Michael Collins, Director of Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum and Apollo 11 astronaut. LM would remain on permanent display at museum. (Smithsonian Release 111—71; NASA PAo)
nasa’s structural analysis computer program (nastran), designed to analyze behavior of elastic structures in space program, was being used by Ford Motor Co. in predicting performance of 1973 light truck components, NASA announced. Ford had reported 60°/o improvement in predicting behavior of components under stress and time-saving of two thirds in calculations. Program also had been used in design of people-mover system to be used at transpo ’72 exhibit planned for spring 1972 at Dulles International Airport, Va. (nasa Release 71—221)
Immediate report from nasa on role of Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. was requested by Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Conn.). In statement to press, Rep. Cotter said Myers “as co-chairman of the joint NASA-Pentagon space transportation system committee, may have been instrumental in cutting off Air Force funding of Pratt & Whitney’s space shuttle research under the XLR—129 program.” Cotter said Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. had based its contention of superior “technical knowhow” on shuttle engine development [see Aug. 3] on its 10-yr XLR-129 research. Myers had been a Rocketdyne Vice President before coming to nasa in 1970. (Text; Warden, C Trib, 8/27/71,22)
Space program for 1970s was outlined by Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in speech before Society of Sigma Xi at Daytona Beach, Fla. It would be “program of transition; a program in which the exploration and technical pioneering of the Sixties will begin to pay substantive dividends; it is the logical transition to the intensive and economic use of space in the 80’s and 90’s. Strong evidence will emerge . . . that will refute many of the arguments advanced against science and technology as embodied in the space program.” Program’s primary strength was “that it is balanced to meet the basic national needs.” Program “strikes a harmony among scientific exploration in space, the practical utilization of space, and the development of improved technologies for space.” (Text)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, chaired symposium and workshop series sponsored by nae in Washington, D.C. Program, “Application of Technology To Improve Productivity in the Service Sector of the National Economy,” explored methods of using technology to ease social, educational, and health care problems, (nae Release)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, former aec Chairman, as U.S. Representative to General Conference of International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, Sept. 21—27. Among nominees for alternate representatives was Dr. T. Keith Glen-nan, first NASA Administrator (1958-1961). (PD, 9/13/71,1250, 1261)
Apollo 14 technical problems were discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in interview published by New York Times: “I feel that what we’ve seen on Apollo 14 is about the number of problems one must expect on any given flight with such a complicated piece of hardware. Yet the spacecraft design is such that it is forgiving of failures. And we hope we’ll always be able to work around them and press on with the mission.” (Witkin, NYT, 2/10/71)
nasa published Mariner-Venus 1967, Final Project Report (nasa SP—190). In foreword, Project Manager Glenn A. Reiff said Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967, toward Oct. 19, 1967, flyby of planet Venus), apart from significant contributions to knowledge of deep space, had achieved secondary objective, “to gain engineering experience by converting a spare Mariner-Mars 1964 spacecraft into one that could be flown to Venus,” with substantial savings. Cost of mission had been 10% less than anticipated. (Text) During 1971: U.S. orbited 51 spacecraft in 29 launches—including Apollo 14 and 15 csms Kitty Hawk and Endeavor with lms Antares and Falcon and their S—IVB stages intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 97 payloads in 83 launches; Japan, 2; U.K., 1; France, 1; Italy, 2 (1 for U.S. on U.S. booster); and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 33 orbited by DOD in 17 launches and 19 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for USAF on behalf of NATO, 1 for France, and 1 for U.K. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launches of Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 manned lunar landing missions. Mobile equipment transporter, used for first time on Apollo 14 to carry equipment and samples, allowed astronauts to explore 3.5 km (2.2 mi) of lunar surface and collect 43 kg (94.8 lbs) of samples. On Apollo 15, astronauts traveled 28 km (17.4 mi) over lunar surface on four-wheeled, battery-powered lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover and collected 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples, including one white anorthosite rock about 4 billion yrs old. Unmanned program was highlighted by Mariner 9 Mars probe, which traveled 400 million km (248 million mi) to Mars and began transmitting photos of major Mars dust storm and, later, of details of Martian surface and moons Deimos and Phobos. Mariner 8 launch vehicle malfunctioned at launch. Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory—rescued from initially incorrect orbit by ground command—made first x-ray observations of beginning solar flare and revealed that sun had “polar caps.” Other unmanned missions included lntelsat-IV F-2 and Intelsat-IV F—3 for ComSatCorp and Explorer 43, Explorer 44, and Explorer 45 (the last launched for NASA by Italy). Launched as secondary payloads were Subsatellite on Apollo 15 and Tetr 3 on Oso 7. All elements of Skylab flight system reached final manufacturing and checkout in preparation for 1973 launch and intensive engineering studies on Space Shuttle were conducted throughout year. In joint NASA—usaf lifting-body program, M2—F3 and X—24A lifting bodies made 17 flights, including first supersonic flight by M2-F3. X-24A reached 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) before completing program and beginning modification for new flight program as X—24B. In aeronautics NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing - made 27 successful flights. USN F-14 fighter aircraft successfully demonstrated first automatically programmable variable sweep wing. USA CH—54B helicopter set new world altitude record of 5120 m (16 798 ft) while carrying 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) payload. New v/stol Wind Tunnel at LaRC became operational, providing greatly improved testing capability for scaled models. GE quiet experimental engine successfully completed initial tests in NASA program to reduce jet engine noise, and NASA let competitive design contracts for development of quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) transport U.S.-U.S.S.R. Space Activity, 1957-1971 Successful Launches to Earth Orbit or Beyond aircraft, sst program ended, with Congress voting to terminate program. In sounding rocket program, 126 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations and to make astronomical observations in x-ray, uv, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum. DOD’s 33 payloads included orbiting of 2 Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs-2) military comsats, 2 ov—i scientific satellites, and Cannonball 2 and Mmketball. U.S.S.R.’s 83 launches set an all-time record in number of flights. The 97 payloads included 81 Cosmos satellites, 2 Luna, 2 Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 2 Mars, 1 Intercosmos, 4 Meteor, 2 Molniya I, 1 Molniya II, and Oreol (launched for France). Soyuz 11, carrying three-man crew, Summary of Soviet and United States Space Payloads by Mission Category Soviet Union						United States 1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total		1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total Earth orbital science			 5	10	3	9	7	59	12	16	14	4	11	137 Earth orbital engineering								6	1	5	1	10	50 Communications				...... 4	4	2	5	3	23	19	11	6	6	6	83 Navigation/ferret			6	6	16	27	84	3	1		1 .		25 1	1	1	1 .		17 Military observation: Low orbit recoverable			 22	29	32	29	28	202	19	16	12	9	7	198 Low orbit nonrecover 		..... 8	10	12	12	12	67	7	7	11	4	6	77 4 .						10 Synchronous or higher 								2	1	3	5	1	18 Q	2	1	2	1	17 . 9	5	2	4	8	25 . Earth orbit man-related 			 3	4		i	2	20	1 .		1 .			11 Earth orbit manned			1	5	i	3	19 .						14 Lunar man-related			3	1	2 .		8	1	2 ,		1	3	13 Moon-unmanned programs			1	3	3	2	25	8	1 ,				21 Venus 		...... 2 .		2	2 .		17	1 .					2 5	10 .			2 .		1	5 Subtotal 				77	71	91	102	602	87	64	66	39	53	764 Orbital launch platforms			 6	8	6	10	7	59 . From Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Staff Report, Soviet Space Programs, 1971, 92d Cong., 2d Sess., April 1972, p. 5. ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971	During 1971 successfully rendezvoused and docked with unmanned Salyut 1 to form first orbital scientific station, but cosmonauts died during earth reentry because of improperly sealed hatch. Mars 2 and Mars 3 dropped instrumented capsules on Mars surface. Mars 2 capsule crashlanded and Mars 3 capsule transmitted 20 sec. Lunokhod 1 lunar rover carried to moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, continued to explore lunar surface until October 1971, when isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night. Japan launched two satellites—Tansei and Shinsei. China launched Chicom 2, France launched Tournesol, U.K. launched Prospero, and Italy launched San Marco 3. (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Lifting Body Off; GSFC Sounding Rocket Br; NASA Exec Secretariat; Sheldon, United States and Soviet Progress in Space, Library of Cong, 1/22/72) • NASA’s scientific and societal achievements advanced national goal of alleviating environmental problems and expanding basic research on behalf of humanity, as public pressed for immediate, usable returns from research in all fields. Apollo manned missions swelled storehouse of lunar information. Unmanned astronomical missions gathered unique data, including new clues to Martian atmosphere. NASA-developed inventions saw increased use beyond space exploration—in environmental sciences, communications, medicine, industry, and agriculture. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space meetings set stage for future joint space missions. And balanced program of space and ^aeronautics, despite low funding level, continued to raise U.S. prestige as aerospace pioneer while it worked to improve man’s future. Some observers, however, warned of higher rate of technological advances abroad than in U.S. and of ever-growing U.S.S.R. space program and technological capability. Soviet expenditures on space were estimated at level about double U.S. peak expenditure of l°/o of GNP when combined nasa-dod space program was at highest level and four times present level. Dr. James C. Fletcher was nominated new nasa Administrator by President Nixon. President of Univ. of Utah and former aerospace executive, Dr. Fletcher took office April 27. He succeeded NASA’s third Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, who had resigned Sept. 15, 1970, to return to industry. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, had served as Acting NASA Administrator in the interim. Operating at lowest budget level since 1962, nasa in 1971 continued phase-out of Apollo program with successful completion of Apollo 14 and 15. Man’s fourth landing on moon, in Apollo 15 mission, proved to many that man had an effective scientific role in space. At year’s end, Apollo 16 had been scheduled for March 1972, with Apollo 17 to complete program later in year. Reduced funding forced additional reduction of personnel as well as program cutbacks, stretching out remaining Apollo missions, delaying first Skylab flight, and slowing studies of space shuttle, nerva nuclear rocket engine program was reduced to holding action. Bioscience funding was eliminated. Aerospace employment in industry throughout nation also fell, reflecting cuts in DOD spending as well as in NASA’s. During year, however, Skylab hardware manufacture neared completion and space shuttle work continued. Shuttle preliminary design contracts were extended so that nasa could examine alternative configurations, contingent on Administration approval of shuttle development. In erts program, aircraft tested remote sensing devices for gathering earth resources data and first satellite for global monitoring of resources was scheduled for 1972. During 1971, instrumented aircraft measured air pollution, investigated corn blight infestation, and sought hidden natural resources. Pioneer-F spacecraft for planned 1972 launch and December 1973 Jupiter flyby went into final manufacturer’s tests. Increased emphasis on aeronautics included research into aircraft noise reduction, increased air transport efficiency with use of supercritical wing, and STOL aircraft for transportation. To emphasize practical goals of space science, NASA established new Office of Applications, increased technology utilization budget from $1 million to $5 million, and issued request for proposals for additional uses of space-developed technology to solve problems of society. Among NASA projects were nsf contract to investigate use of solar cells to electrify homes and buildings and hud contract to study application of space technology to sewage recycling. Joint nasa-dot study resulted in recommendations for civil aviation R&d policy (card). Research achievements at NASA centers included ARC discovery of amino acids—building blocks of life—in second meteorite. Discovery strengthened case for chemical evolution of life elsewhere in universe. NASA FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion was $27 million more than requested $3,271 billion and $29 million above FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion—halting downward trend but far below 1965 peak of $5,250 billion. (A&A 1971; O’Toole, W Post, 1/2/72, Al; Sheldon, Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70, Senate Doc 92-51)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nominations of Robert M. White as Administrator of noaa, Howard W. Pollock as Deputy Administrator, and John W. Townsend, Jr., as Associate Administrator. White had served as Acting Administrator of noaa since his appointment as Acting Deputy Administrator Oct. 9, 1970. Before establishment of noaa, he was Administrator of essa. (PD, 2/1/71, 127, 141)
Appointment of Dr. Marshall E. Alper, Manager of JPl’s Applied Mechanics Section since 1964, to succeed Howard H. Haglund as Manager of jpl’s Civil Systems Project Office was announced by Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director. Haglund had been appointed Project Manager of dot’s automated transit system, jpl’s principal civil systems project, (jpl Release 571) through rehearsal of manual loading and preparation of LRV equipment, and reverification of relationships between stowed components and LRV. (msfc Release 71-33)
Washington Post editorial criticized nasa agreement with New York Times Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for byline articles by Apollo 15 astronauts [see July 23] and reprinted excerpt from Sept. 19, 1963, New York Times editorial that had scored earlier NASA agreement with publications. Post said: “. . . we would like to record . . . some reservations about the practice of commercializing the space program by permitting any of its official participants to sell personal accounts of their experiences. Strictly in legal terms, there is not much doubt that such material is subject to copyright protection. But, leaving aside regulations, there is a question of propriety, first raised back in 1963, when the Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Life Magazine nailed down contracts totaling $1 million for the personal stories of 16 astronauts over a four-year span.” New York Times editorial in 1963 had said sale of astronauts’ stories represented “stain of commercialism on the record of the space program,” and that astronauts “should not be permitted to reap enormous private profits from outside sources on the basis of their participation in a great national effort.” (W Post, 7/29/71, A14)
Newsweek commented on “shrinking space shuttle.” U.S. space program had been “hit with another budgetary broadside.” Space shuttle to service planned space station “will get no more than a third of the money its designers insist they need to build it.” Original request for $300 million had been cut by NASA to $225 million. “Now White House budgeteers have shrunk it to $105 million—and it has yet to face the anti-technology faction in Congress.” (Newsweek, 1/25/71)
NASA announced confirmation of text of agreement with Soviet Academy of Sciences on exchange of lunar samples and on procedures toward recommendations for joint consideration of objectives and results of space research [see Jan. 18—21J. Agreement had been confirmed by exchange of letters between Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy, (nasa Release 71-57)	'
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, reviewed nasa program before 25th annual conference of aiaa Board of Governors in Williamsburg, Va.: “This country needs space programs that move out vigorously to create new technology. A space effort that limps along on yesterday’s knowhow will not do much for the country. A slow program may cost less, but be worth nothing in terms of meeting the country’s needs. And a slow program—or no program—is all we are going to have without the strong support of the public. ... We should invent and fly more self-supporting satellites. We are seeking and getting valuable scientific knowledge from space we could not get in any other way . . . about the Earth and its atmosphere, the sun and the planets, and the universe. And about man himself.” National security was at stake. “It would not be safe for the United States, with its great responsibilities for world peace, to lag behind any other country in space technology. This is an axiom we did not quibble about in the ’60s and should not quibble about in the ’70s.” Space program had proved “excellent hotbed for forcing new technology, which in turn raises our national productivity and prosperity and increases our ability to solve pressing social problems of today’s urban society.” Finally, space exploration was needed as inspiration for modern man. “I think we are inspired, and our children are inspired, to be living in an age when man first moved out into space and began the exploration of our solar system. I think we should be ashamed of ourselves, as a society, if we withdrew from space exploration now after such an auspicious beginning.” (Text)
Library of Congress published United States and Soviet Progress in Space: Some New Contrasts, report by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Congressional Research Service Science Policy Research Div. Report summarized “how far these two major space powers have come in the last 13 years,” gave “answers to frequently raised questions about the comparative aspects of the two programs,” and looked at possible future developments. Since U.S.S.R. did not disclose information on its space budget and manpower, exact comparison with U.S. could not be made. Dr. Sheldon speculated, however, that Soviet budget was about 2% of gnp—more than twice as much as U.S. percentage—and that Soviet space work force was close to 600 000 persons. Greatest number of successful launches from a single site to earth orbit and beyond between 1957 and 1970 had been 311 from Vandenberg afb, Calif. U.S.S.R.’s Bay-konur was second with 282, followed by ksc with 189 and Plesetsk, U.S.S.R., with 147. There seemed to be little difference between U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs in general purpose and direction. Both were broadly based with elements of scientific exploration, technology development, national image building, practical applications, and military support services. Although military missions made up about two thirds of launches by both countries, number of presumptively specialized U.S. military missions had declined from 34 missions in 1966 to 16 in 1970, while U.S.S.R. total had increased from 28 missions in 1966 to 57 in 1970. Although U.S. and U.S.S.R. were competing in space they were also cooperating. Cooperation already under way included exchange of information at scientific meetings, negotiation of treaties, trading of space-collected weather pictures, joint efforts to write textbook on space biology, coordination of efforts on geomagnetism, and negotiation on possible common designs for docking attachments to facilitate space rescue or joint projects. (Text)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Dr. James C. Fletcher to be nasa Administrator succeeding Dr. Thomas O. Paine, whose resignation was effective Sept. 15, 1970. Dr. Fletcher had been President of Univ. of Utah and College of Eastern Utah since 1964. He had organized Space General Corp., subsidiary of Aerojet-General Corp. in 1960 and served as President 1960-1962 and Chairman of Board 1962-1964. From 1960 to 1962 he was President of Space Electronics Corp., which he founded. Dr. Fletcher had been Associate Director of guided missile laboratory at Ramo-Woolridge Corp. He was member of Air Force Science Advisory Board and Naval Warfare Panel. Nomination was submitted to Senate March 1. (PD, 3/1/71, 383— 3/8/71, 437)
KSC launch complex where Apollo 15 spacecraft and Saturn V booster stood ready for liftoff had been struck by lightning 11 times during past six weeks, Washington Post reported. First strike, June 14, had been equivalent to 98 000 amps—almost three times as powerful as average lightning strike and two thirds as strong as biggest lightning strike ever recorded in Florida. Two more strikes had followed within 15 min of each other and a 31 000-amp strike had hit launch pad one day later. On July 20 five separate lightning bolts with total amperage July 26-August 7: ApoJlo 15 carried three astronauts on the fourth successful lunar landing mission, returning them with 77 kilograms {170 pounds) of samples after 66 hours 55 minutes on. the moon’s surface. During prelaunch activities in Firing Room 1 of the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Control Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, Nisi. Administrator {right), spoke utith nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders; i/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), former Apollo Program Director; and Dr. Wernher tton Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning (left to right). of almost 100 000 amps had been recorded. Ninth strike of 22000 amps had occurred June 25, and last—weakest to date at 6600 amps— had occurred July 19, Neither spacecraft nor launch vehicle had been damaged. Apollo 15 was first spacecraft to have even a near miss from lightning strikes while being prepared for launch. [W Post, 7/25/71, A16) July 26—August 7: nasa’b Apollo J5 (AS—510) carried three-man crew on fourth successful lunar landing mission. LM-10 Falcon landed on moon’s Hadley-Apennine region and two astronauts conducted experiments, rode first manned lunar roving vehicle (lrv) on moon, and explored lunar surface. After 66 hrs 55 min on surface, Falcon rejoined orbiting CSM-112 Endeavor and astronauts transfered for safe return to earth with lunar samples, Spacecraft and S-1VB combination entered parking orbit with 171.4-km (106.5-mi) apogee and 169.4-km (105.3-mi) perigee. Translunar injection (tu) was achieved at 2:56 get and csm separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:22 get. Docking of csm with lm at 3:34 get was shown clearly by onboard color TV. S-IVB aps burns were conducted at 5:48 get and 10:00 get to send stage toward moon. Separated S-IVB/iU impacted lunar surface at 79:25 get (4:59 pm edt July 29) at 1° south latitude and 11.9° west longitude, 188 km (117 mi) northeast of Apollo 14 landing site and 355 km (221 mi) northeast of Apollo .12 landing site. Impact was detected by Apollo 14 seismometer 37 sec after impact and by Apollo 12 seismometer 55 sec after impact. . First midcourse correction (MCC-1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Shortly after csm-lm docking, telemetry data indicated electrical short in service propulsion system (sps). Troubleshooting isolated problem and MCC—2 at 28:41 get used sps bank A to analyze apparent intermittent short. Data indicated bank A could be safely operated manually. Modified procedures were developed for using bank B alone for remaining midcourse corrections except lunar orbit and transearth insertions, which would be dual bank burns. Scott and Irwin entered lm at 33:56 get, 50 min earlier than planned, to check out LM communications and other systems. TV pictures of csm and lm interiors were shown between 34:55 and 35:46 get. During checkout crew discovered range/range-rate exterior glass cover had broken, removing helium barrier. Crew began lm housekeeping V/2 hrs earlier than scheduled and vacuumed broken glass. At 61:13 Get, during preparations for water chlorination, water leak developed in cm chlorination septum gland but was stopped by crew, following repair instructions from ground, and water was absorbed with towels. Door of scientific instrument module (sim) was jettisoned at 74:06 get. July 29—August 4: Apollo 15 entered lunar orbit with 314.8-km (195.6-mi) apolune and 107.5-km (66.8-mi) perilune after LOI burn at 78:32 get (4:06 pm edt July 29). “This is really profound . . . it’s fantastic,” Scott said of view from moon. Apennine Mountains looked unreal. “They stand out in tremendous relief. They appear to be smooth or rounded. But they are cratered and in many places rough in texture. We don’t see any jagged peaks. They don’t look like . . . any other mountains we’ve seen on earth.” csm-lm undocking and separation maneuver was initiated during 12th lunar revolution, on far side of moon at 100:14 get, but spacecraft did not undock. Worden entered tunnel to inspect csm—LM umbilical and found plug was loose. After he reconnected plug and adjusted spacecraft attitude, undocking and separation were achieved at 100:39 get—about 25 min later than planned. lm Falcon touched down in moon’s Hadley-Apennine region near Salyut Crater at 104:42 get (6:16 pm edt July 30) about 600 m (656 yds) north-northwest of planned target. “OK Houston,” Scott said after touchdown, “the Falcon is on the plain at Hadley.” He said LM’s engine had stirred up so much dust that landing site had been completely obscured from 15-m (50-ft) altitude to touchdown: “We flew ifr from then on down.”	> Stand-up extravehicular activity (seva) to observe and photograph landing site and surrounding area began after cabin depressurization at 106:43 get. Scott put his head out of upper hatch and described and photographed area for 33 min. Scott said he could describe site July 29-August 4; Apollo IS entered lunar orbit July 29 and the lm Falcon touched down in the moon’s Hadley-Apennine region July SO for three eva periods of exploration. The lunar room# vehicle Rover, deployed during the first EVA July 31, was photographed by Astronaut James B. Irwin near Hadley RiUe (right center above), with the Hadley Delta in the background and St. George Crater partially visible at the upper right edge. Astronaut David R. Scott was working at the Rover. In the photo at right Irwin scooped a trench, with Mount Hadley in the background. A gnomon indicated the local vertical and the sun angle. Meanwhile CM pilot Alfred M. Worden, orbiting Hie moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography. for hours. Area was covered with craters, but strewn with very few large boulders; it was hilly, hut not rocky or rugged. First EVA began July 31 at 9:04 am EDT. Scott climbed down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded his descent, and stepped on lunar surface. Irwin followed and, while Scott removed TV camera from mesa and deployed it on tripod, Irwin collected contingency sample. Crew had difficulty deploying lev Rover; during checkout they found that front steering mechanism was inoperative and that there were no readouts on lev battery No. 2 amp-volt meter. Battery was found to be operating satisfactorily and decision was made to perform EVA-1 without LEV front-wheel steering. Crew mounted LEV and proceeded on EVA-1 traverse at 121:45 CET. Crew described EVA as “exploration at its greatest," and repeatedly used words “fantastic,” “breathtaking,” and “spectacular” to describe features as they rode Lrv at about eight km per hr {five mph). Scott said Rover handled quite well: “It negotiates small craters quite well, although there is a lot of roll. The steering is quite responsive . . . and 1 can maneuver pretty well. . . . There is no accumulation of dirt in the wire wheels.” Stops at stations where crew collected lunar samples and took photos were broadcast on TV with excellent transmission. At end of traverse alsef was deployed. Scott and Irwin reentered LM after 6 hrs 33 min exploring surface, 28 min sooner than planned because Scott used up more oxygen than anticipated.	' After resting inside LM, recharging and repairing portable life support system (plss), and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:15 get (7:49 am Edt Aug. 1). Lrv was powered up, circuit breakers were cycled, and lrv front steering was found to be completely operational. EVA—2 traverse included stops at Spur Crater, Dune Crater, Hadley Plains, and area between Spur and Window craters. Numerous samples and photos were obtained and TV transmission was good. Crew completed heat Sow experiment initiated during EVA—1, collected core sample, and deployed U.S. flag. After stowing sample container and him in LM, astronauts reentered LM at 149:27 GET, after 7 hrs 12 min on surface during EVA-2. Third eva began at 163:18 get (4:52 am edt Aug. 2), 1 hr 45 min later than planned because of cumulative changes in surface activities timeline. Late start and requirement to protect nominal liftoff time required shortening EVA. Alternate EVA plan was devised with traverse west from lm to Hadley Rifle. Astronauts traveled to Scarp Crater, “The Terrace” near Rim Crater, and Rim Crater, collecting samples and photographing lunar surface features. Scott tripped over a rock July 29-August 4: The command and service modules were photographed in lunar orbit from the lunar module, giving a view of the scientific instrument module (sim) bay, housing cameras and sensors to record data from the moon’s surface and atmosphere. and fell, but experienced no difficulty in getting up. Astronauts retrieved drill-core-stern sections and samples near ALSEP, returned to LM, off-loaded LRV and stationed it for TV coverage of lm liftoff, and reentered lm at 168:08 get, after 4 hrs 50 min—bringing total EVA time to 18 hrs 35 min. While lm was on moon Worden, orbiting moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. His observations included discovery of fields of cinder cones made by volcanic eruptions, delineation of landslide or rock glacier on northwest rim of crater on lunar farside, interpretation of ray-excluded 2one around crater P roc ulus as result of fault system, and discovery of layers on interior walls of several craters, suggesting volcanic collapse craters of calderas in maria. Scott and Irwin depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized LM, and lifted off lunar surface with 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples at 171:34' get (1:11 pm edt Aug. 2)—66 hrs 55 min after landing on moon. Liftoff, accompanied by usaf anthem “Off We Go Into The Wild Blue Yonder” taped and broadcast by astronauts from LM, was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully at 173:36 GET, as TV viewers watched. Scott and Irwin transferred from LM to csm with samples, equipment, and film, csm-lm separation and LM jettison were delayed one revolution to verify that CSM and LM hatches were completely sealed, LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 26° 22' north latitude and 15' east longitude at 181:30 get, 93 km (59 mi) west of Apollo 15 alsep site. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, Apollo 14, and Apollo 15 seismometers. Orbit-shaping maneuver was performed during 73rd lunar revolution in preparation for subsatellite launch. Scientific subsatellite was launched at 222:39 get (4:13 pm edt Aug. 4) into lunar orbit with 141.3-km (87.8-mi) apolune and 102.0-km (63.4-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 36-kg (80-lb) satellite 79 cm (31 in) long and 36 cm (14 in) in diameter carried three experiments and was housed in SIM bay with seven other new experiments. Satellite extended three l^-m (5-ft) booms, one with magnetometer to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and two for stabilization. Satellite also carried charged-particle sensors and equipment to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Transearth injection maneuver at 223:49 get put CSM on trajectory for home after 85 hrs 18 min (74 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Endeavour separated from sm at 294:44 get. Drogue and main parachutes deployed but one of three main parachutes partially closed during descent, causing harder landing than expected. CM splashed down in mid-Pacific about 10.1 km (5.5 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. Okinawa at 295:12 get (4:47 pm edt Aug. 7)-—12 days 7 hrs 12 min after liftoff. Astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, were carried by helicopter to biomed area* on recovery ship for post-flight examinations. After being declared in very good shape, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam afb, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. CM was retrieved and placed on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb, and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 15 objectives: to make seleno-logical survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Hadley-Apennine region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased eva operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for intermittent short circuit in Delta V thrust switch A, CSM—LM failure to undock properly, and increase in CM tunnel pressure preceding lm jettison. Flight crew performance was excellent. Accomplishments included first use of Lrv, lunar surface navigation device, direct lunar communications without lm relay, and ground-controlled remotely operated TV camera on moon; largest payload in earth orbit (140 310 kg; 309 330 lbs) and largest payload in lunar orbit (33 803 kg; 74 522 lbs); longest lunar surface stay time, lunar surface eva, distance traversed on lunar surface (28 km; 17.4 mi), and lunar orbit time (74 orbits); first subsatellite launched in lunar orbit; and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth. Apollo 15 was 12th Apollo mission to date, 9th manned Apollo mission, and 4th successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 14 mission had been conducted Jan. 31—Feb. 3. Apollo program was directed by OMSf; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by CSFC under overall direction of otda. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 7/26-8/7/71; W Post, 7/27-8/8/71; gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; nasa Special Release; NASA Release 71-119K; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/71, A1; AP, W Star, 8/1/71, A10)
Technological intelligence concerning salt was reaching U.S. through Soviet scientist who had defected to West under pseudonym of Anatoly Fedoseyev [see May 26] but had been identified subsequently as Ignatiy A. Nikitrine, deputy director of Soviet space program ip charge of electronics and cybernetics, Don Cook of Los Angeles Times reported in Washington Post. Meanwhile, AP said, British officials insisted scientist’s real name was Fedoseyev and that he was expert in field of “powerful magnetrons” whose research had applications to Soviet space effort. (W Post, 7/8/71, Al; AP, W Post, 7/9/71)
Mariner 9, en route to Mars on orbiting mission, successfully completed first midcourse maneuver with 5.11-sec burn that produced 6.7-m-per-sec (15.1-mph) velocity change. Maneuver placed Mariner 9 on trajectory that would approach to within 1600 km (1000 mi) of Mars; second maneuver would be conducted Oct. 24 if necessary to correct trajectory further. Spacecraft had traveled 21 779 000 km (13 533 000 mi) since launch May 30 and was 2 076 000 km (1 290 000 mi) from earth, traveling at 10 985 km per hr (6826 mph). It was scheduled to reach Mars vicinity Nov. 13. (nasa Releases 71—96, 71-100)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, submitted to Senate resolutions authorizing printing of Committee reports International Cooperation in Outer Space: A Symposium and Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70 as Senate documents. (CR, 5/13/71, S6844-5)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4067 designating day as National Moon Walk Day, “to commemorate the anniversary of the first moon walk on July 20, 1969, and to accord recognition to the many achievements of the national space program.” He said, “Two years after the first landing . . . other brave men are following in the footsteps of [Astronaut Neil A.] Armstrong and [Astronaut Edwin E.] Aldrin to explore the unknown and advance scientific knowledge for the benefit of all mankind.” (PD, 7/26/71, 1068)
New York Times editorial commented on nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator: “Mr. Fletcher’s highest priority at nasa will undoubtedly be to try to restore morale, insofar as possible, in a program whose ranks have been decimated by the budget cuts of recent years, nasa’s new chief apparently takes the job with few illusions. This is suggested by his recent comments that budgetary problems will probably force a shift from manned to unmanned space exploration, especially beyond the moon.” Such realism should “serve Mr. Fletcher well in the difficult days ahead as he tries to lead NASA toward a new equilibrium with a Congress largely disillusioned about the worth of showy and ultra-expensive ventures in space.” (NYT, 3/4/71)
Committee for the Future—group of wealthy private citizens—was seeking to finance return trip to Hadley Rille, Apollo 15 landing site, with surplus Apollo spacecraft, Reuters reported in Baltimore Sun. Group hoped to recover contemplated $400-million investment by selling moon rocks, TV film, and photographic and literary rights, and by charging for scientific experiments conducted. Group had announced proposal to operate mission “Harvest Moon” after final Apollo flight in 1972 because it seemed incredible that man could invest $25 billion and 10 yrs to reach moon and then “stop without . . . looking at the moon’s value to man and his future.” Members of committee had spoken informally with NASA officials, Reuters said. Oflicials had said privately that plan stood little chance of approval. (B Sun, 8/4/71, A6)
NASA manned space flight officials proposed four-launch program to place astronauts in earth orbit to map U.S., study earth resources, and study pollution, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D.	Myers said in AP-reported interview that program was in preliminary stages and would require additional funding from Congress. MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said project would keep U.S. in maimed space flight business during period when U.S.S.R. would probably be very active in the field. Project would fill four-year gap between Skylab and manned space shuttle tests. It would also directly benefit mankind, Kraft explained: “The two-man crews will fly at a higher inclination than we’ve ever flown before in earth orbit. Using photographic and other sensing equipment developed in the space program, they could accurately map the entire United States, including Alaska. The astronauts also could make earth resources and environmental measurements.” (AP, W Star,	A16)
National Civil Service League announced selection of 10 Federal officials to receive annual Career Service Awards. Recipients included NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley, cited for “his administrative expertise which enables him to help design major policy directions at NASA and interpret them to the Congress and the public.” Honorees would receive $1000, watches, and citations at banquet April 23 in Washington, D.C. (W Star, 3/2/71, A2)
Soviet defectors—writer Leonid Vladimirov, who defected in 1966, and scientist Anatoly Fedoseyev [see June 19]—said at London press conference that Soviet space technology had lagged behind that of U.S. and had produced less scientific data. Fedoseyev, not present but responding by tape recorder to questions put to him previously, said he did not think Soviet space achievements would be scientifically impressive for some time because Soviet space program was short of funds and technology level was low. Fedoseyev was said to have been responsible for bringing down U-2 reconnaissance aircraft pilot Francis Gary Powers in May 1960, Reuters later reported. (Reuters, B Sun, 11/24/71, A4)
Slackening of U.S. R&D was scored by Eberhardt Rechtin, Principal Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering in dod, in Astronautics & Aeronautics article: “The image of world technical leadership earned by our electronics and aerospace industries in the 1960s will predictably be eroded in the 1970s by our own lack of planned ‘firsts’ in contrast with the continuing achievements of the Soviet Union, France, and probably Germany and Japan.” Major source of future wealth “must be the special skills of our population— yet we are presently pricing ourselves out of the world markets, including our own. We are also disseminating our science, our inventions, our management expertise, and our manufacturing technologies around the world in a way which, though it raises the standards of living elsewhere, also diminishes the competitive advantages of our own people.” While U.S. had been world leader in R&D less than 25 yrs, “you hear discussions about reordering national priorities as if we could make unilateral decisions, independent of the international competition •—as if international interactions were not a significant, much less a driving, factor—concerning defense R&D, the NASA space program, tax incentives to industry, or a wage/price freeze.” (A&A, 12/71, 22-7)
nasa published Manned Space Program Accident/Incident Summaries. Result of nasa Safety Office survey of accidents and incidents that occurred during Apollo Program development years could be used in nasa training programs. Of some 10 000 case documents reviewed, 508 mishaps had been studied closely. Of these, 47 % had occurred during operational test and checkout. Procedural deficiencies were largest contributor to accidents—46%—and 74% had human error as contributing factor, (nasa Awareness)
U.S. and Soviet scientists met in Moscow to recommend joint projects and exchanges in near-earth space research, investigations of moon and planets, development of space meteorology, and space applications related to natural environment. Recommendations of three working groups representing NASA, and Soviet Academy of Sciences would be forwarded to Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh and to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for consideration. U.S. participants were led by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Deputy Associate Administrator (Science) Leonard Jaffe; and noaa’s Director of National Environmental Satellite Services David S. Johnson. U.S.S.R. participants were headed by Dr. Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet Academy; and Deputy Chief L. A. Aleksandrov, Deputy Chief for Technology, Main Administration of Hydrometeorology Services, U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers, (nasa Release 71-147; NASA Int Aff)
USN was concerned that F-14 fighter aircraft might go into potentially dangerous flat, fast spin, Capt. Lionel E. Ames, Jr. (usn), F—14 Project Manager, said in testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services. (Transcript)
Langley Visitor Information Center was dedicated in formal ceremonies at LaRC. Dr. James C. Fletcher attended, in first official visit of new NASA Administrator to any NASA center. Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) said in dedication speech: “Space flight has opened up new vistas of flight and of the mind to understand the universe and our place in it. Our technology has become the world’s best and has brought us prosperity in a highly competitive environment.” Dr. Fletcher said center would give public broad understanding of what was happening in aerospace technology. Science was “part of our everyday life.” Technological society would continue “for the next 100 or perhaps 1,000 years.” Center displayed model aircraft, model spacecraft, lunar sample, and suit used by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., while training for Apollo 14 mission. (Langley Researcher, 5/28/71, 1; 6/11/71, 1: Text)
Tenth anniversary of President Kennedy’s message to a joint session oj Congress urging that the United States “commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.” The goat was achieved when Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, on the Apollo 11 mission, became the first man to set a foot on the lunar surface, at 10:56 pm edt, July 20, 1969. mary aim of passive seismic experiment was to discover where moon-quakes occurred. “So far we have identified 11 zones in which moon-quakes occur, hut one of these is particularly active, accounting for about 80 percent of the energy we record.” Source might be “an isolated pocket of magma under pressure at depths between 30 and 400 miles [50 and 600 km],” Third seismometer, to be placed on moon by Apollo 15, was expected to provide data as to whether all 11 zones corresponded to same source mechanism; i.e., small magma reservoirs. Active zone fell on line that bisected Apodo 12 and 14 seismometer stations, “so that makes 15 an exceedingly vital station to us. If we just get one perigee passage and a couple of these moonquakes before station 12 or 14 ceases to function, we’ll have taken quite a step forward.” Apollo 15 would be at edge of prominent mascon basins, Serenatatis and Imbrium. “We expect ... to impact an S-IVB smack in the middle of one of them, probably Serenatatis. So this will he the first time we get seismic waves propagating through one of these mascon features, and, hopefully, we will be able to say something about how its structures differ from the other mare we have been able to record seismic waves through.” Edward M. Davin, Program Scientist, Lunar Surface Experiments, said Apollo 12 magnetometer had been “very successfully recording a surprising magnetic field. . . . we now have a general model of the moon based upon three layers ... a crust, an inner layer, and a core.” Apollo 15 lunar surface magnetometer could determine “if there is any asymmetry in the magnetic field” and provide additional information on electrical conductivity that indicated thermal distribution of lunar interior. jpl scientist Dr. Conway W. Snyder said solar wind spectrometer experiment would he “measuring the weather in space. The solar wind which is a plasma—this is an ionized gas—is quite analogous to weather on earth. ... it is the phenomenon that determines what magnetic fields are in space, affects cosmic rays, and generally is the fundamental entity in space once you stop considering the planets themselves.” With addition of second spectrometer on moon “we hope to be able to start making some definite interpretations of the very complicated kind of plasma effects that go on the moon.” Suprathermal ion detector experiment was described by Rice Univ. scientist Dr. Kent Hills. Apollo 12 and 14 ion detectors had revealed ion clouds that were not lunar-oriented hut had been formed elsewhere “from an expanding neutral gas cloud.” With Apollo 15 experiment, third station north of other two would give “extended distance with which to investigate these things and ... a different direction.” Cold cathode gauge experiment would indicate amount of gas on moon, Dr. Francis S. Johnson of Univ. of Texas at Dallas said. Ion detector already on moon had detected gas clouds in which concentration sometimes increased 100 times. With second gauge “we hope that there will be the prospect of seeing the same event on two gauges, and then we will be able to tell quite a lot more about where these gas sources would be and also learn something about how they propagate across the lunar surface.” Heat flow experiment, with 3-m (10-ft) drill, was to measure amount of heat coming from interior of moon, Columbia Univ. astronomer Dr. Marcus E. Langseth said. Measurement would be made by monitoring heat budget in near-surface material (lunar regolith) over one year with thermometers on probes about 2 m (6 ft) below lunar surface. Measurements could be useful in resolving contradictory data from magnetometer experiments on Apollo 12 and 14. Experiments outside Apollo 15 alsep package—laser ranging retro-flector, lunar field geology, and lunar soil mechanics—were discussed by Wesleyan Univ. astronomer Dr. James E. Faller; Donald A. Beattie, Program Manager, Lunar Surface Experiments; and Dr. James K. Mitchell of Univ. of California at Berkeley. Laser array would provide third leg of triangle formed by laser retroflectors on Apollos 12 and 14, improve ranging reliability from current stations, and “provide for greater efficiencies in telescope use time.” Geology experiment objectives were to sample Apennine Mountain front, study Hadley Rifle, examine mare, sample volcanic complex to north of landing site, and study cluster of craters southeast of landing site. Soil mechanics experiment would measure density, strength, compressibility and adhesive and cohesive characteristics of material on lunar surface. “The thing that is going to be of considerable interest is the lunar roving vehicle because if we can calibrate this vehicle ... a knowledge of vehicle tracks and power consumptions should provide . . . continuous record of the soil conditions as the crew moved from point to point.” (Transcript)	'
rand Corp. report The Space Shuttle as an Element in the National Space Program (RM 6244-1PR) completed in October 1970—study that questioned economic feasibility of nasa’s reusable space shuttle program—was entered in Congressional Record by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) Study, undertaken for usaf, concluded “total space funding requirements over the next 20 years are not significantly different for plans that use the shuttle and those that accomplish the same missions without the shuttle.” Results indicated “that criteria other than cost should be used to evaluate the desirability of the space transport system.” {CR, 5/26/71, S7823-9)
President Nixon was expected to name Univ. of Utah President, Dr. James C. Fletcher, as nasa Administrator, Washington Post reported. Dr. Fletcher, a physicist, had been an aerospace executive and consultant to Naca, dod, and President’s Science Advisory Committee. (O’Toole, W Post, 2/19/71, Al)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified on aerospace unemployment before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 authorization hearings: From number of studies of unemployment of scientists and engineers, estimated 30 000 to 40 000 were out of work at end of 1970. “The majority of these came from aerospace-related industries. Projections indicate that this number could more than double by June 1972, which means that as many as 30 percent of the Nation’s aerospace scientists and engineers will be unemployed. The effect of this national trend—in terms of an individual scientist or engineer being reemployed—is magnified by the concentration of this unemployment, geographically and by training and experience. . . . This not only causes great personal hardship but . . . represents the loss of a tremendous national resource.” NASA-sponsored survey by Battelle Memorial Institute of persons laid off by group of nasa contractors from June 1968 to September 1970 had made preliminary findings: only 31% had found permanent jobs, 32% had found temporary jobs, 32% were still unemployed, and 5% had left work-force. Average person was unemployed 31 weeks. Of those who had found permanent jobs, only 18% returned to aerospace. Of those permanently employed outside of aerospace, only 12% reported having positions highly related to aerospace skills and 50% reported new positions unrelated to aerospace. Unemployment rate of those over 50 was 48%. Of those who had found permanent work outside, 31% said they would not return to aerospace if given opportunity; 16% said they would. Preliminary results of survey indicated “we are losing much of the aerospace capability that is an indispensable ingredient of our long term economic strength and national security.” In closing, Dr. Low made point that there was “no either/or choice between technological advances and social advances. Without technology, we cannot maintain the capability to deal effectively with any national problem.” Dr. Low was questioned on his testimony that U.S.S.R. was spending more on R&D than U.S. was spending in total science and technology area. He answered that Soviet space program, with apparent Soviet policy of steadily increasing r&d investment, would soon match and then surpass U.S. program in size and accomplishment. “For this comparison, I am dealing with the combined civil and military space programs of both nations; to try to differentiate between civil and military activities of the U.S.S.R. would be speculative at best. The most difficult comparison to try to make between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. economies or programs is in terms of absolute costs: each national economy is geared and motivated to produce a different, nonparallel mix of goods and services.” (CR, 7/31/71, E8611—2) Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed future of Apollo program: “We can now move with confidence to the final phase. ... In these last missions, we will expand the capability of the system very dramatically. Design changes in the spacecraft and supporting equipment will allow the two astronauts in the lunar module to remain on the moon up to 67 hours, as compared with 34 hours on Apollo 14. The scientific payload landed on the moon will be doubled to above 1200 lbs [544 kg]. Changes in the command and service modules will permit up to 10 days total flight time and major increases in orbital scientific activities. During the Apollo 15 and 16 missions small subsatellites will be placed in lunar orbit and will continue to make scientific measurements long after the astronauts return to earth.” In Skylab program, “three separate three-man Skylab flight crews will be selected during the coming year. Scientist astronauts will be included. . . . They plan to perform about 50 experiments in various disciplines. Twenty of these are in the life sciences, to determine how human beings adjust and perform under the conditions of prolonged space flight, up to 2 months’ duration. “They will also operate the Skylab Earth Resources Experiment Package in the second space flight phase of NASA’s earth resources program. These observations will be in conjunction with [and] complementary to those [of] the automated earth resources test technology erts, to be launched in 1972.” FY 1972 request for space shuttle of $100 million would provide for broad spectrum of studies, including analysis of new alloys and promising external materials for thermal protection; test demonstrations of design concepts for structures; wind-tunnel tests to define aerodynamic heating, launch aerodynamics, etc.; design of long-leadtime hardware, subsystems, and test devices; initiation of scaled model for flight tests; dynamics testing; electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing; and integration of upgraded fuel-cell electrical power subsystem with other components for proof-of-concept testing. (Transcript) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, testified on dod applications of space transportation system and dod-nasa teamwork on space shuttle: “Present dod satellite communications program consists of two major systems: The long distance point to point or strategic system and the local-area multiple-user or tactical system. . . . We are pursuing a new system called Defense Satellite Communications System, Phase II, which can provide many voice channels to selected limited areas of the earth. These present and proposed systems give us the flexibility for voice and teletype communications from our forces overseas and allow rapid transmission of photographic images from operational theaters to the United States.” In conjunction with NASA studies, usaf was analyzing defense applications of space shuttle to provide better insight into utility of concept for dod. usaf was providing NASA with data to help ensure that configuration was of maximum utility to dod. nasa and usaf had worked jointly on engine development. Air Force “has supported advanced development efforts on liquid rocket engines in the past, and more recently concluded a hydrogen/oxygen high performance engine demonstration program.” Engine, XLR-129, had “provided the basis for selection of the reusable high pressure rocket engine concept for the shuttle. It also provided design data for a 250 000-pound [1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which supports the current shuttle engine design concepts.” In operational testing area, “usaf and NASA recently conducted unpowered approach and landing demonstrations with F—Ills and B-52s. . . . These demonstrations investigated terminal area energy management for maneuvering reentry vehicles and have a relationship to the Space Shuttle operational concepts.” (Transcript)
USAF had ordered new flying procedures to reduce structural wear and tear on C—5A cargo aircraft, New York Times reported. “Highly unusual program for extending a plane’s useful life” was additional to “more routine work of beefing up the wings in areas that show signs of being the least durable.” There were indications that C—5A’s structural needs could grow beyond usual level for new aircraft. “If so, huge new outlays could be added to the already massive costs that have made the aircraft a focus of debate.” C-5A had already overrun initial total cost estimates by $1.2 billion. Latest figure of $4.6 billion was for diminished fleet of 81 instead of 120 aircraft, which were to have cost $3.4 billion. (Witkin, NYT, 12/26/71, 46) Symposium on “Astronomy from a Space Platform” held Dec. 27—28 included papers by astronomers, space program planners, electronics specialists, optical designers, and researchers. NASA Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider, presented plans for Skylab solar astronomy experiments. Dr. George H. Ludwig, Chief of gsfc Information Processing Div., analyzed tradeoff between earth-based and space-based data processing in astronomy missions. Dr. William F. Hoffman of nasa Institute for Space Studies discussed next-generation infrared space astronomical instruments and discoveries already made in infrared region. Panel chaired by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, reviewed symposium on Dec. 28. Panel also included Dr. Karl Henize, astronaut-astronomer. (Program; Science, 10/15/71, 11/19/71; 1/7/72; NYT, 1/2/72, 3:9; NASA Hist Off)
Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb (left), developer of nasa’j supercritical wing, congratulated test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry after the successful first flight of the wtng on the TFSA jet aircraft. Program Manager John G. McTigue looked on. The new airfoil shape, undergoing tests at the Flight Research Center, was designed to reduce buffeting at high subsonic speeds and permit increased aircraft performance. dling qualities. Aircraft reached 3000-m (10 000-ft) altitude at 220 and 300 knots, (nasa Proj Off)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.)—who had been Vice President under President Johnson-—addressed Space Seminar of Hugh O’Brian Youth Foundation at KSC: “One of the reasons that I have been active in the Space Program is because I believe that this program did something for all of the things I thought were important in life.” Space program was “pioneer in beginning to make the discovery in environmental control.” It had proved men could live in pure environment and “that there’s a relationship between the living space that we have and the number of people that can be there . . . [and] that you can have clean water and clean air. And it’s proven to us that you can work together.” Space program had helped produce computer and had developed satellite monitoring system. Possibly “one of the greatest efforts for world peace has come right out of the science and technology of space research.” Sen. Humphrey recalled his role as negotiator of Nuclear Test Ban Treaty: “I went to Moscow when it was signed. I have the pen that President Kennedy used to sign the treaty ... he said, ‘I give you this pen, Hubert, because it’s your treaty.’ ” He had been in Moscow when Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong made first moon walk. “I was in the offices of Pravda and Izvestia . . . and a dispatch came through from Reuters . . . noting that the launch had been successful, and I had said to the editors of Pravda, ‘Why don’t you run this as a headline?’ There was nothing in their paper that indicated that our launch had taken place. And when I went to Izvestia the same afternoon I said ‘Look, the launch has taken place and I see nothing in your headlines in your papers.’ I am happy to tell you that they were somewhat embarrassed and the next morning, at the National Hotel, under my door was a copy of Pravda and Izvestia with front page stories saying that there had been a successful launch.” When Neil Armstrong “touched down that Sunday night . . . the only information that I was able to get was out of the Voice of America through the United States Embassy because the Russians had blacked out.” (CR, 6/18/71, H5484-7)
Tenth anniversary of the first manned space flight, made by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin in the Vostok 1. In the April 14, 1961, photo Gagarin and US.SJl. Premier Nikita Khrushchev, standing atop the Lenin-SlaUn Mausoleum, responded to a welcome by crowds during a ceremony in Moscotc’s Red Square, (Photo by courtesy of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.) In letter to Pravda, group of Soviet cosmonauts said “it is our opinion that businesslike cooperation of space researchers of different countries, including the U.S.S.R. and the United States, should develop and grow stronger in the interests of peace and friendship among the peoples of our planet.” Soviet Academician Boris N. Petrov said in article reprinted in a number of Soviet journals that “main trend of the next development of cosmonautics and space exploration . . . will probably be as follows: Further investigation of near-Earth space, studying the Earth from space for purposes of space meteorology, geology, agriculture, oceanology, and marine and air navigation. The task of constructing space exploration facilities and the usage of outer space for peaceful purposes is the favorable basis for fruitful international cooperation wherein both big and small countries can effectively participate.” U.S.S.R. had “always directed its efforts into an arena of peace and international cooperation. . . . The time is not behind the mountains when the remarkable idea about construction of long-duration, piloted orbital stations will be implemented.” Soviet Military Review editorial said Soviet space program had demonstrated “the benefiting the whole of mankind and the contribution to worldwide progress. The Gagarin flight, as all subsequent achievements of Soviet space exploration, demonstrated the organizing and guiding role of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and the inexhaustible potentialities of the socialist social system and of the Soviet economy, science, and technology. Consistency and purposefulness are a feature of the Soviet program of exploration in outer space, on the Moon and on the planets of the solar system.” (Yuenger, C Trib, 4/13/71; Shabad, NYT, 4/13/71; upi, W News, 4/12/71; upi, LA Her-Exam, 4/12/71; SBD, 4/12/71, 263)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as nasa Administrator. (CR, 3/11/71, S3088)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in speech before National Space Club that Apollo program would end with Apollo 16 and 17 launches in 1972. Later, responding to question concerning possible cancellation of Apollo 17 because of FY 1973 budget restraints, Dr. Fletcher said, “The fate of Apollo 17 is beyond my control at the present time.” nasa was shifting emphasis, Dr. Fletcher said in speech: “When Apollo ends, most of our space activities planned for this decade will be in Earth orbit—and Moon exploration, for a time, will be left completely to the Soviets.” Continuing effort to explore planets also was related to earth studies. “I am sure that much of what we learn will have direct and valuable application to our understanding of Earth and our current concern with environmental protection.” Apollo photos of earth had helped create concern for world’s environment. “I am glad to say that NASA is now well prepared to take a leading role in defining and responding to this concern.” Apollo technology and equipment would be used directly in Skylab and directly or indirectly in space shuttle, Dr. Fletcher said. “Moreover, we gained invaluable experience in Earth orbital operations in the Gemini program and on the way to the Moon and back. We are well prepared for the next logical steps in near-Earth space. I wish very much we could continue lunar exploration . . . but if we have to make hard choices in this decade, then the right choice is to return to Earth orbit and defer lunar exploration.” nasa hoped to keep open option of additional Apollo missions in earth orbit. “This would enable us to carry out additional experiments in our Earth resources program, and would also facilitate our planning for cooperative flights with the Soviet Union.” Worldwide demand for applications satellites could be met only by production of space shuttle. “The key to our ability to help our country and to serve mankind is now the shuttle. The sooner we build it, the better we can serve.” (Text; Av Wk, 11/29/71, 13)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, met with msc officials during his first official visit to Center. Later, at press conference, he said NASA’s image could not rest on “absolutely fantastic achievement” of first lunar landing by man. NASA needed to convince taxpayers of basic technology that had been developed on way to moon. Each part of nasa program “has to be defended as a separate piece.” (Maloney, H Post, 5/28/71)	'
New civilian program to “absorb the nation’s technical talent, respond to our unmet social needs, and enlist widespread enthusiasm and support” was proposed by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech before National Society of Engineers meeting in Washington, D.C. “The development of new cities may be the important challenge we face, because it dramatizes the need for new research and engineering in the way the challenge of the Soviet Sputnik spurred the American space program in the late fifties and early sixties.” (Text)
NASA-inspired Earth Awareness Foundation—nonprofit, educational and advisory body originated by NASA officials and Apollo astronauts— marked first anniversary. Group was chartered to develop community solutions to environmental problems using NASA-developed knowledge to maximum extent practicable. During first year group had established community chapters called “Earth I Care” clubs, mostly on school campuses; started “Summer Scientist” program to study pollution; established newsletter; presented awards for concern with environmental quality; and produced slides and films on environment from nasa photos taken in orbital flight, (msc pao )
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on space funding: “If Congress wants to be truly responsible about our national priorities, it will avoid making further cuts which would damage the space program out of proportion to the savings involved.” In addition to “advancing the frontiers of knowledge about the origins of the earth and the nature of the universe,” space program promised “to pay off in much more concrete ways.” “We are already reaping huge benefits from weather and communications satellites, as well as from the development of compact, highspeed computers, new metals and fabrics, microminiature circuits and many other technological advances.” Space program also promised more efficient use of earth’s resources, help in global attack on environmental pollution, possible prediction of earthquakes, and hope for more productive agriculture by use of lunar soil ingredients. “The line between true and false economy is hard to draw. But the space program is one area where the time has come to draw it.” (LA Times, 1/31/71) During January: Creation of global resources management system was discussed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in guest editorial in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “Can we afford to create a global resources management system? I think we cannot afford not to develop it. As the richest nation in the world we have a moral obligation to bring our new technology to bear to help the helpless. But let us talk about our national security. On both well-fed sides of the Iron Curtain, an uncomfortable amount of raw thermonuclear power has been piled up in the name of ‘deterring the other side.’ In the meantime, the under-fed, over-populated part of the world, too poor to build thermonuclear bombs, has quietly developed a far more terrifying threat to the thermonuclear powers: the Population Bomb. Is is not just common sense to spend at least a small part of our tax money set aside for national security on the task of defusing that bomb? It is gratifying indeed to know that, by establishing a global Earth-resources survey and management system, we can combine a project bound to vastly enhance our national security with a noble contribution to the welfare of the world, a charity quite likely to save the lives of millions.” (A&A, 1/71, 24-5)
International aspects of U.S. space program were discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in luncheon speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: Cooperation with Western nations in past decade had included 70 countries, 250 specific agreements, and more than 24 joint satellite projects at run-out cost in excess of $400 million. More than 50% of total had been funded by other nations. In 1970s, “opportunities exist for cooperation on a significantly larger scale.” U.S. wished “to build a foundation for important benefit- and cost-sharing in the major space programs of the future.” Canada, Japan, and Australia—“countries having the most obvious potential for post-Apollo work-sharing”—had been given “every chance to become fully acquainted with our plans and studies” to enable them to decide whether they wished to commit their own resources. European Space Conference had put several million dollars into studies of post-Apollo program possibilities and some member countries had invested still larger amounts. British, French, and West German firms were working with NASA prime contractors on space shuttle design studies. Europe would have to choose between significant participation in shuttle funding and funding independent European rocket program. Decision would be necessary “even if Europe funds only 10 per cent of the shuttle’s price tab.” U.S. had said it would “sell launch services for projects consistent with peaceful purposes and existing international agreements . . . [and] that general technical access to the entire program would be available, but that technology at the level of commercial know-how would be transferred in either direction only where one side required it to complete its commitments to the other.” Since Europe was talking of only 10% share of shuttle program, “we said that we would retain decision-making responsibility except where European costs were directly affected, in which case decisions would be joint.” In U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space, “it is particularly important that we give clear recognition to both . . . competition and cooperation.” U.S. was competing with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, strategically, economically, and politically.” U.S. was cooperating with U.S.S.R. “because we both live in a vast universe that must be explored, where important new knowledge is to be gained, for the benefit of all men, everywhere.” While U.S. retained demonstrated lead over U.S.S.R., “it will not be an enduring lead without major new initiatives on our part— initiatives like the space shuttle and the exploration of the outer planets. . . .” In Jan. 18—21 Moscow talks with Soviet Academy of Sciences, “we specifically agreed, initially, to exchange three grams [0.11 oz] of sample obtained from Luna 16, for three grams each from Apollo 11 and 12. These relatively small amounts are sufficient for detailed scientific examination of a comparative nature.” Additional meetings on compatible docking arrangements had not been held because “docking discussions are well underway, and the planned exchange of information is taking place.” On visit to Soviet cosmonaut training area at Star City, “we were welcomed by Cosmonauts Beregovoy, Nikolayev, Leonov, Shatalov, and Valentina Tereshkova. We were shown the Soyuz mission trainer, and were invited to attempt to dock two Soyuz spacecraft in their docking trainer. While there, I also presented a plaque in memory of Yuri Gagarin [first man in space] from the U.S. astronauts.” (Text) • President Nixon announced appointments of members of President’s Science Advisory Committee for terms expiring Dec. 31, 1974: Dr. Lee A.	DuBridge, former Presidential Science Adviser; Dr. Herbert Friedman of nrl; Dr. Daniel P. Moynahan, former Counsellor to the President; Kenneth H. Olsen, President of Digital Equipment Corp.; and Dr. John G. Truxal of Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute. {PD, 2/1/71,
President Nixon issued statement on Oct. 6 death of Rep. James G. Fulton. Rep. Fulton would be “especially remembered for his unfailing support of our space program.” (PD, 10/11/71, 1382; Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
European interest in U.S. space program had “with notable exceptions” dwindled since Apollo IPs first lunar landing and “trouble-fraught” Apollo 13, New York Times said. Despite extensive press and TV coverage, Europeans had taken Apollo 14 for granted. “In some countries local events overshadowed man’s third visit to the moon,” but in West Germany opinion poll had shown that 64% favored continuation of manned space flights. Frankfurter Rundschau editorial had said, “What Shepard and Mitchell carried off couldn’t have been done by a Lunokhod.” Polish newspapers had given equal prominence to Lunokhod 1 and Apollo 14, but stressed technological feat of unmanned vehicle. Soviet press had highlighted Apollo 14 difficulties to suggest superiority of unmanned vehicles. Soviet man in street “seemed bored with space exploration, although some Russians went out of their way to ask Westerners about the United States moonshot.” Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet youth daily, had praised astronauts’ “indisputable bravery.” In U.K. Apollo 14 had been overshadowed by unrest in Northern Ireland and collapse of Rolls-Royce Ltd. Live TV coverage of Apollo 14 had been less than of previous Apollo missions. Earthquake and civil disorders had crowded Apollo 14 from front page of Italian newspapers, and Feb. 7 power blackout in New York had received as much space as launch. Italian radio and TV coverage had been thorough but audiences seemed smaller than for previous Apollos. Pope Paul VI had praised Apollo 14 as advance for all mankind. In France interest had waned as mission progressed. Newspapers and TV offered comprehensive coverage but “excitement of two years ago” had vanished. Spaniards, too, were losing interest in space exploration and public interest had declined in Hungary and Yugoslavia. Communist student, leader in Zagreb had said, “If the Americans and Russians would cooperate in space instead of carrying their rivalries to the moon, maybe there could be some scientific progress on earth and maybe the smaller nations could be helped to contribute their knowledge instead of being shut out of science by the expense.” (NYT, 2/10/71, 24)
JPL announced selection of Howard H. Haglund, former Surveyor project manager, to be project manager for dot’s People Mover transit system at Morgantown, W. Va. Dr. Albert R. Hibbs would be deputy project manager, jpl was initiating research and design of automated, computer-controlled system under $1353 000 dot contract, (jpl Release 570)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) on Senate floor questioned need for space shuttle and space station: “I have written to NASA on a number of occasions to ask whether . . . there is a need for the space shuttle-space station. All nasa has told me in reply is that first, the shuttle would enable us to continue to have an active space program, and second, it would reduce the costs of the space program. But why do we actually need it? What would it help us to accomplish that we could not otherwise accomplish? NASA seemingly has no answer to these questions.” (CR, 5/26/71, S7811—2)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on hud, Space, and Science during hearings on NASA FY 1972 appropriations bill. He urged that “strong program in space and aeronautics is essential to our longterm national well-being. Our capabilities as a Nation to deal with domestic problems of high priority—poverty, cities, the environment . . . and indeed, our pursuit of happiness and cultural advance—ultimately depend on whether we can maintain a strong economy with continually increasing productivity. Increasing productivity, in turn, depends primarily on technological advance, which, in turn, results primarily from the large scale focussed technological efforts like our major space programs.” In addition were both long-term and near-term direct benefits, many already realized. “When 50,000 lives were saved as a result of satellite advance warning at the time of hurricane Camille, the space program probably paid for itself.. . . “I believe that the space program is a value in itself to the nation and to the whole world. With our everyday preoccupation, necessarily, with the many serious and often depressing problems we face . . . there is, I believe, a human hunger for positive elevating goals to work for at the same time as we do what needs to be done in all these other difficult areas. I believe the strong attraction that the landing of the first man on the moon had on people everywhere, and much of the underlying basis of support in the country for the space program, stems from the fact that the space program provides such goals. The space program gives us goals seemingly beyond human capability, goals which transcend earthly boundaries.” Space shuttle had tremendous impact for future because it not only reduced cost by being reusable itself, but it also gave options of reusing payloads. “You do not have to throw them away once you put them up there. . . . There are many more application satellites we can use with this kind of an arrangement, because we will be able to reuse them.” Skylab, “first and only NASA experimental space station,” due to fly in 1973, would be “larger but 2 years later than the Soviet Salyut now in orbit.” U.S.S.R. probably would be able to “do things in space, laboratories, 2 years earlier than we ... to know what the earth is like, to know what the clouds are like, to understand more about the earth’s resources. . . . Another aspect, which I am uncertain about, is what they plan to do in a military way. . . . they will have the potential of doing military things on this same vehicle. We do not plan to do this on the Skylab. We also must consider the scientific value of Salyut, which I think is important, but not as important to us as the applications and the military aspects of it.” Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified that “models” of anticipated further reduction of 1500 civil service positions in fall “indicate that we have reached a point in which really good people of considerable experience will be going out the door. Certain parts of our operations will be closed. This means that we have come to a place where reductions in force are eating into our capability to do the job.” (Transcript)
Milwaukee Journal editorial on Apollo 14 commented: “The real return on Apollo lies in the future—beyond the more difficult missions of flights 15, 16 and 17. It is in Skylab, reusable space shuttles and sophisticated space stations to come. It is in the complex monitoring of the earth and its resources from space. It is in the co-operation and internationalization of space programs that appear to be developing—hopefully to replace competition. Here is the payoff. To this Apollo 14 and its crew have made their extraordinary contribution.” (MJ, 2/10/71)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, enumerated major factors relevant to nasa FY 1973 budget request in speech before aiaa National Capital Section: 1. “Program continuity must be maintained.” NASA could not “shut down major programs for several years and then start them up again efficiently.” 2. NASA programs had helped stabilize U.S. aerospace industry. “This is a very significant reason for maintaining NASA programs up to or near current levels at this time.” 3. NASA would reach minimum “institutional base” requirement for efficient management of approved programs in current fiscal year. “I will strongly resist any further reductions.” 4. Space shuttle was “next logical step to develop our national capabilities for using space more economically and more effectively with manned and unmanned spacecraft, for both civilian and defense purposes.” 5. U.S. was lagging behind in development of new technology for commercial and military aviation. “We killed the sst while Britain and France went ahead to build the Concorde, and the Soviet Union built a competing version. The Europeans—and our Canadian neighbors—are ahead of us in Short Take Off and Landing Aircraft. The question must be asked, how long can we, as a great nation, afford to be mere spectators while others move ahead in aircraft technology?” nasa did not intend “to shift the gears of our space program into the ‘park’ position; we are geared up for continued steady and impressive progress in those areas of space activity which we consider most rewarding scientifically or most important to our national security.” Within few years “there will be no time of day or night, year in and year out, when men are not working in orbit above the earth. And it is up to us, in decisions to be made this year in this capital, whether these men in orbit will include Americans.” (Text)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Administrator for Planning, told press in Bremen, Germany, that he expected to visit 50-man U.S. research station on moon within 10 yrs, at end of 1970s or beginning of 1980s. He said, “I’ll have to stay there at least eight or 10 days.” (AP, NYT, 9/7/71, 18)
NASA announced it had signed agreement with New York Times Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for one byline article each by Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden after mission and three articles by Scientist-Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt while crew was on lunar surface. Agreement, extending to 30 days after mission’s end, provided for payment by Special Features of 50% of gross proceeds from syndication of articles. It also permitted still photos in Apollo 15 astronauts’ homes and interviews of family members. Agreement did not infringe on NASA policy of free flow of information to all media nor limit NYT coverage of all aspects of space program, (nasa Release 71-138)
Apollo 15 Awards Ceremony was held at msc. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for “accomplishments in the Apollo 15 mission” to Dr. Larry A. Haskin, Univ. of Wisconsin; Dr. Robert 0. Pepin, Univ. of Minnesota; Dr. Leon T. Silver, Cal Tech; Dr. M. Gene Simmons, mit; and Dr. Gordon A. Swann, U.S. Geological Survey. NASA Exceptional Service Medal was presented to 22 msc employees and NASA Public Service Award to representatives of contractors Boeing Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Delco Electronic Div. of General Motors Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. NASA Group Achievement Award was presented to msc Extravehicular Mobility Unit Team, msc Lunar Orbit Experiments Team, msfc and msc Lunar Roving Vehicle Team, msc Lunar Traverse Planning Team, noaa Space Flight Meteorology Group at ksc, and msc Television and Lunar Communications Relay Unit Team. Dr. Fletcher read telegram from President Nixon congratulating Apollo 15 Team which, President said, deserved “highest praise for their vital contributions to man’s scientific knowledge and our nation’s prominence in space.” (nasa Ann, 10/1/71; msc Roundup, 10/8/71, 1)
Conversation between Mary Ann Harbert, U.S. citizen released Dec. 14 after nearly four-year internment by Chinese Communists, and escort Col. Leonard W. Johnson, Jr., Commander of 9th Aeromedical Evacuation Group at Clark afb in Philippines, was reported by AP. Miss Harbert had asked, “Have you put any men on the moon yet?” Col. Johnson had responded with description of U.S. space program that had put eight men on moon. Miss Harbert had said, “I really don’t know, I hadn’t heard about it. Many people in China don’t know that. The last thing we knew about space was that Russia had something circling the moon.” (B Sun, 12/15/71, A9)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, testified before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science in support of nasa FY 1972 budget request: “We have recently settled on a single set of performance characteristics for the preliminary design of the two-stage fully reusable [space] shuttle. Alternate approaches are also still under study. We expect to be in a position to make decisions this summer on how we will proceed with airframe design or development in FY 1972. The $100 million recommended in the FY 1972 budget will support, in addition to the engine development, either continued intensive design studies and related efforts or the initiation of airframe development.” Dr. Low noted “tremendous interest in exploration during Apollo 11, when an estimated 107 million people in the U.S. watched our first manned lunar landing mission; and we saw it again last month, when 104 million watched Apollo 14.” (Text)
Former F-14 project manager Capt. Lionel E. Ames, Jr. (usn), said in interview that F-14 fighters would cost $16.6 million each—almost $4 million more than $12.7 million announced by dod Aug. 10. He said confusion over cost illustrated some of problems he had had as project manager before being replaced. (W Star, 9/2/71, All)
William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary and Apollo 8 Astronaut, and Astronauts John L. Swigert, Jr., William R. Pogue, and Jack R. Lousma met with President Nixon at White House to report on their visits to 17 college campuses from October to December 1970. At White House press conference later, Anders said meetings with students had been “very positive.” Students had been “very curious about the Space Program.” (PD, 3/15/71, 475; Transcript)
Establishment of joint nasa-dot Office of Noise Abatement was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Office would provide overall leadership and focal point for national program to attack noise problems of current and planned transportation systems. Charles R. Foster, head of dot Office of Noise Abatement, would be Director of joint office. Walter F. Dankhoff, Chief of LeRc Office of Operations and Planning, would be Deputy Director. New office would be responsible to Robert H. Cannon, Jr., Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Systems Development and Technology, and to Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. It would also integrate programs with other agencies through Interagency Aircraft Noise Abatement Program and was fulfillment of some of recommendations from Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study, (nasa Release 71-213)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, delivered commencement address at Cal Tech: “One of the paths we can take—the obvious one ■—is to help develop some new area of high technology that will serve to strengthen our Nation’s economic base, and thus indirectly, our whole culture. We don’t necessarily have to perform this task with productivity foremost in our minds . . . even though that’s really the way it works. “A second path—and the demand for this path will be growing rapidly, I believe—is to attack directly the social, economic, and other serious problems of our time that have a definite technological component. Problems of ecology . . . have technological solutions. Urban and interurban transportation have technological solutions. As soon as we determine the appropriate political system which will spend the time and money, we already know a good deal about how to solve problems like these, and what remaining technology needs to be developed will undoubtedly appear. Other problems such as rural and ghetto health, housing, hunger, and poverty, have only a partly technological solution; still others, with strong human and sociological components, are even harder to deal with, and it may be a long time before problem-solvers learn to deal with ‘people’ problems. . . . while it wasn’t easy to land men on the Moon—it was nevertheless a straightforward, engineering kind of problem. And as someone has said, there weren’t any people between here and there.” Third path—and he thought few persons “yet realize what a broad and important path it can be in years ahead”—was “to pursue long-range study and research on applications of problem-solving techniques to some of the more purely human problems.” (Text)
Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Gold Medal for Aero-dromics was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), samso Commander and former NASA Apollo Program Director, at ceremonies commemorating Smithsonian’s 125th anniversary. Medal, presented periodically for “meritorious investigations in connection with the sciences of aeronautics and astronautics,” was established in memory of Dr. Samuel P. Langley, aviation pioneer. Among recipients had been Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1964 and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in 1967. (Smithsonian Release SI-131-71) Gold Space Medal, Federation’s highest award for space achievement, was presented to Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., for “his courageous achievements and leadership as the Commander of Apollo 13.” In recognition of achievements of entire Apollo 13 crew, Astronauts Lovell, Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., received iaf’s V.	M. Komarov Diploma for 1970. Diploma had been created in memory of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov, killed during Soyuz 1 mission April 24, 1967. Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov were awarded Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for 1970 for achievements as crew of Soyuz 9, June 2—19,1970. Gold Air Medal, highest iaf award for aeronautics, was presented to Capt. Henry T. (Dick) Merrill for contributions to aviation over 50 yrs. Capt. Merrill, civilian pilot, had flown Atlantic in 1935 and 1937. Concorde technical team of bac and Aerospaciale employees received group diploma for “valuable example set by . . . effective collaboration developed since 1962 between the engineers of British Aircraft Corp., Aerospaciale, Rolls-Royce and Snecma, operating as a single industrial team.” During conference lrv was presented to Swiss Transport Museum. (Letter to NASA Administrator, 6/10/71; letter to NASA Historian, 9/29/71; W News, 9/30/71, 42; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 9; bac pio; NAA PIO )
National Space Club luncheon honored Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late nasa Deputy Administrator, physicist, and Director of naca from 1947 to 1958. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in speech: “Dr. Dryden held that the decentralization of authority was a desirable goal and dictatorial control of projects, funds, and facilities should be avoided. He knew that ideas and skills would be widely dispersed. Even though the goals of applied research and development projects were concrete and specific, the approach to these goals had to he diversified. Freedom of the agencies and scientists engaged in the work was a necessity here, as it was in fundamental research, if the best use was to be made of their abilities. These concepts have lived and grown, and I believe, still represent the fundamental policy for the management of programs at nasa today.” During luncheon, bust of Dr. Dryden, commissioned by National Space Club and executed by sculptress Una Hanbury, was officially presented to nas President, Dr. Philip Handler. (Text; nsc News Letter)
Dr. James C. Fletcher held first press conference as nasa Administrator. In response to questions Dr. Fletcher said strength of U.S. depended critically on development of new technology. “And this means new technology of all kinds—electronics, computers, materials, as well as military technology. And 1 think that’s . . . why NASA . . . programs should be vigorously pursued.” nasa had studied possibility of second Skylab and “many other manned missions in space, most of them somewhat cheaper than the second Skylab; and we intend to look at these very carefully to see what programs, if any, made sense after . . . the first Skylab is flown.” Dr. Fletcher thought NASA stol experimental aircraft program was “long overdue.” Asked his personal plans for NASA, Dr. Fletcher said, “I can’t say that I want to go in a new direction from the way nasa has been going, except maybe up instead of down.” He was interested in international cooperation in space and “whole business of commercial use of the things that nasa has been developing,” including “strides in the applications satellites area.” He was “great supporter of the shuttle,” and had been “for many years before coming to NASA.” With development of shuttle, or “a cheap transfer system to orbit . . . it’ll open up all kinds of new things you can do in space. Since the costs will be much less—the costs per launch will be so much less. That is, all kinds of new applications, all kinds of new science programs, new manned, near-earth programs, almost anything you can think of can be done much cheaper once you have the shuttle developed.” With sufficient funds, NASA would probably pursue space station. “But in my judgment, if you have to decide between the shuttle and the space station, you pick the shuttle first because you have to have that for the second.” (Transcript)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said strong technology base was “absolutely vital” to U.S., in speech before 14th Annual Aerospace Luncheon of Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce. Indications from critics of lack of confidence in advancement of “greatest technological evolution in the history of mankind” was reminder that “we must do a better job of convincing the man-on-the-street of the [space] program’s merits.” Public needed information “to put its priorities in proper perspective.” There was “something seriously wrong” when “as a nation we pay people more not to work and more in farm subsidies than we do on space research, a program which impacts our national economy and vitally affects our national security. ... I am convinced that further erosion of our technological leadership will start us on a downhill course from which it will be difficult to recover.” But, “in our zeal to forge ahead in technical and scientific fields, it is possible to lose sight of the debt we owe to the great American public that so steadfastly sustained us during the early years.” Average American had his priorities. “But he needs to be informed if he is to arrive at an intelligent decision about how to rank his priorities.” Burden of convincing public of necessity for “continuing well-balanced space program for the 1970’s and beyond” lay with those in program. Dr. Fletcher also said: “We want cooperation with the Soviets as well as with other nations throughout the world. We are ready to do our part to get it, but if we have learned the lessons of history, we should know that the Soviets will not be eager to cooperate with a second-rate power. . . . And that is what we will become if we do not proceed with the space shuttle in this decade. We cannot create the environment needed for space cooperation, or an era of enduring peace, by handing over a monopoly in the realm of orbital flight to the Soviet Union or anyone else.” (Text)
nasa Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on research and program management (r&pm) budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization: FY 1972 request was 821 million less than in FY 1971, primarily because of continuing reduction in permanent positions. Request of $697.4 million was based on further reduction of Government personnel of 1500 positions, lowering employment to 28 350—total reduction of 6971 positions from 1967 peak and lowest level since 1963. Cut of “some 20 percent in the 1967—72 period is by a considerable margin the greatest, proportionately, to be made by any Government agency in the period.” Of total NASA force, scientists and engineers made up 44.8%, technicians 26.7%, administrative personnel 13.9%, and clerical 14.6%. Hiring restrictions had reduced number of new college graduates added to work force and raised average age to 41.3, with rate of 8/10 a year each year, endangering health and vigor of NASA. “In the past decade, the aerospace industry, overall as well as that portion serving NASA, has passed through a substantial perturbation. Contractor employment climbed to a high peak, then dropped drastically. The current estimate for industry employment on NASA work at the end of this year and next is about 108,000—less than one-third of what it was at the peak of the space program. But with the major reductions in the space program over the last several years, this is how it must be.” Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, testified on NASA management of its new technology as “a repository of national resources”: Some 20 000 technical contributions had been disclosed by NASA contractors, 3500 in past year. Another 4000 had been reported by NASA employees from inhouse projects. Contributions reported were evaluated, defined, and published for use by others. Allocations for FY 1972 were increased over previous year as NASA began to work with innovative events of early stages of 1970s R&D programs. (Transcript)
Responsibility for NASA space tug activities was assigned to msfc by Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in letter to Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msfc Director, msfc would manage “inhouse and contracted activities” and provide liaison with DOD and European groups interested in participating in development and use of space tug. Dr. Rees later said Space Tug Project Group would be established within Advanced Systems Analysis Office of Program Development. (msfc Release 71-178)
NASA interest in “phased approach” to development of reusable space shutde system was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Contractor studies near completion indicated “preferred configuration” was “two-stage delta-wing reusable system in which the orbiter has external propellant tanks that can be jettisoned.” While studies to date had favored “concurrent approach” in which development and testing of orbiter and booster stages would proceed simultaneously, NASA also had studied feasibility of sequencing development, test, and verification of system’s features. “We now believe that a ‘phased approach’ is feasible and may offer significant advantages.” Additional studies in progress, plus those nearing completion, would enable NASA “to make a decision this fall on the technical and programmatic approach to be followed in the space shuttle program.” (NASA Release 71-107)
Clare F. Farley, Executive Officer in Office of NASA Administrator since 1968, became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization. Farley was succeeded as Executive Officer by Henry E. Clements, formerly of usaf Hq. Directorate of Space Research and Development. (nasa Ann, 7/12/71)
AP quoted NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly as saying NASA was not releasing some information on Soviet space program received through official channels. Clampdown was being made at U.S.S.R’s request and through “bilateral agreement.” AP said Donnelly had forbidden NASA engineers who had returned from NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meeting on compatible docking system Nov. 29—Dec. 7 in Moscow to talk to press. Text of message telexed by Soviet scientists to nasa at JPL during exchange of Mars 2 and 3 and Mariner 9 information would be withheld at Soviet request. Soviet scientists had sent three such messages. (NYT, 12/16/71, 27)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences unanimously approved nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as nasa Administrator, following one-hour hearing. Dr. Fletcher told Committee U.S. had made “some small steps” toward cooperation with U.S.S.R. in space. “I think we can .make these even larger steps.” Asked if he thought nasa needed any change in direction Dr. Fletcher said, “No organization is perfect, and a new administration will always look at the program to see if it can make any changes and I intend to do that.” In response to question from Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), Dr. Fletcher said it was “not NASA’s mission” to act as technological wpa in aiding depressed areas through the channel of space contracts. (CR, 3/10/71, D144; O’Toole, W Post, 3/11/71)
NASA telexed thanks to Soviet scientist Dr. I. A. Zhulin for “very informative transmission” of Mars 2 and 3 data that included description of instruments [see Dec. 21] and forwarded Mariner 9 UV spectrometer results. Message, signed by Mariner 9 Program Manager Dan Schneiderman, continued exchange between JPL and Moscow of information from U.S. and Soviet Mars probes. NASA requested more information on Soviet experiments and spacecraft on “detailed level . . . described in our icarus publication previously transmitted to you,” and said Mariner 9 photo of Mars 3 lander site area was being dispatched by diplomatic pouch. New value for direction of Mars polar axis based on dynamic considerations was included in NASA message to Moscow, nasa noted, “Although this will probably cause a revision of the Mars coordinate system at a later date, we will continue to observe the existing convention in describing the positions of visible surface features.” (NASA Release 71-254)
Tenth anniversary of President Kennedy’s message to Congress urging that U.S. “commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) said on House floor: “As we attempt to plan for a significant and aggressive national space program for the 1970’s, it is well to remember that on this date in 1961 the late President John F. Kennedy made an equally difficult and challenging decision. It is time again that we seize the initiative and make a positive decision for a strong national space program.” (CR, 5/25/71, S7698, E5023)
Soviet Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 cosmonauts were described by Dr. Vladimir Dupik in Sovietskaya Rossiya article as best-fed crew in history of space flights. Length of flight had necessitated diet of four hot meals daily including “first breakfast” of veal, bread, candy, and coffee; “second breakfast” of tongue, sausage, and curds; lunch of dried, salted fish, borscht, meat, bread, cake and black currant juice. Fourth meal was not described. Oven had been installed in spacecraft for first time in Soviet space program, spices had been added to meats to improve flavor, and 14 varieties of meat carried had “higher moisture content which makes them juicier and gives off a nice aroma.” (upi, W Star, 6/27/71, All)
NASA announced decision to discontinue quarantine of astronauts, spacecraft, and lunar samples for remaining three Apollo flights. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said NASA had concluded from analysis of Apollo 11, 12, and 14 quarantine information “that there is no hazard to man, animal, or plants in the lunar material. These results have been reviewed by the Interagency Committee on Back Contamination, and that committee has recommended that further lunar missions need not be subject to quarantine.” (NASA Release
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Aug. 25 resignation from NASA of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong: “Offhand, it is regrettable to see any of these accomplished men leave the program they helped make such a smashing success. But Mr. Armstrong will be teaching engineering and it will be no surprise if some of his students wind up in future space exploration. So count his ‘defection’ to education as another spinoff benefit of the space program.” (W News, 8/30/71, 22)
U.S. manned space flight program would continue on schedule despite Soyuz 11 tragedy, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, told press in Houston. Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, said cosmonauts could have been killed by a toxic gas that accidently escaped, either by a chemical reaction or by a substance being heated inadvertently. He said odds were 1000 to 1 against one cosmonaut dying from effects of 24 days of weightlessness and it was almost impossible for all three to die simultaneously from weightlessness. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told press cosmonauts’ deaths might have been caused by failure of spacecraft’s oxygen-supply system or by physical rupture of spacecraft. Deaths, he said, were “a terrible tragedy. They were pioneers in their achievements in space—in establishing the first manned space station. Our hearts go out to their families and to their colleagues. The cause of their death is not yet known to us. But I would speculate that the fault was with the spacecraft and not with the men. In all of our experience man has readily adapted to new conditions, while machines have sometimes failed.” Dr. Low said he did not expect changes in nasa’s Skylab program because of cosmonauts’ deaths: “All of our experience in 24 manned flights suggests we can and should move ahead.” (upx, W Star, 7/1/71, A3; NASA Activities, 7/15/71, 107)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 docking in AP interview published by Chicago Tribune. Docking indicated U.S.S.R. was “more or less on schedule in their declared program for developing a major experimental station in space, at least two years ahead of us.” In answer to question Dr. Fletcher said prospect “frightens me only because I don’t know what they’re doing there. They may have some military purposes that we don’t know about.” On U.S.S.R.’s two vehicles en route to Mars he said that “we don’t know what these vehicles are going to do, but it’s conceivable that there will be attempts to land.” Dr. Fletcher said NASA had been “shocked and saddened” by loss of Soyuz 11 cosmo-/^2_ nauts but “we find no reason to make any major changes in our plans for manned missions.” (AP, C Trib, 7/11/71)	•
Dr. Vasily V. Parin—Soviet physiologist, former President of Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, and member of Soviet Academy of Sciences—died at age 68 of liver ailment. Dr. Parin had been known primarily for his work during 1960s on human physiological problems during space flight and had authored studies on effect of weightlessness on functioning of heart and circulatory system. He had received Order of Lenin, U.S.S.R’s highest award, in 1963 for his work in developing Soviet medical science. (AP, NYT, 5/Yl/ll, 42) Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified June 15 on nasa policy on backup spacecraft and Centaur reliability: “In the manned program, all possible steps are taken to assure the safety of the astronauts. Single point failures are reduced to an absolute minimum. Missions are planned to build upon the previous missions so as to reduce the number of unknowns.” Within missions, “plateaus are established so that all systems can be checked out in real time prior to committing to the next plateau. Vigorous testing procedures coupled with redundancy and in many cases dual redundancy are adopted before a system is ‘man-rated.’ ” In Skylab “we are building a back-up workshop which will be brought right up to the point of actual checkout. This will permit us to proceed with the program even in the event that the first workshop would not be successfully launched. Similarly, we will have a single back-up Command and Service Module-Saturn IB capability for the three manned visits to the workshop.” Capability was built into program and was “key to the plan for a rescue capability in Skylab which we recently adopted.” In earth-orbital automated programs “we generally plan a series of related missions, using identical or similar hardware. If we have a mission failure, decisions will then be made, based on all available factors, whether we will (1) prepare and fly a specific back-up to the mission which failed, (2) modify succeeding flights ... to achieve the objectives, or (3) defer achieving the mission objectives to future years.” In planetary programs, with launch opportunities at only discrete intervals, NASA usually had provided for two identical launches. Each launch in dual mission was planned to complement its twin, while at same time serving as backup if twin were lost. This year Manner 9 was backup, flying hybrid mission. Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle had history of 3 failures out of 16 operational vehicles, without apparent relationship between failures, giving probability of success of 80% if based solely on past experience. Launch vehicles for automated missions—such as Scout, Delta, and Atlas-Centaur—were “complex systems without much redundancy, and cannot be expected to achieve reliabilities much greater than about 90% without very major and costly changes. They certainly cannot be considered ‘man-rated’ vehicles.” Addition of redundant systems would be investigated again but was not complete solution. Redundancy added weight, reduced payload capability, and was expensive. For launch vehicles of size of Titan-Centaur, which would carry Viking and Grand Tour payloads, additional redundancy might be practicable and desirable and would be actively studied. Major increase in reliability of achieving orbit would be one of important attributes of space shuttle. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on June 16 continued testimony on backup philosophy, expanding on application in ossa: “We do not schedule backup missions for observatory spacecraft. We always buy, and intend to fly, at least two flight units of a new series of observatory-class spacecraft. When we have a failure or a malfunction in a spacecraft or a launch vehicle we will always do everything possible to thoroughly understand and correct all other future missions which could conceivably be subject to a similar malfunction. When we have a failure we will always review the effect of the loss on the program, determine the alternative recovery plans by which we can attain the objectives of the lost mission, assess the cost and any other impact of those alternatives on the program and then decide which alternative to choose.” Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified June 17: “In the basic considerations which establish the philosophical approach to reliability of unmanned space vehicles, the over-riding necessity for protection of the lives of human passengers is absent. The result is an approach to reliability in which cost and simplicity play a much larger part. We have not imposed a requirement for total elimination of single point failure modes, but have concentrated upon reducing the probability of failure by careful design, parts application, major quality and reliability efforts, and, most importantly, tender loving care. Our launch vehicles . . . are characterized as simplex systems, implying lack of the complexity characteristic of redundancy.” (Testimony; Subcom Rpt, 10/71)
Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) which would transport astronauts John W. Young and Charles M. Duke, Jr., on moon during Apollo 16 mission had successfully completed prelaunch checks and been installed on lunar module for flight, KSC announced. Astronauts Young and Duke would make three excursions on LRV in Descartes area of moon during mission, scheduled for March 1972. Final approval of LRV flight readiness was given by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, after installation review. LRV was managed by msfc and was built by Boeing Co. (ksc Release 259-71)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in Washington that Salyut 1-Soyuz 11 mission was “clear demonstration of the Soviet Union’s continuing interest in manned space flight and represents a further experiment to determine the value of manned earth orbital operations.” He wished Soviet cosmonauts “every success in their mission.” (Reuters, B Sun, 6/8/71)
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
President Nixon sent message to Congress transmitting Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Transmitted to the Congress January 1971: “The activities of our space program during the year are consistent with the recommendations I made in March for a balanced space program. Our goals are continued exploration, scientific knowledge and practical applications. The technology acquired through our space programs has many practical applications on earth ranging from communications, meteorology and navigation to agriculture, education and transportation.” Specific objectives were continued lunar exploration to increase scientific return on Apollo program investment, exploration of solar system and universe, reduction of space operation costs, expansion of knowledge of “man’s ability to perform productively in the hostile environment of space and to relate this knowledge to uses here on earth” and application of space technology to environmental problems. “We should also promote international cooperation in our space program by pursuing joint space ventures, exchanging scientific and technical knowledge, and assisting in the practical application of this knowledge. We are greatly encouraged by European interest in joining us in cooperative post-Apollo planning.” Year 1970 had produced “substantial contributions to continued U.S. pre-eminence in civil aviation, major improvements in aeronautical services, and impressive developments in a sound sst program.” New military aeronautics programs initiated in 1970 would “enhance our national security.” (Pres Rpt 71; PD, 2/8/71, 158)
NASA announced establishment of new Office of Applications (oa). Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, was named Associate Administrator for Applications. Leonard Jaffe, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Applications) since 1966, was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications. Personnel, programs, and functions of Earth Observations and Communications Programs Divs. would be transferred from ossa to new office and ossa would be renamed Office of Space Science (oss). Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator said: “The application of space technology to solving problems here on Earth is perhaps NASA’s most important new thrust. I believe it appropriate to centralize into a single office in NASA Headquarters all of the resources which we can muster to support space applications to Earth.” (NASA Release 71-239)	.
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Dr. James C.	Fletcher as NASA Administrator [see Feb. 27]. (PD, 3/8/71, 437)
NASA announced award of $1.6-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Aerospace Corp. for studies of advanced space programs. Studies, which would advance work performed under previous contract, would include space shuttle mission and payload capture analysis, payload analysis for space shuttle applications, analysis of advanced program operations and logistics analysis, and advanced missions safety. (nasa Release 71—255) During December: U.S. manned lunar missions Apollo 14 and 15 were voted fifth most important news story of 1971 in AP poll of member newspapers. Communist China was voted number one newsmaker for admission to U.N., changed diplomatic relations with U.S., and emerging position in world affairs. (W Star, 12/27/71, C9)
Text of Dr. Wemher von Braun interview by West German magazine Der Spiegel was released to U.S. press, nasa Associate Administrator for Planning was convinced that in 20 yrs “we shall have reached the point where space travel will earn more than it is costing.” Earnings from “bread and butter programs”—comsats, weather-monitoring spacecraft, and ers satellites—could pay for permanent lunar bases and manned exploration of Mars. “Most important product of the seventies” would be application of “all that the space program has taught us.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/21/71, 75)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, held news conference during first visit to LeRC. He said LeRC would play major role in development of commercial engines geared toward reducing noise pollution by future jet aircraft. (Lewis News, 9/10/71, 1; LeRC pio)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched NATO’s Natosat 2 military comsat for usaf and NATO, Eole Cooperative Applications Satellite for France, Isis 2 cooperative U.S.-Canada ionospheric satellite, and Ariel 4 ionospheric satellite for U.K. Italian crew trained by NASA launched NASA’s Explorer 45 Small Scientific Satellite and Italy’s San Marco 3 from Italian platform off coast of Kenya. Joint NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings on compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking system progressed to discussion of possible joint test missions. Data obtained by NASA’s Mariner 9 and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 probes were exchanged under agreement that covered broad range of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space science and applications. Agreement on future exchanges of medical and biological manned space flight data called for meetings between U.S. and Soviet experts at least annually. U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged Apollo 11 and 12 and Soviet Luna 16 lunar samples and Soviet scientists were among 750 experts attending Second Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in Houston. First U.S.-U.S.S.R. Conference on Communications with Extraterrestrial Intelligence was held in Soviet Armenia. Joint meeting of NASA and European Space Conference (esc) identified candidate areas for possible European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space programs, including design and development of space shuttle subsystems. International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey at Univ. of Michigan was cosponsored by NASA, Dept, of State, usn, and aid to inform representatives of 51 countries and international organizations of latest techniques for interpreting earth resources data acquired by aircraft and satellite remote sensing systems. nasa’s C-130 aircraft equipped with remote-sensing devices participated in U.S. survey of Jamaica’s natural resources undertaken at request of U.N. and Jamaican government. NASA signed agreement with West Germany for series of barium-ion-cloud (bic) probe launches, and new sounding rocket agreement was signed with France. Under sounding rocket agreement, 20 French Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets would be launched from Kourou Center, French Guiana, in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project. By end of year NASA had entered into cooperative agreements with 39 countries, including agreements on lunar samples, tracking and data acquisition, and geodetic satellite program. Scientists of 87 countries besides U.S. were participating in cooperative ground-based programs and personnel exchanges and 62 countries were exchanging scientific and technical information. Since the beginning of 1962, NASA had launched 21 satellites under international agreements, in addition to flying 21 international experiments on NASA satellites. Since the beginning of the sounding rocket program, 683 cooperative rockets had been launched for research, (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Int Aff; “Selected Statistics on Int’l Affairs,” 2/17/72; A&A, 1971)
GAO study had disclosed that cost overruns on 61 weapon systems had reached $33.4 billion, of which some $9.5 billion had taken place before production began, Washington Post reported. Report blamed “deliberate underestimating,” unanticipated development difficulties, faulty planning, poor management, bad estimating, inflation, and desire to exploit new technology. It said newer dod programs “are characterized by a slower development pace and more conservative procurement practices.” (Nossiler, W Post, 3/19/71, Al)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, described future benefit of space program spinoff in Parade article on applications of space technology to social problems. “On the 1973 flights in the Skylab experimental space station, a medical doctor will go into space with the astronauts. He will carry out a comprehensive program of experiments ... to establish how well men live and work in weightless conditions in an enclosed space as big as a three-bedroom house.” With data obtained, space benefits could be achieved in a few years and made available to people everywhere. (Parade, 12/5/71, 8, 12)
Threat of military superiority was “inherent” in Soviet space program, New York Daily News said. “For it was the the development of a Russian rocket for intercontinental bombardment that led the way to the technological race in space in the first place. We certainly had nothing like it on Oct. 4, 1957, when the Russians startled the world with the orbiting Sputnik and came along a month later to launch Sputnik II, a 1200-pound [500-kg] vehicle carrying a live dog.. . .” U.S. Saturn rocket had no military usefulness; “one doubts that the Russians can say the same about their spacecraft launching vehicles.” (Greene, NY News, 1/31/71)
Dr. James C. Fletcher was sworn in as NASA Administrator by D.C. Superior Court Judge James A. Belson in White House ceremony attended by President Nixon, (nasa Off Admin; W Post, 4/28/71, A2)
Willis H. Shapley, nasa Associate Deputy Administrator, testified before House Committee on Foreign Affairs’ Subcommittee on Africa on operation of NASA tracking station in South Africa. Subcommittee was investigating U.S. business involvement in South Africa. NASA station was manned, staffed, and operated by South African Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (csir). “Committed as we have been to attaining the important national objectives entrusted to us, we have thought of our stations overseas essentially in terms of their efficiency in supporting our flight missions. We have monitored station operations mainly from the standpoint of technical effectiveness and sound financial management. While we have recognized that human factors can have a direct bearing on performance, we are limited in our ability to control these factors, particularly in societies where statutes and practices differ markedly from our own.” NASA wished “to do all we can to see that the NASA station in South Africa reflects to the greatest degree that local circumstances permit, the practices and ideals which govern employment at our domestic facilities.” (Testimony)
GAO published Comparison of Military Research and Development Expenditures of the United States and the Soviet Union. Report quoted Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (oecd) as saying much Soviet R&D was likely to have been directed toward military and space programs. Spin-off to civilian industry in U.S.S.R. was considered to have been small because all invention and innovation of military application, while in principle available for civilian use, was surrounded by impenetrable security blanket. Consequently, strain of R&D effort had been much greater for Soviet economy than for that of U.S. (CR, 7/31/71, E8607-81)
Future of U.S. space program was subject of articles in America Illustrated, usia publication distributed in U.S.S.R. Jay Holmes described plans for next two decades in space including planetary exploration and Grand Tours of outer space, practical applications of space technology, and international cooperation in space. Technical advancements directly traceable to U.S. space program were described by James J. Haggerty, who forecast additional space benefits in future. Reusable space shuttle and earth-orbiting stations, continued lunar exploration, and manned voyages to Mars were discussed in article on earth, moon, and Mars. (Am III, 2/71)
NASA’s 13 scientist-astronauts were “fuming,” Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. They had been selected to be members of Apollo crews landing on moon, primarily as geologists, and members of Sky-lab crews, as physicians, physicists, and chemists. But “no geologist has landed on the moon yet, and only one has a chance of making it,” O’Toole said. Among names of nine prime Skylab crew members and six backups recently circulated at msc, three prime and two backup members were scientists and “this enraged the scientists who were hoping for two-thirds representation on Skylab.” Three meetings had taken place between scientist-astronauts and senior NASA officials— Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Homer E. Newell, Associate Administrator; and Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Scientist-astronauts had asked for more freedom in developing their scientific careers. O’Toole said NASA officials had been said to be sympathetic, “but the gripe about getting their own experiments aboard Skylab fell on deaf ears.” (W Post, 5/17/71, Al)
NASA notified U.S.S.R. of Mariner 9 Mars orbit in telexed message to I. A. Zhulin, Soviet space expert, in Moscow. Message, from Dan Schneiderman, Mariner 9 Project Manager at JPL, said spacecraft had achieved desired orbit but ephemeris used in planning orbit required 60-km (37-mi) adjustment. Mars “appears brighter than expected by a factor of two. Surface features are almost entirely obscured, but the south polar cap can be seen because of its brightness. This is believed to be the result of a dust storm which covers the entire planet.” Infrared instruments on the two Mariner 9 cameras “appear to be seeing the [Martian] surface, but interpretation of their results is complicated by effects of the dust storm. Message invited Soviet request for additional orbit information and described Nov. 10 and 11 photos taken by Mariner 9 before Mars arrival. Photos had shown “four distinct dark features,” one “possibly Nix Olympica.” Nov. 12 photos had shown streaks 1000 km (620 mi) long originating at fourth spot. “Changes in appearance of these four dark areas over the coming weeks may provide unique information about the dust storm.” (nasa Release 71—229)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko signed two nuclear control agreements in formal ceremony at State Dept. Agreements called for improved “hotline” communication between Washington and Moscow via comsats and immediate notification of any unexplained incident involving possible detonation of nuclear weapon which could cause outbreak of nuclear war. (Smith, NYT, 10/1/71, 1) During September: Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in interview published by Air Force Magazine that nasa planned to let hardware contracts for space shuttle by spring 1972, contingent on White House approval. NASA had decided in summer to extend preliminary design contracts by four months to “look more intensively at alternative configurations,” examining phased approach for building reusable upper stage first and testing and using it with interim expendable booster, instead of developing reusable booster at same time. Reevaluation of design concepts was stirred by need for additional analyses and research and by need to trim expenditures “in a given year.” nasa’s viewpoint on space in this decade was “to bring the program down to earth, both figuratively and literally. We must ask ourselves the question: Is what we are doing useful in alleviating our problems on the ground?” Crucial criteria of each prospective space program were “whether it will pay for itself by doing useful work; whether it can be expected to produce valuable scientific knowledge that can only be obtained from space; whether it is important to national security; and whether it will catalyze valuable new technologies or lead' to other practical results.” For shuttle “answers to all these questions is 100 percent affirmative.” (AF Mag, 9/71, 53-61)
National Urban Coalition released Counterbudget—A Blueprint for Changing National Priorities, 1971-1976. Report noted diminishing public support for science and technology and recommended 4% increase in r&d funding to prevent deterioration of Government’s role in science and technology in national affairs. Space program should be kept at funding level just over $3 billion, rather than $5.9-billion level reached in 1966. Space shuttle and station programs should be continued but on stretched schedule. Mars mission should be undertaken only when it could be done internationally. Value of space program as whole lay in its scientific yield, practical results, and national leadership. (CR, 5/21/71, E4836-98; nuc pio)
Space Program Advisory Council, established by NASA to advise on space program goals and objectives and aid in reviewing plans for and work in progress on space programs and accomplishments, held first meeting. Council of prominent scientists would report to NASA Deputy Administrator on findings of four committees—Applications, Physical Sciences, Life Sciences, and Space Systems, (nasa Release 71-71)
Results of Harris survey of 1614 U.S. households on priority areas for cuts in Federal funding were published in Washington Post. Top three candidates for cuts were Vietnam war, foreign aid, and space program; 50% of those polled favored cut in space program; 13% would cut program least of Federal spending areas listed. Support for spending in education, urban aid, and environmental areas, Harris said, “appears to be on the rise.” (Harris, W Post, 8/5/71)
Total new obligational authority for U.S. space program including all pertinent agencies in President Nixon’s proposed FY 1972 budget was $4,707 billion—down $73.6 million, or 1.1%, from FY 1971 space noa of $4,780 billion—Space Business Daily estimated. Total FY 1972 space expenditures would be $4,633 billion, down 5.2% from $4,888 billion in FY 1971. (SBD, 2/3/71, 148)
introduction he said, “This is a time not for routine reading of sophisticated papers about a future that is itself in question, but for addressing ourselves to the basic issue of where we are headed—if anywhere.” Technical display included space shuttle technology exhibits by NASA and major contenders for shuttle contracts and models of Grumman F—14A fighter aircraft, McDonnell Douglas F—15 fighter, and NR B—I bomber aircraft. On Oct. 25, designated by aiaa as “Aerospace Day,” Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott narrated NASA Apollo 15 film. Panel discussions included “Rocketry in the 1950’s” chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; “stol and vtol—Where Do They Fit In?” chaired by arc Director Hans Mark and transmitted by telephone link up to LeRC employees; and “The Aerospace Professional—What Is His Future?” with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as panel member. Von Karman Lecture, “Trends in the Field of Automatic Control in the Last Two Decades,” was given by Dr. Irmgard Flugge-Lotz of Stanford Univ. Automation had been penetrating nearly every field of engineering. Mathematical theory and large computing equipment allowed development and extension beyond handling of linear and weekly nonlinear systems. Investigation of systems with large transport time lags had been advanced. Major aiaa awards presented included John Jeffries Award to Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director of Medical Research and Operations, for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of Manned Space Flight and aerospace medical research through your leadership in the development of life support systems.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given to Ronald L. Berry, Chief of MSC Planetary Missions Analysis Branch, for “many outstanding achievements in the field of manned space flight, particularly in lunar mission analysis and design development.” Spacecraft Design Award was presented to Anthony J. Iorillo, Manager of Special Projects for Hughes Aircraft Co., for “invention of the Gyrostat stabilized spacecraft which formed the basic stabilization and configuration for the successful Tactical Communications Satellite, Intelsat IV, and a series of other satellites now in design and production.” Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award was given to Dr. Hubertus Strughold, Emeritus Professor of Medicine at Brooks afb, Tex. Citation said, “With his prophetic foresight and exceptional talents he established the rational biomedical foundations for manned exploration of space.” DeFlorez Training Award went to Capt. Walter P.	Moran of American Airlines for his “pioneering efforts in the utilization of flight simulation to increase safety and economy of airline flight training and checkout operations. . . .” Aerospace Communications Award was presented posthumously to Siegfried H. Rieger for “his personal contributions over a 10 year period, in analytical work evolving basic concepts, and in the origination and implementation of the Intelsat Program which led to the establishment of the present worldwide communications satellite network.” aiaa History Manuscript Award was presented to Dr. Richard C. Lukas of Tennessee Technological Univ. for “best historical manuscript dealing with the science, technology and impact of aeronautics and astronautics on society.” Award winning manuscript was “Eagles East: The Army Air Force and the Soviet Union.” Among 23 new Fellows honored at Honors Night Banquet Oct. 28 were George H. Hage, Boeing Co. Vice President for Product Development and former NASA Apollo Program Deputy Director; Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Head of 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at LaRC; Eugene S. Love, Chief of Space Systems Div. at LaRC; James W. Plummer, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.; Wilbur L. Pritchard, Comsat Laboratories scientist; and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Douglas Corp. designer. (Program; aiaa Releases; Lewis News, 10/22/71, 1) 1971.	In this connection the sides referred to the important achievements in cooperation in the fields of space exploration, peaceful uses of atomic energy, as well as high energy physics, in particular the installation of a French laser reflector on the moon surface, the commissioning of the French bubble chamber Mirabelle at the Soviet proton accelerator in Serpukhov, the Soviet-French contact on enriching French natural uranium in the Soviet Union.” (fbis-Sov-71-210, 11/1/71, F4)
Christian Science Monitor editorial commented: “Technically, the feats of Apollo 14 . . . are invaluable. The scientific data obtained have opened many new paths to broader knowledge. But far more noteworthy should be the effect which these can have upon man’s view of his place and role in the universal scheme. It is already historical fact that America’s space program has helped focus sharper attention on challenges at home. This is bound, in the long run, to be one of the program’s greatest contributions.” (CSM, 2/9/71)
U.S. space program was “beyond the days of reacting to each major Soviet space event,” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in speech before Aviation/Space Writers Assn, meeting in Wichita, Kans. NASA’s FY 1972 request was typical of those to come for several years; “we have made no commitment to any new program beyond the 1972 budget.” In response to questions, Dr. Low said Soviet Salyut 1—Soyuz 10 mission was “not clearly successful or unsuccessful.” It was “inconceivable” that total planned mission was 48-hr flight to rendezvous and dock briefly. But U.S.S.R. had “strong program. They are concentrating very hard on a major space effort.” (Aero Daily, 5/10/71)
John R. Schaibley, Executive Assistant to Apollo Program Director, omsf, died in Virginia after extended illness. He had been with NASA since 1959 and had received NASA Exceptional Service Medal. (NASA Ann)
The Russian Space Bluff by Leonid Vladimirov, Soviet engineer-journalist who had defected in 1966, had been published in U.K., AP reported. Book said Soviet space program had begun as series of publicity stunts to persuade West that U.S.S.R. had reached level of advanced technology equal to that of U.S. Vladimirov had said that U.S.S.R. knew “she could not beat America to the moon because she cannot build a moon rocket. Even today the Soviet Union cannot produce any significantly big jet nozzles.” Mid-1960 flights in Voskhod series had been short because spacecraft were overloaded earlier Vostok type with some equipment removed. Last-minute modifications had been engineering disgrace. (AP, W Star, 11/25/71, H7) On Nov. 27 Mariner 9 failed in attempt at closeup photograph of Martian moon Phobos. JPL ground controllers said spacecraft’s camera wasn’t pointed correctly when attempt was made. Orbit of Phobos was not known precisely enough to ensure getting photo. Successful photo of Phobos would have shown greater detail than recent picture of Deimos, Mars’ other moon, since Phobos was twice as large as Deimos and spacecraft passed 1600 km (100 mi) closer. Mariner 9 had photographed Phobos Nov. 13 from 150 000 km (93 000 mi) out. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/27/71, A4; W Star, 11/28/71, A6)
Senate confirmed nominations of Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as Alternate U.S. Representative to 26th session of U.N. General Assembly and of Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, former aec Chairman, and Dr. T. Keith Glennan, former nasa Administrator, as U.S. Representative and Alternate to 15th session of General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at Geneva. (CR, 9/16/71, S14433)
Dr. Marvin J. Kelly, former President and Board Chairman of Bell Telephone Laboratories, died at age 77. After retiring from Bell in 1959 Dr. Kelly had been named adviser to NASA Administrator and consultant to IBM, Ingersoll-Rand Co., and Kennecott Copper Corp. (NYT, 3/20/71, 32)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div. of Library of Congress’ Congressional Research Service, reviewed Soviet space program in A1AA Student Journal. Soviet program’s physical size and upward pace “suggests it exceeds in real terms the U.S. program at its previous maximum.” In contrast to U.S. program— which had been eroded as programs ended and technical manpower teams broke up—Soviet “application of resources to a broad program of space flight has continued fairly steadily upward toward an ultimate level which has not yet been publicly defined.” Soviet program began its space flights with adaptation of its first ICBM, SS-6 Sapwood. “This vehicle, with improved upper staging, is still the mainstay of the present program while our corresponding, but very small, Redstone and Vanguard first stages have long since disappeared into history.” Largest single element in total U.S.S.R. program was Cosmos reconnnaisance satellite, which stayed in low-circular orbit a few days and was then recovered and which represented “rather passive military support flights.” Other elements with direct weapon implications were special uses of SS—9 Scarp ballistic missile carrier with space versions F— 1-r carrying fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) and F-l-m carrying highly maneuverable payloads. Some payloads launched by F—1—m “seem almost certainly aimed at developing the techniques of rendezvous with uncooperative spacecraft to inspect them and, if need be, destroy them. In a series of flights . . . such inspectors have made close passes on other Soviet payloads and then have themselves been blown into clouds of debris. At least one, instead of being destroyed . . . was deliberately redirected to plunge into the atmosphere and ocean.” (AIAA Stu /, 12/71, 14-28)
Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the JohnsonSea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft) vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star, 1/30/71, A9) January 31-February 9: nasa’s Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting CSM—110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM Kitty Hawk. January 31~February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot), was launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at 4:03 pm est Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was 40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72° to 75.6°. Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr. Spacecraft and S—IVB combination entered parking orbit with 188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Midcourse correction (MCC—1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:02 get. Onboard TV was initiated to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encountered. First five docking attempts by cm pilot Roosa were unsuccessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible. Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 get, 1 hr 54 min later than planned. Separated S-IVB/iu impacted lunar surface at 83:18 get (2:41 am est Feb. 4) at 7°49' south latitude and 26° west longitude 174 km (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs. Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was initiated at 10:00 get to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they found no indication that systems would not work normally again. Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. 1]. Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-sec sps burn at 30:36 get, increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver, crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth’s dark side and continued to check out systems, get update was performed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay. MCC—3, scheduled for 60:38 get, was not necessary. Third TV transmission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 get, showed Shepard and Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC—4, at 77:38 get with 0.6-sec sps burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec (3.5 fps). Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before firing rcs thrusters at 104:28 get to separate CSM and lm. Spurious bit in lm guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent January 31-February 9: Propelled into space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the moon on the third .successful United States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5 touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored the Fra Mmtro area for 9 hours 24 minutes in two extravehicular periods before the LM Aniares lifted them off to rejoin Roosa in the orbiting cm Kitty Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch activities were monitored by Dr. George M. Low (at left below), Acting nasa Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at ksc. abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manually. LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 108:54 get (4:17 am est Feb. 5) on 8° slope 9—18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy, undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.” First eva began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent plss communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar surface at 114:30 get (9:53 am est Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the forward footpad landed is extremely soft. . . . it’s in a small depression. The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads, it even folded over the sides to some degree. ... we can see the boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route up to the top of the Cone.” Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb) contingency sample; deployed TV, S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experiment; and photographed lm, lunar surface, and experiments, alsep was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of lm and laser-ranging retrorefiector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of alsep. Mitchell conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibrations 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min extension on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:48 get (3:11 am est Feb. 6)—2 hrs 27 min earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded met with photographic equipment and lunar portable magnetometer (lpm) and proceeded toward Cone Crater, met bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable. Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Everything’s going to be covered with dust before long.” lpm site measurement was made at first stop and lpm traverse measurement was later made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and materials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m (1.5-ft) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected. Alignment adjustment was made to alsep central station’s antenna to improve signal strength being received at msfn ground stations. Crew was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of timeline and minor problems. Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement: “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the February 4-6; Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed, (at top left) leading across the lunar surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-band antenna was positioned by the astronauts to the left of the lm. Lunar dust clung to the legs of Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extravehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to M tons of tht. contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball on lunar surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds). Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing total eva time to 9 hrs 24 min. While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in csm, completed bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic photography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for shortened rendezvous technique. Shepard and Mitchell depressurized lm, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg (94.8 Ihs) of samples at 142:25 get—33 hrs 31 min after landing on moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 get (3:36 pm Feb. 6) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to earth for postflight analysis. Excellent TV during rendezvous and docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET (7:05 pm est Feb. 6) at 3° 35' south latitude and 19° 40' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 alseps. Transearth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 get, injected CSM into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Kitty Hawk separated from sm at 216:12 get. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 get (4.05 pm est Feb. 9). Astronauts, wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston. CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for lrl. Primary Apollo 14 objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro; deploy and activate alsep; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occasional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent. Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSm/lm docking attempts and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first use of met, largest payload—32 500 kg (71 650 lbs)—placed in lunar orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations. Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capability to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), aborted by sm tank explosion, had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; Av Wk, 2/15/71, 19)
Portrait of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, third nasa Administrator (1969-1970) was unveiled in nasa Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. Paine; and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Portrait, by artist William Draper, would hang at NASA Hq. (Transcript)
Economic slump that hit Cape Kennedy and Brevard County, Fla., after space program cuts appeared to be bottoming out, New York Times reported. Three Chambers of Commerce and county economic development council were spending $260 000 annually, “compared with next to nothing three years ago,” to promote ksc tours find area’s natural assets. Decline in jobs since 1968 had leveled off and panic sale of homes at bargain prices had ended. (Janson, NYT, 3/8/71, 25)
Interview of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, was published by U.S. News & World Report. Dr. Petrone said: “Many people think Apollo had only a singular goal—that is, land a man on the moon and return him safely to earth. That was not the only goal of Apollo. Very clearly, in President Kennedy’s address to the Congress in May of 1961, a landing on the moon was chosen as a focal point. The intention was that the U.S. would become pre-eminent in space— learning to operate, I believe as President Kennedy said, on a new ocean, a new frontier.” Space research was “definitely relevant. Many of the problems we’re trying to solve have to do with the environment. We’ve already made a head start in that field with our work on spaceships, which requires that we carry the environment with us. We have got to purify the gases we have, we’ve got to remove odors, we have to restore the oxygen we use. . . . We are learning how to rehabilitate an environment. These tools, these techniques, these understandings will have relevance here on earth.” (US News, 8/2/71)
Newspaper editorials commented on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: Chicago Tribune: “Any one of a million things could have gone wrong, because there are a million things that have had to go right for each Soviet and American success in space. It is no discredit to Russian scientists that something went wrong at the last moment. It is testimony to the good fortune and skill and care of the United States space program that something of this kind hasn’t happened yet to us.” (C Trib, 7/1/71) Christian Science Monitor:	. . those men who fly such missions are taking the risk for the aspirations of mankind to break the limitations of earth’s gravitational and atmospheric fields. They depend on the accumulating technological knowledge of mankind to protect them. As a result, the Soyuz 11 event argues the more determinedly that nations—for the moment chiefly the United States and the Soviet Union—should share their space research efforts.” (CSM, 7/1/71) Washington Post: “The special sorrow that must be felt at this event does not proceed from their numbers—three deaths next to, say, thousands among the world’s more recently savaged refugees. Nor does it proceed alone from their conspicuous bravery, their willingness to take the ultimate risk in pursuit of a national mission: daily, men in combat make the same commitment and do so minus the glory and unambiguous sense of purpose that cosmonauts and astronauts share. So it is more than the death of three men on a high risk venture that must move the earthbound to a special sorrow: it is the death of these men in pursuit of the ultimate adventure, exploration of the outer limits of human knowledge and endurance—and beyond.” (W Post, 7/1/71) New York Times: “. . . it should be apparent that the staggering dangers of space can be met most effectively by mobilizing all the knowledge and talent available irrespective of nationality. It is time to abandon the wasteful irrationality of prestige-motivated competition. The real lesson of this tragedy is . . . that space exploration ought to be a cooperative endeavor of all nations.” (NYT, 7/1/71) Baltimore Sun: “The three cosmonauts lived in space for almost 23 days, and by all indications the station’s operation came up to its designers’ hopes. Only in the final brief stage, a stage often successful before, did disaster intervene. It is tragedy, but it is not defeat.” (B Sun, 7/1/71)
Joint group of NASA and European Space Conference technical experts completed four-day meeting at NASA Hq. to identify candidate areas for possible European participation in post-Apollo space programs. NASA announced Dec. 6 that areas identified included space shuttle subsystems, major responsibility for orbit-to-orbit space tug, early development of major payload elements like sortie cans and research and applications modules, and support studies in related technology. Group’s report would be studied by U.S. and European authorities. Group had proposed February 1972 meeting for further technical definition and consideration of programmatic, financial, and management implications, (nasa Release 71-241)
New York Times editorial commented on Pioneer F: “The mission of Pioneer F—the spacecraft that will be launched next year to visit giant Jupiter and send back photographs and scientific data—opens some of the most exciting vistas yet in the entire space program. If accomplished ... this mission would mark a major advance in man’s understanding of a hitherto unpenetrated section of the solar system.” (NYT, 3/15/71, 38) altitudes with rockets and instruments functioning satisfactorily. Launches were second and third in four-launch series; first had been conducted March 5. (nasa Rpts SRL) Col. John G. Albert, usaf Director of Space Operations, said dod was “putting its faith in the shuttle and as a result we are not developing any other space rocket beyond the present Titan 3. We intend to use the shuttle for all military space operations.” Use would include communications, navigation, weather-watching, and surveillance. Shuttle would place military satellites in orbit and perform specialized missions in orbit for periods up to seven days. Col. Albert told news conference later that dod would “certainly make a sizable funding contribution at the proper time” to assist NASA in shuttle development. To be useful to the military, shuttle must be able to operate like jet transport with quick turnaround on runway after conventional landing. (AP, B Sun, 3/16/71) Jean Bernard LaGarde, liaison officer for European Space Conference and French representative to esc, said Europe would contribute $1 billion to U.S. manned space programs in future if U.S. lifted ban on launching comsats for European nations. LaGarde said U.S. would have to give positive answer by late April or early May. (LA Times, 3/17/71) aiaa President Martin Goland at banquet March 16 presented Haley Astronautical Award of $500, medal, and certificate, to Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert for “exceptional manner in which the Apollo 13 crew conducted themselves and their spacecraft under extraordinary circumstances of extreme stress.” Octave Chanute Award of' $500 and certificate was presented to William M. Magruder, Director of ssx Development for dot, for “outstanding contributions by a pilot to the development of safer, more efficient air transportation.” aiaa History Manuscript Award for “best historical manuscript dealing with the science, technology, and impact of aeronautics and astronautics on society” went to Constance McLaughlin Green and Milton Lomask for “A History of Project Vanguard” [published in nasa Historical Series in March as Vanguard—A History, SP—4202]. (aiaa Release; AIAA Bull, 3/71; nasa Hist Off)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and Alan Gotlieb, Deputy Minister of Canadian Dept, of Communications, signed agreement at NASA Hq. for first cooperative international project for experimental communications technology satellite. Cooperative Applications Satellite C (cas-c) would be launched into geostationary orbit by NASA in 1974 to conduct communications experiments with ground terminals operating at extremely high frequencies, test one-kilowatt solar-power-cell arrays that would unfurl in space like window shades, and test electric propulsion and stabilization systems. Canadian doc would be responsible for design, construction, integration, and subsystems testing of spacecraft and for tracking, data acquisition, command, and control of spacecraft after it reached orbit, nasa would provide Thor-Delta booster, launch services, superefficiency power tubes and associated equipment, and environmental testing of integrated spacecraft. Thei'e would be no exchange of funds between doc and nasa. Project was fifth in series of cooperative satellites which began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. (nasa Release 71-72)
USAF had announced that 130-member review team of specialists from usaf, Lockheed, and other aerospace companies would make year-long review of usaf C-5A program, Wall Street Journal reported. Object of review was to “recommend operational refinements or aircraft modifications where necessary.” (WSJ, 11/30/71, 3)
Eyewitness to Space by H. Lester Cooke with James H. Dean, published by Harry N. Abrams, Inc., was reviewed by Frank Getlein in Washington Evening Star. Book contained more than 250 paintings and drawings by artists in nasa artist program. “What they have Created is an extraordinary record . . . because it records more than the eye, even the trained eye, can see. The sketches and many of the paintings do indeed record what any eye can see, but the seeing is special. Beyond that, artist after artist at some point found himself pushed by the material itself into taking an abstract, symbolic view of the space flights themselves, painting a vision, not a view.” nasa artists program, “one of the most remarkable ventures in art-government relations,” had brought hundreds of artists to NASA facilities to paint or draw what they saw and they were to see whatever they wanted and depict it in whatever manner suited their perceptions.” Only requirement was that all work was to be turned over to NASA, which had given it to National Gallery. Coauthor Cooke was National Gallery Curator of Painting. It was “hard to think of anything in art history that quite compares with the nasa program.” Getlein recalled Italian TV coverage of first moon walk. “One big response to the event was to convene gatherings of famous Italians—non-scientists all—in studios . . . and have them talk about the moon. But at many points in the protracted coverage, against a background of Beethoven, a beautiful Tuscan voice read Dante.” Qualities evoked by this “odd response, but an oddly perfect one,” were “precisely those that have eluded American television coverage of the space program. They are qualities that this book reaches for constantly and often attains.” (W Star, 10/17/71, B5)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, addressed annual meeting of National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “I am impressed with the soundness of this new space program for the Seventies and I urge you to support it. I also believe very much that our country needs it.” Among program’s strengths were: it had congressional backing; it was well planned and well balanced to meet basic national needs, including national security; it stressed earth orbit as “new realm of prime importance and great opportunity, where America’s capacity for world leadership will be tested not only in this decade but in the decades to follow.” Program promoted economic progress based on new technology, was essential to President Nixon’s peace policies based on international cooperation, and was “already part of America’s destiny, as all of you can testify who watched the Apollo 15 operations on international television.” nasa had been “impressed and encouraged” by President’s call for new programs to ensure maximum enlistment of technology in meeting challenge of peace and by President’s promises to present those programs in next session of Congress. “Technology, in my judgment, has made this country great and will keep it great. It is certainly true that we need adequate political controls and, if possible, social controls to keep technology the servant of man, and not his master. But nevertheless new technology we absolutely need to assure jobs and a better life for all Americans in the decades ahead.” Dr. Fletcher felt recent shuttle studies had “reinforced the general belief that America’s future in space in the remainder of the 20th Century depends in large measure on our skill and our determination in defining and developing the shuttle.” (Edited text) Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said in speech that U.S.S.R.’s Foxbat fighter aircraft was “now operational in Egypt and cannot be matched in performance by anything we have in operation.” (Text)
