Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified on space shuttle economics before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Following testimony by Dr. Oskar Morgen-stern, Chairman of Board of Mathematica, Inc., and Dr. Klaus P. Heiss of Mathematica, on corporation’s study of space shuttle economics [see Jan. 31], Dr. Lapp criticized calculations and said entire issue of launch vehicle choices for future should be restudied. He said shuttle payloads would average “10 times more expensive than their weight in solid gold.” Cost would be $5100 per 0,5 kg (1 lb) for launches 1979-1990. Cost projection prepared for NASA had indicated $7-billion saving for shuttle launches in program that would cost $42 billion using current methods, Dr. Lapp said. He added that no such $42-billion program had been authorized for the 1980s. U.S. taxpayers could save $19 billion by not building space shuttle and by using existing rockets for space program. (Transcript)
Full-scale model of Boeing supersonic transport costing $10 million would be stored at Boeing facility near Seattle, Wash., another year for further “technical evaluation,” Washington Evening Star reported. Federal Aviation Administration had said technical benefits to be gained by retaining mockup would outweigh proceeds from its sale. (W Star, 4/30/72, C12)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, discussed cost of doing business in space in speech before Aerospace Industries Assn.’s 26th Williamsburg Conference at Williamsburg, Va. NASA was developing “steady flow of products in the space business.” With shuttle “we will have a real opportunity to do something about the high cost of doing business in space.” Formula was to identify areas with greatest potential payoff for cost improvement, determine standard requirements for systems with highest potential payoff for future spacecraft, develop these standard items with low cost and high reliability, and ensure that items were used. “Our work to improve the costs of the things we will do in space is an essential adjunct to the Shuttle—not only for our own projects, but to help pave the way for many more commercial uses of space.” (Text)
International aspects of future space programs were discussed by Crosby S. Noyes in Washington Evening Star and Daily News column. Scientific and engineering aspects of 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission were “minimal compared to the psychological switch which the effort represents.” Project had “most profound political implications for the future.” U.S.S.R. participation in space shuttle development might raise “touchy questions” because of “obvious military aspects of the program.” In distant future efforts, including possible manned flights to other planets, “it is . . . evident that international cooperation on a much wider scale will be essential. What the Apollo program has demonstrated is that manned space flight is an impractical proposition for any single nation to undertake. Which may turn out to be the most valuable discovery of all.” (W Star & News, 12/5/72) December 6:	NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by Cecil Powell, completed 25th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Objectives of flight were to evaluate command augmentation system; to ohtain stability and control data at mach 1.1, mach 0.8, and mach 0.7; and to check out pitch-reaction augmentation system. All objectives were achieved. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.3. (nasa proj off)
Envelopes carried to moon aboard Apollo 15 and later sold to stamp dealers had been ordered by Harold G. Collins, Chief of Kennedy Space Center Mission Support Office, Manager John H. Jacobs of Brevard Printing Co. told press. Collins had asked that bill be sent to Hughes Enterprises in Las Vegas, Nev. Associated Press said Collins and NASA officials and astronauts at Manned Spacecraft Center had declined to comment on Jacobs’ statement because matter was under investigation by Dept, of Justice. (AP, W Post, 9/19/72, A3)
Report by Italian Research Organization sobis was quoted as saying U.S. and U.S.S.R. were rocketing out of Europe’s reach in technical and managerial sense as result of the success of their space technologies. Report, prepared for Commission of the European Community, recommended that high priority be given to strengthening and unifying European aerospace industry, (csm, 6/5/72) World Bank President Robert S. McNamara said during June 9 session: “Ecological considerations have made us all more aware of the interdependencies of our world. We have come to see our planet as a ‘spaceship earth.’ But what we must not forget is that one-quarter of the passengers . . . have luxurious first-class accommodations and the remaining three-quarters are traveling in steerage. That does not make for a happy ship—in space or anywhere else.” Major conflict of Conference was over resolution to halt nuclear weapon testing. Resolution was approved by majority but opposed by Communist China and France, with 14 nations—including U.S. and United Kingdom—abstaining. Conference recommendations, subject to ratification by U.N. General Assembly in September, were not legally binding. (NYT, 6/5—17/72; Hawkes, Science, 6/23/72,1308-10) June 6:	Dr.’ James C. Fletcher reviewed space program accomplishments during his first year as NASA Administrator in speech before Salt Lake City, Utah, Rotary Club. He had been asked at bis first NASA Hq. press conference if he “did not feel like the captain of the ill-fated ship Titanic.” Ten “good reasons” why reporters no longer asked that question were: (1) NASA had defined space program for 1970s that was “as challenging, as exciting, and as rewarding as our space achievements of the last decade, but less costly.” (2) New program had been approved by President and Congress “with a strong bi-partisan majority.” (3) Program could be carried out over next six or eight years at present $3.4-billion NASA budget level “which calls for steady space progress at a cost the country can afford.” (4) Balanced program meant increased capability for “useful work in all the major areas of space activity.” (5) “We have chosen the re-usable Space Shuttle as our major investment in new space technology . . . and . . . have succeeded in redesigning the Shuttle to cut estimated development costs in half without significant losses in performance.” (6) “We have settled the argument over whether to stress manned or unmanned space missions in the Seventies. The shuttle will be used for both.” (7) Space shuttle in military service “will make an important contribution to our national security.” (8) Program was “relevant to the needs of modern America.” Information culled from Earth Resources Technology Satellites would “help protect the environment of spaceship Earth.” (9) Space shuttle program to develop future uses of space provided “necessary base for increased international cooperation,” adding significance to U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement. (10) NASA again had “national commitment to make space progress a clear expression of our national character and a symbol to the world of what America stands for and works for.” (Text)
Selection of Kennedy Space Center in Florida and Vandenberg Air Force Base in California as launch and landing sites for space shuttle was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in Washington, D.C. ksc site would be used for research and development launches, to begin in 1978, and for all operational flights into easterly orbits. NASA would provide facilities for shuttle users at ksc by modification of existing facilities. Vandenberg afb site would be phased in toward end of decade for shuttle flights requiring high-inclination orbits. Dept, of Defense would provide basic shuttle facilities. NASA Site Review Board studies had shown Kennedy-Vandenberg combination had cost, operational, and safety advantages over all other U.S. sites. Cost of establishing facilities at ksc was estimated at $150 million; at Vandenberg, $500 million. Decision to use KSC was “most gratifying to NASA’s launch organization” and ensured “continued utilization of this base and the supporting Eastern Test Range,” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, said in statement read at KSC press briefing following announcement of shuttle site selection. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, explained at ksc briefing why site construction at Vandenberg AFB would cost more than at ksc : “At Kennedv we can make full use of the Saturn V launch complex—Complex 39. The Shuttle will be brought back in there after flight, . . . refurbished there, . . . mated with its booster ... in the vab [Vehicle Assembly Building], taken on the trawler transporter to the existing launch pad and launched.” ksc modifications would be minor but at Vandenberg “launch facilities . . . are not yet as well suited to the shuttle.” Larger modifications would be required, “and this is where the cost is.” Selection between KSC and Vandenberg for a particular launch would depend on required launch azimuth, Dr. Low said. “If we launched something toward the east . . . then it makes sense to launch it from the east coast, whether it is for the Department of Defense or for NASA or for civilian users. When you launch into a polar orbit, or a high-inclination orbit, then it makes more sense to launch from the west coast so you don’t overfly land.” In response to question, Dr. Low said NASA did not plan to mate Air Force-supplied booster with shuttle, “nasa will develop, or have developed under NASA contract by industry, the full shuttle including the orbiter, its large tanks, and the solid rocket motor.” NASA did have “clear understanding” with dod that it would use shuttle when it became available and if it met requirements. (NASA Release 72-81; Transcript)
Press commented on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement. U.S. would “be doing virtually all of the cooperating” in joint space mission called for under new U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement, William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. “While negotiations were underway ... it was assumed that the 1975 joint manned space flight envisioned . . . would be a 50-50 proposition. The Americans would build the hardware . . . and the Russians would provide a small space station in which experiments could be carried out.” Instead, U.S.S.R. had “pulled back their item—the Salyut station— and changed the nature of the mission.” This had relieved U.S.S.R. of considerable expense and “left Uncle Sam holding a $250 million bag, this sum being the estimated cost of the hardware our side will have to build anyway.” (W Star, 5/28/72, A6) St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “An agreement between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. . . . ought to be just the first step toward full international co-operation in space. Countries which lack space programs of their own should be encouraged to participate in space ventures as limited partners.” Other countries had scientific expertise to contribute. “Beyond this they ought to receive the full benefits of whatever information is gained through space research. Historically, science never has been the exclusive domain of a single nation or even a small group of nations. It has served all mankind and this is the way it should be in space.” (St. Louis P—D, 5/28/72)
One consequence of President Nixon’s Feb. 17-28 state visit to People’s Republic of China could be indefinite ban on overflights of mainland China by reconnaissance drones and high-altitude U-2 aircraft engaged in intelligence-collecting missions, Aviation Week & Space Technology article said. “If the anticipated decision is made, it presumably would end any consideration of flying Boeing’s upcoming long-endurance Compass Cope drone on proposed 24-hr missions over Communist China.” (Av Wk, 2/28/72, 11) February 28-March 24: City of Memphis and Shelby County, Tenn., conducted “Space and Science Awareness Month” to inform citizens about national space program. Project—sponsored by greater Memphis area school systems and supported by NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center—was opened £y Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart and NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. Program exhibited space-related displays—including moon rock, lunar roving vehicle mockup, and models and displays on several NASA programs—at Pink Palace Museum. Also included were displays of educational literature on space technology in 250 school libraries; lectures at 65 schools and at various club meetings by NASA officials; 14 seminars and workshops for teachers; showing of 25 films at elementary schools, on Memphis educational TV station, and to adult groups; and presentation of series of programs on etv station. Memphis awareness month was largest space information program ever held by U.S. city, (msfc Release 72-16)
Science commented on June 6 defeat of Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) as candidate for reelection to Congress: Since 1961, when Miller became Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, “Apollo program has reached fruition and starts have been made on Skylab and the shuttle. Miller was NASA’s foremost advocate in the House and took pride in announcing every latest achievement of the space program.” Miller’s committee had been “influential in having NASA expand its investment in . . . scientific satellites.” Science cited Miller’s age, 81, as “decisive factor” in his loss of election. (Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
Federal Aviation Administration announced award of five-month 1414 226 contract to Xonics, Inc., for additional wake-turbulence studies leading to design of ground-based acoustic wake-turbulence detection system. Xonics would analyze results of previous studies and recommend design of system capable of providing wake-vortex surveillance along airport instrument-landing-sytern approach path, (faa Release 72-37)
Apollo 17 astronauts flew proficiency runs in NASA T-38 jet aircraft from Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., while at Kennedy Space Center five mice were selected to fly on mission experiment. Mice had been selected from 40 small rodents brought from California desert as candidates for mouse-to-the-moon mission. They would remain in orbit around moon when lunar module descended to surface. (AP, B Sun, 12/3/72) December 2—3:	Chicago Daily News editorial commented on impact of Apollo program: “The costly moon race may have helped distort American thinking in a damaging way. If we can go to the moon, so the slogan ran, we can do anything—wipe out poverty, eradicate racism, guide the economy, cure every evil of society. The euphoria created by the burgeoning space program and the crowning successes of the landing may have contributed to the rise of expectations in other fields beyond any solid hope of their realization. Science and technology can do wonders, but social problems do not yield so readily to electronics or telemetry.” (C Daily News, 12/2-3/72) December 3:	Kennedy Space Center technical writers, members of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees, agreed to accept 44% pay increase, ending threat of strike that might have delayed Apollo 17 launch [see Nov. 5]. (Auerbach, W Post, 12/4/72, A20)
Plans for 1976 private space probe “Mankind 1” were described by spokesmen of Committee for the Future at Beverly Hills, Calif., press conference. Committee of private citizens proposed to buy U.S. or Soviet spacecraft and launch system for one of three proposed missions: orbiting laboratory, 14-day mission to place giant illuminator with one sixth moon’s reflective capacity in orbit 650 km (400 mi) above earth, or combination of both missions. Mankind 1 was successor to Project Harvest Moon which Committee had hoped to finance by selling moon rocks. Committee Chairman John J. Whiteside said first project had been scrapped after July 18 meeting with NASA officials who were skeptical about possibility of flying lunar mission after Apollo 17. (Sweeney, LA Times, 9/21/72)
Cleveland Press editorial commented on NASA catalog of inventions available for commercial licensing [see Sept. 8]. “We already know of such NASA-originated benefits as satellite communication, land surveys and crop inspection. The catalog simply is another illustration of the spinoff importance of the space program.” (Cleveland Press, 10/12/72) October 13:	Three Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched by NASA from Poker Flat near Fairbanks, Alaska, carried GCA Corp. experiment to study thermospheric winds using vapor-trail technique. Experiment data would be compared and contrasted with data from several different ground-based and airborne measuring systems. Data were acquired by high-speed cameras aboard NASA’s Convair 990 optical aircraft and by ground-based instruments—incoherent scatter radar, radio meteor winds system, ionosonde, interferometer, spectrographs, and high-speed cameras. Vapor trails for two launches were produced by sodium-lithium ejected from payload. Rockets performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Launches carried no instrumentation. Vapor trails for third launch were to have been produced by liquid tri-methylaluminum ejected from payload in flight. Launch was adjudged failure when Apache 2nd stage failed to ignite. Payload did not reach experiment altitude of 80 to 200 km (50 to 125 mi) and no data were obtained. (NASA Rpt srl; Wallops Release 72-10)
Federal Aviation Administration had approved airport planning project funding of $9 061 104 for 181 projects in 39 states under its Planning Grant Program for FY 1971, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced. FY 1971 funding had been $3 636 035 for 42 projects in 27 states, (faa Release 72-147)
U.S. Postal Service officials had been “somewhat upset” by reports that Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden had taken 400 unauthorized covers—stamped envelopes with postal markings—to moon, Washington Sunday Star reported. German philatelic magazines had reported that Herman E. Sieger, German stamp dealer, had sold 100 Apollo 15 covers at 4850 German marks each for total $150 350 at official exchange rate. Under NASA regulations, astronauts had been permitted to carry on mission small mementos of flight for friends and relatives but not for sale. Official “moon mail” covers were distributed to purchasers by U.S. Postal Service. Specially struck medals had been carried on several Apollo missions and later sold to public through Government channels. NASA officials had identified unidentified “friend of crew now in Germany” as link between Apollo 15 astronauts and German dealer. Friend had told dealer that 20 covers had gone to astronauts’ friends and relatives; remaining covers had been turned over to NASA management. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, said that no member of crew had profited directly or indirectly from covers sold. (Faries, W Star, 6/18/72, 1)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp discussed space shuttle economics in letter published in Science. Cost and purpose of shuttle’s projected 900-metric-ton (1000-short-ton) payload over 10 yrs needed careful evaluation “before the nation plunges ahead on a space project whose cost may well eclipse that of the Apollo program.” Assuming NASA could slash payload costs to $2000 per 0.5 kg (1 lb), “then 20 million pounds [9 million kg] in orbit represent a national investment of $40 billion.” Shuttle development cost of $5.5 billion plus deployment and operation of shuttle system would cost from $11 to $16 billion. NASA estimate of less than $100 for lifting 0.5 kg (1 lb) of payload from earth to orbit was “easily disputed.” Estimate of $11 billion for shuttle cost divided by 9 million kg amounted to $550 per 0.5 kg and not much less than the $700 per 0.5 kg that existing NASA launch vehicles had cost. Only “if orbital payloads can be reduced so they cost only several times more per pound than gold, is it meaningful to seek cheaper space transportation. Even then the nation ought to be asking what kind of space program is the space shuttle designed to support.” (Science, 3/3/72, 944)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other officials testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 NASA authorization hearings. Dr. Fletcher said: “I regard the fiscal year 1973 budget . . . as marking the end of a difficult transition period for NASA. For the past 2 or 3 years, NASA, the executive branch, and the Congress have been grappling with questions on the course the Nation’s space program should take in the 1970’s and beyond. The main goals in science, exploration, and applications, and the advanced system and technology required to achieve these goals, have been identified . . . and generally approved .... But there has remained a basic uncertainty . . . the question of cost. Can the Nation afford the space program of the 1970’s? Will the approval of the Space Shuttle and the other programs . . . commit the Nation to a large increase in future spending levels? “This year we can give clear answers to these questions. We can assure the committee, the Congress, and the public that the program we are proposing does not commit the country to higher budget levels in future years, at least measured in current dollars .... The revised plan is, I believe, more realistic and will give the Nation a good, viable, and balanced program in aeronautics and space at a cost it can afford.” Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, reported substantial progress in two basic cooperative activities with U.S.S.R.—joint work on compatible docking systems and exchanges in scientific areas, including lunar sample exchanges. In response to question, Dr. Low said he thought it likely U.S.S.R. would continue lunar program after U.S. completed Apollo program. “They may even try to land men on the moon in the latter part of this decade. That will be a catching-up process.” To further question, Dr. Fletcher said that in late 1970s U.S.S.R. would be “doing things in the manned space program that are beyond what we would be able to do.” From end of Skylab in 1973 until 1978, “it is likely that they will be carrying on some important activity and we will have no opportunity to respond until 1978” [with space shuttle]. Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, submitted statement on NASA’s work force: “When several reductions are made serially, as they have been in NASA over the past several years, the effects compound, and the healing processes, such as the resumption of hiring of younger people, the filling of vacancies via merit promotion ... do not have an opportunity to function.” NASA was “feeling these disadvantageous effects severely.” Most worrying was “dwindling of the supply of new blood.” It was obvious “trend cannot continue without the health and vigor of the organization being undermined.” NASA needed “to embark upon a period of stability” in work force to “return to normal personnel development practices, heal the damage of the past several years, and be prepared to meet the challenges of the 70’s.” With the “prospect of a period of relative stability in the general level of spending” and “clearer view of the NASA forward mission,” such a policy was indicated. Statement submitted by Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, described NASA Regional Dissemination Centers’ assistance to users “ranging from small businesses to the largest companies in our Nation’s economy— across a broad spectrum of business sectors including manufacturing services, transportation and communications. The Centers also serve university faculty and students; varied national, state, and local organizations; and governmental entities at all levels.” NASA RDCs had served more than 2000 organizations in 1971, of which over 48% of industrial users were small businesses. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), NASA Director of Facilities, submitted statement on facilities. In $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities, $27.9 million was for modifications and additions to facilities for space shuttle, $11.2 million for facilities supporting scientific investigations in space, $12.9 million for facilities supporting aeronautical research and technology, and $25.3 million for smaller supporting activities and planning and design. (Transcript)
Space program costs were recounted for press by unidentified NASA spokesman at Manned Spacecraft Center. U.S. had spent more than $26,657 billion on manned space program in past 15 yrs and planned to spend $8.85 billion in next 5 yrs. Apollo series—most expensive program—would cost $25 billion through completion of Apollo 17. Gemini program had cost $1283.4 million and Mercury, $392.1 million. Skylab was expected to cost $2.6 billion, and early estimates for space shuttle program were $6.1 billion. NASA had saved $1.5 billion by eliminating Apollo 18, 19, and 20. (upi, NYT, 12/12/72, 38)
President Nixon signed H.R. 15097, $8.393-billion Dept, of Transportation and related agencies appropriations act that contained $1,671-billion Federal Aviation Administration appropriation. Act became Public Law 92-398. {PD, 8/28/72, 1288; faa pio)
President Nixon signed ratification of Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation and urged prompt action on other measures to combat international terrorism. Convention required extradition or prosecution of persons committing sabotage or violence against international civil aviation. Other measures were draft convention for prosecution or extradition of persons who attacked foreign officials, convention suspending air service to countries who failed to punish or extradite aircraft hijackers or saboteurs, and convention requiring prosecution or extradition of persons who injured, kidnaped, or killed innocent civilians to blackmail any state or international organization. (PD, 11/6/72, 1608) November 2:	American Astronautical Society presented its 1971 awards and honored newly elected fellows at Washington, D.C., luncheon. Flight Achievement Award was presented to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar B. Mitchell for “achievements in flight testing which have contributed significantly to the advancement of manned space flight.” Lloyd V. Berkner Award was presented to Willard F. Rockwell, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of North American Rockwell Corp., for “outstanding contributions to the commercial utilization of space technology.” Space Flight Award went to Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., Grumman Aerospace Corp. President, for “outstanding efforts and achievements which have contributed significantly to the advancement of space flight and space science.” Victor A. Prather Award was presented jointly to Robert E. Breeding of United Aircraft Corp. Space Systems Dept, and Leonard F. Shepard of ilc Industries, Inc., for “outstanding contributions in . . . extravehicular protection in space.” Randolph Lovelace II Award went to Dr. Maxime A. Faget, Manned Spacecraft Center Director of Engineering and Development, for “outstanding contributions in space technology.” Melbourne W. Boynton Award for “significant research contributions to space flight safety” was presented to Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director for Medical Operations at msc, and Dr. Harald J. von Beckh, Naval Air Development Center Director for Medical Research. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan were among newly elected Fellows. (aas Release)
President Nixon had directed that regulations on travel of U.S. ships and aircraft (Transportation Order T-2) be changed to permit valid U.S. aircraft and vessels to visit People’s Republic of China, White House announced. {PD, 11/22/72, 1688) November 23:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, during visit to Lewis Research Center told staff NASA’s direction in coming years would include increased emphasis on sharing expertise with other Federal, local, and state government agencies and continued high performance in space-flight exploitation with an eye on the purse strings. He said, despite Federal budgetary restrictions, “I don’t see a great change at NASA and feel we can continue in the direction we set forth this past year.” (Lewis News, 12/15/72, 3)
Release of first 24 in series of supersonic transport (sst) foliow-on technology reports was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. Reports covered noise reduction, supersonic inlets, flight controls, fuel tank sealants, and titanium structures, (faa Release 72-179)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in letter to staff congratulated NASA, contractor teams, and participating scientists for successful performance of Oao 3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory launched Aug. 21, 1972. To date, performance indicated “we have given the world a wonderful new window on the universe and a magnificent new tool of science worthy of the illustrious name it now bears [Copernicus].” Copernicus, father of modern astronomy, had changed world’s thinking about nature of solar system and earth’s place in it. “I believe we are going to see advances of comparable magnitude in our understanding of the universe, thanks to the new technology brought into being in our oao program.” (NASA Activities, 9/15/72, 180-1)
U.S.S.R. celebrated Cosmonauts Day with annual memorial meeting on 11th anniversary of Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh summarized Soviet space achievements and described Soviet space programs. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/18/72, LI)
Representatives of 12 nations at European Space Conference ministerial meeting in Brussels agreed in principle to participate in space shuttle phase of U.S. post-Apollo space program, support French plan to build L-35 launcher, and fuse European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) and European Space Research Organization (esro) into one agency by Jan. 1, 1974. Space programs of individual European countries would he blended into common European program with each country maintaining independent choice of what projects to join. Conference President Theo Lefevre, Belgian Minister of Space, commented at close of meeting, “For the first time I can say I am satisfied with the results of the space conference.” United Kingdom and West Germany, who had agreed to abandon plans for European launcher [see Dec. 8], did not rule out participation (esro Release, 1/19/73; NYT, 12/21/72)
Interview with Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Director of Equal Employment Opportunity, was published by Washington Sunday Star. Mrs. Harris had adopted as her philosophy phrase, “We are all fellow astronauts on Spaceship Earth.” She had said, “My position is to make sure the space program is for everybody. We have to get the alienated minorities into every NASA level, especially space exploration.” (Trescott, W Star, 1/9/72, Cl) January 10:	European participation in space shuttle development was discussed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers during press briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. European space officials had released to European industry “fairly extensive study . . . leading to the definition of the tug that the Europeans might build for the shuttle to carry.” Tug was 3rd stage of shuttle transportation system. Myers said NASA had examined three possible areas for European participation: “One would he in elements, physical pieces of the shuttle that would be managed ... as the prime contractor manages a subcontractor. We will expect the prime contractors to Work directly with the European industries in that case.” Europeans would supply money for parts developed by Europe. Second area Was tug. “If the tug were developed, we would expect it to be paid for by the Europeans.” Third area was sortie can, “experimentcarrying device to be carried in the payload compartment,” which would give them “an opportunity to enter into the use of the shuttle very extensively.” European space officials would meet with NASA within two months to respond on interest in participating. Timetable called for selection of industrial contractors in summer 1972, with subsonic and suborbital test flights beginning in 1975, manned orbital tests in 1978, and first fully operational mission by 1980. Site evaluation board would make its next report to NASA within few weeks, and site for shuttle launch and recovery would be selected by spring. One site would be selected initially, with another or others selected later according to program needs. “We don’t see the shuttle as a highly limited operation. And, I think that eventually there will be more than one site.” Location depended on mission. “Today . . . there is a preponderance of due-east missions out of ksc [Kennedy Space Center!, and . . . different azimuths out of the West Coast. We can’t go due east out of the West Coast very well . . . because of the populated areas east . . . and we can’t get as efficient in polar orbits out of Kennedy ... so there is a tendency to ... go to the two coasts. Now whether that really ends up being that way in the shuttle system, we don’t know yet.” (Transcript)
North American Rockwell Corp., winner of $2.6-billion NASA space shuttle prime contract, might retain up to 70% of contract money for itself and four principal subcontractors, New York Times reported. Subcontractors were Honeywell, Inc., International Business Machines Corp., General Electric Co., and American Airlines. Acceptance by NASA of 70% figure could be “major blow” to Grumman Aerospace Corp., Times said. Only hope for Grumman, loser in shuttle contract competition, and other aerospace companies to obtain substantial subcontracting on shuttle project would be to enter competition with NR subcontractors for whom NR might already have preference. (Andelman, NYT, 9/5/72, 3)
Cosmos 520 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 39 319-km (24 431.7-mi) apogee, 652-km (405.1-mi) perigee, 710-min period, and 62.8° inclination. Western observers of Soviet space program noted that spacecraft reached orbit similar to that for communications satellites, although perigee was slightly higher and inclination slightly different from orbits of past Molniya satellites. U.S.S.R. later announced launch under name Cosmos 520. [See also Sept. 28.] (Spacewarn, 10/3/72; gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SBD, 9/26/72, 106)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23): “erts gives every sign of being an achievement of enormous potential. It is a demonstration of the value of the U.S. space program in applying technology both to extending the frontiers of knowledge, and in contributing to the improvement of life on earth.” {LA Times, 7/25/72) July 26:	NASA selected North American Rockwell Corp. (NR) Space Div. for negotiation of six-year, $2.6-billion cost-plus-fixed-and-award-fee contract as prime contractor to begin developing space shuttle orbiter. Increment covering first two years was $540 million. NR—selected from four firms submitting proposals—would be responsible for design, development, and production of orbiter vehicle and for integration of all shuttle elements. Shuttle main engine was being developed by NR Rocketdyne Div. under earlier contract. External tank and solid-fueled rocket boosters would be procured by NASA after system engineering for orbiter had progressed sufficiently. Shuttle, first reusable space vehicle, would have delta-winged, airplane-like orbiter able to land on conventional runways. It would have cargo compartment 18 m (60 ft) long and 4.5 m (15 ft) in diameter and would be able to place 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) into 185-km (115mi) due-east orbit. Reusable solid-propellant booster rockets and orbiter high-pressure, liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen main engines would boost orbiter into space and booster rockets would detach at 40-km (25-mi) altitude and splash down in ocean for recovery and reuse. Orbiter, under own power, would continue into low earth orbit. Shuttle would be able to place satellites in orbit, return satellites from orbit, permit in-orbit repair and servicing of satellites, deliver propulsive stages and satellites to low earth orbit, and make short-duration science and applications missions with self-contained experiments in low earth orbit. Shuttle development schedule called for horizontal test flights beginning in 1976 and manned orbital test flights beginning in 1978, with complete system operational by 1980. Employment generated by orbiter development and shuttle integration was expected to reach 15 000 by 1975-1976 and then would gradually decrease, (nasa Release 72153)
Former NASA Administrator James E. Webb was appointed by Speaker of House to succeed Joseph M. Barr on Commission on Government Procurement. Barr had resigned. (CR, 3/6/72, H1752)
U. Alexis Johnson, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on space agreements with U.S.S.R. signed in May, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ special hearing. Johnson said agreement signed May 24 endorsed at highest level understandings reached over past 18 mos between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences for cooperation in space science and applications such as meteorology, study of earth’s environment, further exploration of moon and planets, and space biology and medicine. It permitted development of compatible rendezvous and docking systems which “should enhance safety and value of space flight” and opened possibility of further areas of cooperation. It demonstrated “in full view of the world that the two great space powers have both the will and the capability to work together on important and difficult tasks. We have high hopes . . . that this agreement will be a milestone in our relationship with the Soviet Union. ... It serves our broad national purposes, as well as our specific foreign policy objectives.” Dr. Low outlined earlier agreements and gave details of joint rendezvous and docking mission agreed on for 1975. During April visit to Moscow, agreement had been reached that astronauts must understand Russian to extent normally used in both regular and contingency operations. Soviet cosmonauts also would need to understand other language and be able to respond. Dictionary would be.developed of commonly used phrases. Some astronauts, all interested in flying this mission, had begun studying Russian on their own. Astronauts selected would take formal language training. Others in NASA would also learn Russian. (Transcript)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told press in Washington, D.C., he believed U.S. and U.S.S.R. would sign agreement during 1972 for joint mission in which Apollo spacecraft would dock with Soviet Salyut orbiting laboratory in 1975. At dinner party for seven newsmen Dr. Fletcher said: “We certainly don’t believe that the first mission of American and Soviet astronauts together will be the last.” Mission would “take a lot of planning and some hardware changes. ... I also think the crews will need time to train together for the first flight.” Crews would be bilingual and familiar with each other’s spacecraft. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Donald K. Slayton were already studying Russian. First joint docking mission would cost U.S. as much as $300 million, most of it to keep manned flight facilities intact after conclusion of 1973 Skylab mission. Dr. Fletcher foresaw series of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. missions, each longer and more ambitious. U.S.S.R. was emphasizing space station while U.S. emphasized shuttle. “I think it only logical that the two hook up together, especially since the shuttle will have rescue capability.” U.S.S.R. was expected to continue Lunokhod lunar rover and lunar sample return programs and “probably marry the two some time in the next two years. I also think they will attempt a manned lunar landing, but not until late in the ’70s, perhaps 1977.” (O’Toole, W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., received Distinguished Service Medal from Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, and Command Pilot Astronaut Badge from Gen. John D. Ryan, Air Force Chief of Staff, in Washington, D.C., ceremony, dsm was for “exceptionally meritorious achievement in a duty of great responsibility.” Badge identified Duke, Apollo 16 lunar module pilot, as one of 37 Americans who had piloted powered vehicles more than 80 km (50 mi) above earth’s surface. Duke gave Dr. Seamans and Gen. Ryan lunar sample and silver medallion in recognition of Air Force role in space program and as NASA salute to Air Force’s Silver Anniversary. (President Truman signed Armed Forces Unification Act creating Dept, of Air Force July 26, 1947.) (dod Release 509-72)
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s resignation from NASA May 26 was “reminder of how many others who forged the American space effort in the last 15 years have left the scene,” New York Times commented. Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was “Ohio businessman with political ambitions”; Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was Eastern Airlines Vice President; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was Univ. of Cincinnatti professor; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb, “who built the Apollo team,” was lawyer-consultant in Washington, D.C.; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, “administrator in charge at the time of the moon landing,” was General Electric Co. Vice President. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, “who gathered the manned space flight team while Dr. von Braun was building the rockets,” had “recently stepped down as director of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.” Others of “space’s first generation have scattered to industry or are close to retirement.” Of original 118 German-born engineers who came to U.S. with Dr. von Braun, only 35 remained at Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, “another of the Peenemuende V-2 rocket Germans,” was msfc director. Six of original team—including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, director of Kennedy Space Center—were still with NASA at other Centers. Of others of team, 22 were in industry, 12 were deceased, 16 had returned to Europe, and 26 had retired. (Wilford, NYT, 5/27/72)
U.S. Comptroller General Elmer B. Staats said in letter to NASA Administrator, Dr. James C. Fletcher, that General Accounting Office had determined July 13, 1971, NASA award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. had been fair. “We believe the procurement was conducted in a manner which was consistent with applicable law and regulations and was fair to all proposers.” Award had been challenged by competing firm, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. (Text)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Chairman of Atomic Energy Commission, to be U.S. representative at 16th session of General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency. Among alternates nominated was Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator. (PD, 8/14/72, 1225) August 8-9:	Skylab program managers reviewed design of mission’s experimental hardware with 11 high school student winners of NASA and National Science Teachers Assn, competition to propose experiments for 1973 Skylab mission [see July 20]. Students attending critical design reviews at Marshall Space Flight Center were those whose experiments required new scientific equipment, (nasa Release 72-161) August 9:	Army announced cancellation of controversial Lockheed AH-56A Cheyenne helicopter program and plans, subject to congressional approval, to develop new attack helicopter. Production contract for Cheyenne had been canceled in May 1969, after Lockheed failed to solve rotor problem. Since then firm had claimed progress in combating problem, Wall Street Journal later reported. (WSJ, 8/10/72, 3; Army pio)
Term “post-Apollo” had “outlived its usefulness,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in message to staff. “When plans for this decade were still uncertain it made sense to refer to them as post-Apollo plans. But today we are advanced with new programs which stand on their own merits.” Skylab, space shuttle, Viking, High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao), and Pioneer and Mariner missions to planets drew heavily on technology of 1960s, “but they take this technology giant steps into the future.” Dr. Fletcher suggested names for future years: 1973 would be “Year of Skylab” and of Pioneer 10, 1975 would be year of Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, in 1976 Viking would land on Mars, and in 1978 first space shuttle orbital flight was scheduled. “Each of these events will make a memorable page in the story of human progress. Each of them will contribute importantly to mankind’s knowledge of our planetary environment.” (NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 244-5)
Second press briefing on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement was held at NASA Hq., following White House briefing. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said: “This is not the culmination but a very major milestone in the long period of negotiations with the Soviet Union on space cooperation. And in my judgment this is at least one of the most important missions that NASA has and that is to promote international cooperation.” Mission was, as well, “an important part of the new program of NASA for the 70’s.” Rendezvous and docking mission could be accomplished in context of constant NASA budget. “This constant budget . . . and the programs . . . now planned, the Skylab, the shuttle and now the international rendezvous and docking mission show I think the kind of program that we envision for the rest of this decade.” Program had congressional support “at least partially because of the strong international flavor that NASA has in manned space.” Dr. Fletcher said crew for joint mission had not yet been selected. Assistant Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale Myers and Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager, explained details of plans in response to press questions. (Transcript)
l/g August Schomburg (usa, Ret.), former Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces and former Commander of Ordnance Missile Command at Redstone Arsenal, died at age 63. He had served as consultant to NASA Administrator 1967-1970. (W Post, 1/16/72, Dll) January 15:	Pioneer-F spacecraft to probe Jupiter’s environmental and atmospheric characteristics arrived at Kennedy Space Center to begin final checkout before Feb. 27 launch. Pioneer-F 3rd stage had been erected Jan. 7 and overall vehicle interface test had been conducted Jan. 10. Pioneer-F would mark first use of Atlas-Centaur booster in Pioneer program and first use of Atlas-Centaur with 3rd stage— TE-M-364r^l solid-propellant engine with 66 750-newton (15 000-lb) thrust, (ksc Release 7-72; NASA Release 72-25)
Associated Press reported Apollo 15 crew had been favored to receive Air Force Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy but that trophy would be withheld because of unauthorized postal cover incident [see July 11]. Trophy was awarded annually for most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress. AP said Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin also had been invited to annual meeting of Federation Aeronautique Internationale in Parts in October to receive other awards with Soviet cosmonauts and that Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, had advised Fai that efforts would be made to have astronauts accept invitation. (AP, W Star & News, 7/23/72, A23) * Federal Aviation Administration announced award of $119 249 contract to Parsons, Brinckeroff, Quade and Douglas, Inc., for architectural and engineering plans for 600-by-90-m {2000-by-30Q-ft) elevated STOLport for short takeoff and landing aircraft. Exterior design of structure supporting STOLport would be planned to provide approaching pilot with realistic cues resembling those included in actual landing facility on top of a multilevel structure, (faa Release 72-142)
New York Times editorial criticized Apollo 17 TV coverage: “One might have thought that the Apollo 17 moonwalks would be thoroughly covered by television as they took place. But the published television schedules indicate that the networks have chosen to dish out their usual commercial fare while giving only minimal live coverage to moonwalks that will make history. It is a poor choice from the point of view of public service.” (NYT, 12/12/72, 46) December 12—13:	Review of plans for space shuttle external tank and solid-fueled rocket booster was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for 350 industry and Government representatives. Attendees heard presentations by NASA and North American Rockwell Dec. 12. NASA officials conducted separate briefings Dec. 13.	(Marshall Star, 12/12/72, 1)
Progress in NASA development of technology to alleviate aircraft noise pollution and ensure quieter aircraft operation was described by Walter A. Pennino, Public Affairs Officer in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), at NASA Hq. press briefing. Research had shown aircraft noise could be reduced if pilot flew aircraft “so that it climbs quickly” to be “as far from a ground observer as possible.” When wing flaps were retracted as aircraft accelerated, aircraft required “less thrust to climb. When a safe altitude is reached, the pilot can reduce the engine thrust from that required for takeoff to the lower thrust required for climb.” NASA and Federal Aviation Administration were encouraging airlines to adopt two-segment approach to reduce landing noise. Pilot would adjust controls to descent first at 6° glide slope. About one mile from the runway he would change path to slope. In final stages there would be no difference in the landing procedure. Aircraft would approach with engine power somewhat reduced and would be at higher altitude. Noise reduction would be three to five effective perceived noise in decibels (epndb) one nautical mile from the end of the runway and even greater reduction farther out from the runway. Ames and Langley Research Centers were studying requirements to make two-segment approach safe standard procedure. In Lewis Research Center Quiet Engine Program, experimental engines suitable for conventional takeoff and landing aircraft were being built. Test had shown reduction of noise by using quiet engine with and without acoustically treated nacelle. Goal chosen for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft was 95 epndb at 152 m (500 ft). “We don’t have an engine that can do that job right now, but NASA is working on it.” Follow-on programs for new family of aircraft were described by James 0. Kramer, Chief of Noise and Pollution Reduction Branch in oast Aeronautical Propulsion Div. “Preliminary design study contracts will be let in the next month or two to study a low-noise, low-pollution engine . . . suitable for stol. In addition, we havie been carrying on design study for an advanced technology transport . . . appropriate for the 1980-timeframe as a replacement for 707 or for the DC-8. We are . . . planning to initiate in FY 73 preliminary design studies of a Quiet Engine . . . appropriate for such an advanced technology airplane.” (Transcript)
Federal Aviation Administrator John H. Shaffer received 1972 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at annual Wright Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. Citation was for “outstanding leadership of the worldwide operations of the Federal Aviation Administration which has greatly enhanced all aspects of U.S. aviation to the benefit and safety of the general public and all who fly.” (naa Release, 9/22/72; FAA PIO)
Wall Street Journal article criticized “strange aspects to NASA’s push for the shuttle.” Economic estimates of cost were “troublesome.” Some critics had charged that development costs might be “two to four times the $6 billion estimate of NASA. And the operating cost may not be as cheap as NASA says.” “Strangest” aspect of NASA argument was “agency’s almost total silence on the one space project for which the shuttle makes real sense—the permanent orbiting space station.” It had been assumed space station would be “keystone of any long-range space effort involving men” from beginning of space program. Project had been “shoved aside” in favor of manned lunar landing but “the moment that race was won . . . NASA pulled the space station plans back out.” It was easier to sell public $6-billion research and development program for “useful” space shuttle than $40-billion program for space station. But NASA’s “selling spiel” was “somewhat misleading.” Once $6-billion development program was finished shuttle would go into routine operation. “Plans call for 30 to 40 flights a year for 10 years. At $10.5 million a flight this comes to $30 billion to $40 billion— about the same in time and money as proposed for the space station.” Paper later acknowledged its arithmetical miscalculation and corrected total to “$3 billion to $4 billion,” but said corrected figure also was “misleading.” NASA estimate had projected $35 billion for shuttle program through 1990, including $12 billion for shuttle and $23 billion for payloads. (WSJ, 6/16/72, 10; 6/20/72)
Soviet Space Programs, 1966-70 (Senate Document 92-51) was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The 670-page report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.— noted that Soviet space program remained “a strong and growing enterprise” unhindered by budgetary strain and undimmed by deaths of three Soyuz cosmonauts in 1971. Current level of Soviet space activity exceeded that of U.S. at its peak in 1966, with perhaps 2% of Soviet gross national product devoted to space (U.S. spent about 1% of its gnp at peak). Although U.S. launch record had been declining steadily since 1966, Soviet launches had continued to climb, at least until 1970. Contrary to assertion that it was concentrating its efforts on unmanned program rather than manned program, U.S.S.R. apparently was still planning manned lunar landing and might spend $49 million on both advanced unmanned and manned lunar programs. U.S. would have committed $35 billion to total Apollo program when complete. In unmanned research satellite program “the level of activity currently runs ahead of the corresponding level of work at NASA.” Compendium of every known Soviet launch that had achieved orbit showed that, along with scientific satellites, Cosmos program consisted of unmanned tests of spacecraft designed to carry cosmonauts, lunar and planetary probes that failed to leave earth orbit, unsuccessful Mars probes, and military research and development and observation satellites that accounted for 80% of Cosmos payloads. According to study, Cosmos series through April 1971 had included at least 16 tests of fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) and 22 tests of experimental spacecraft designed to inspect and destroy other nations’ observation and navigation satellites. Soviet achievements in near future were dependent on success or failure of G booster (in Saturn V class) or similar booster. Studies of moon with Luna series spacecraft would continue, perhaps with spacecraft launched by advanced booster carrying both rovers and sample returners. Planetary program would continue, probably with flyby mission to Jupiter and landing mission to Mars. Dr. Sheldon stressed that “the Soviet program is not a sham. It may be exploited for political purposes, but it is real and it is pursued in earnest.” (Text)
President Nixon accepted resignation, effective July 15, of Kenneth M. Smith as Deputy Administrator of Federal Aviation Administration. (PD, 5/12/72, 1008)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in Dept, of Defense, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on dod coordination with NASA on space shuttle development during hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization: “I firmly believe that the U.S. must retain a strong national commitment to scientific and technological progress. The NASA space program is a vital element of this overall effort.” In space area, DOD was “becoming increasingly dependent on space systems, particularly in . . . communications. Other agencies and the public are becoming increasingly dependent on the use of space for communications, weather forecasting, and natural resource exploration. The Department of Defense supports the NASA space shuttle as an important part of the President’s program, which will lead to a greater and more effective use of the space environment in the future.” Dr. Foster discussed Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) for military needs not satisfied economically and reliably by more traditional communications systems. First dscs, currently operational, employed “simple, low-power satellites and ground terminals originally designed for experimental and test programs. To replace the existing satellites ... we are deploying new DSCS satellites that have roughly 10 times the communications capability. . . . We are also developing improved terminals which will supplement the existing dscs terminal complex.” (Transcript)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $1 323 565 contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to provide liquid hydrogen to East Coast space program users from June 1, 1972, through March 31, 1973. Liquid hydrogen would be distributed to Government agencies and contractors in Saturn V booster and space shuttle activities. Under interagency agreement, NASA contracted for all liquid hydrogen used by NASA and Dept, of Defense in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 72-69)
NASA and Dept, of Interior dedicated Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge at Cape Kennedy. Under agreement signed by NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley and Assistant Secretary of the Interior Nathaniel P. Reed, all land not used for rocket launch and launch support at Cape Kennedy would be used for wildlife management. Citrus grove and fish camp leases formerly managed by NASA for Army Corps of Engineers would be administered by Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife. Agreement added to existing refuge 16 200-hectare (40 000-acre) property at northern tip of Kennedy Space Center that included Indian burial ground, 1830 Army fort, and Civil War sugar mill. {Today, 6/3/72; M Her, 6/4/72)
Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne had record 608 000 visitors— increase of about one third over 1971. Museum was considered most active museum in Switzerland and Europe’s most popular transport museum. Planetarium rated second to New York’s American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in number of annual visitors. Swiss Transport Museum’s Air and Space Wing was dedicated July 1. Dedication ceremonies were attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. During year, James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator, officially presented model of Goddard Space Flight Center’s computer facility to Museum. (Dir Swiss Trans Museum letter to nasa Hist Off, 2/19/72; A&A 1972)
GTE International, Inc., subsidiary of General Electronics Corp., announced it had received contract valued at about $4 million from Western Union International, Inc., for construction of satellite communications earth station in People’s Republic of China. Station would be ground link for first direct communications satellite between China and Europe, (gte Release) Primary objective of Explorer 48 was to measure spatial and energy distribution of primary galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation— within sas program to make investigations of celestial sphere from above earth’s atmosphere and search for sources inside and outside our galaxy, radiating in x-ray, gamma ray, ultraviolet, infrared, and other regions of electromagnetic spectrum. Gamma ray telescope was first satellite version of evolution of digitized spark-chamber telescopes that had begun with balloon-borne instruments. Advanced detector could establish gamma ray event and reject events that simpler instruments might identify erroneously. It could study gamma rays exceeding 20 mev in energy, in region of electromagnetic spectrum able to penetrate galactic and extragalactic matter. On Nov. 19 half of experiment’s high-voltage supplies were turned on and experiment was pointed toward earth. Real-time data acquisition indicated proper functioning of experiment, with detection of earth albedo gamma rays. Remaining high-voltage power was turned on Nov. 27. Experiment and spacecraft control section were functioning normally. Spacecraft was cylinder 59 cm in diameter and 51 cm high (23-in dia by 20). When deployed, four solar paddles—27 cm wide and 135 cm long (10.5 by 53 in)—provided raw power. Unique was separate development of spacecraft control section and experiment package, which had permitted flexible concurrent development of experiments and minimized costs by fabrication of standardized control section. NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team was responsible for cost-reimbursable launch preparation. Goddard Space Flight Center and Applied Physics Laboratory crew performed ground test and checkout. Satellite was designed and built at gsfc, which managed project. Langley Research Center managed Scout. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72—204; gsfc proj off) November 16:	Briefing on results of low-cost-design concept completed by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. under NASA contract was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. Study had been conducted under NASA Low Cost Evaluation Project begun in May by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. Information from panels was to be correlated and incorporated into program planning and execution. (msfc Release 72-147)
NASA and Federal Aviation Administration announced they would jointly sponsor major aeronautics exhibit at world’s first international transportation exhibition, transpo ’72, to be held at Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va., May 27 to June 4. Exhibit would illustrate how two agencies were working with aviation community to overcome problems of congestion, noise, pollution, and inadequate airport facilities, (faa Release 72-57)
Atomic scientist Dr. Edward Teller urged legislation to make public Government’s scientific findings within year after they were classified. In speech before Florida Presbyterian College in St. Petersburg he said, “I am convinced we must do something about secrecy if democracy can function.” (AP, W Post, 1/15/72, All) January 14:	NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast). Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said NASA was steadily increasing its aeronautical activity and said name change “highlights the importance we attach to aeronautics.” (NASA Release 72-10)
NASA policy on autographs was outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in memo to officials of Hq. program and staff offices and field installations: “1. No autograph should be treated as a commercial commodity; nothing of value should be requested or accepted in exchange for an autograph. 2. Multiple autographs for the same individual or concern are discouraged; multiple autographs should not be provided when it is apparent that they will be. used commercially by the requesting individual or concern.” Policy applied to all NASA employees on and off duty but did not affect official signatures for official purposes or signing of autographs for noncommercial purposes. (Text)
Proposed general reorganization of Flight Research Center was approved by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Under new organization frc would be divided into four directorates and subdivided into divisions and branches, (frc X-Press, 5/12/72, 2)
Award of cost-sharing contracts totaling nearly $9 million to Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Co. to determine feasibility of retrofitting jet aircraft with noise-reduction devices was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. Cost of Boeing contract was $3 365 000, of which Government would provide $2 771 549. Cost of McDonnell Douglas contract was $5 600 000, with Government share $2 771 549. (faa Release 72-141)
Prediction that deep-space probes would be launched by combination rockets propelled by chemical, nuclear, and electric engines by 1980 had been made by Soviet aerospace designer Valentin P. Glushko in interview by Moskovsky Komsomolets, New York Times reported. Rockets would be launched with liquid or solid chemical fuel. Nuclear engine would take over when spacecraft penetrated earth’s atmosphere. Times also reported that color film “The Taming of the Fire” had been released in Moscow. Film, based on life of Sergey P. Korolev, head of Soviet space program until his death in 1966, raised philosophical questions of use of scientific advances for military purposes. Film showed Soviet dictator Josef Stalin at end of World War II calling for Soviet development of military rockets to counter weapons he expected Dr. Wernher von Braun to develop in U.S. Dr. von Braun, while not actually portrayed in film, was “frequently mentioned by name.” (Shabad, NYT, 10/16/72, C17)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, described functions of Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) in speech before First International Conference on Computer Satellites in Agriculture at Ohio State Univ. Satellite “now circles the earth 14 times a day in near-polar orbit. Each pass covers a region 185 km (115 miles) wide. After 18 days, the satellite returns to the same position. The erts Multispectral Scanner scans the earth in four wavelength bands.” Green band enhanced features within water, since they were transparent in band. Red band showed contrast between vegetation and man-made structures and was good for land use mapping. Infrared band was invisible to human eye but “vegetation strongly reflects this energy, and thus appears bright on film. Water absorbs it, and appears dark. This band is often used to identify plants or crops, since the brightness of the image depends greatly on the type of vegetation. It is also used to determine the health of plants, because healthy crops will appear to be much brighter than those which are diseased.” Data to date had shown earth resources satellites like Erts 1 would be able to take large-scale inventories of crop type and crop health, erts data “lend themselves to rapid automated area calculation procedures for all kinds of agricultural production parameters.” (Text)
House passed H.R. 10243 to establish Office of Technology Assessment for Congress by vote of 256 to 118. Office would identify and consider impacts of technological application. (CR, 2/8/72, H865—7) February 8—11:	NASA and European Space Conference (esc) Joint Experts Group met in Neuilly, France, to identify potential areas for European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space program. In statement issued Feb. 11 Group said NASA, “noting President Nixon’s approval on Jan. 5, 1972, to proceed with development of the space shuttle,” had encouraged European participation in shuttle development. NASA expected that European participation would be “within the context of a broader program which included multilateral European responsibility for development of a major element such as reusable space tugs to provide access to geosynchronous and other orbits” beyond shuttle’s capability or “shuttle-borne orbital laboratories” for research by U.S. and European scientists. Group recommended calendar for actions to permit governmental decisions consistent with July 1 NASA commencement of shuttle development. (NASA Note to Editors, 2/11/72)
President Nixon sent $246.3-billion FY 1973 budget request to Congress— increase of $9.6 billion over FY 1972. National total included research and development budget of $17.8 billion (increase of $1.4 billion), with $3,740 billion requested for civilian and military space R&D. Total request for NASA new obligational authority (noa) of $3,379 billion (1.3% of total U.S. budget) was $83 million more than FY 1972 NOA of $3,296 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase by $11 million, against decline of $200.9 million in FY 1972. Increase to $3,192 billion reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle engine and airframe. Of budget request, $2.6 billion would go for R&D, $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $701 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $472.5 million, to $128.7 million, reflected completion of Apollo program with Apollo 16 and 17 scheduled for launch during calendar year. Manned space flight operations—including $540.5 million for Skylab, $200 million for space shuttle, and $23 million for orbital systems and experiments—would increase from $682.8 million in FY 1972 to $1,094 billion in FY 1973. Space life sciences would receive $25.5 million and development, test, and mission operations would receive $305.2 million, including funds for detailed design and development of shuttle airframe and engine. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,224 billion, down $61 million from FY 1972. Funding for NASA space science and applications programs would increase $123.7 million, from $740.4 million in FY 1972 to $864.1 million in FY 1973. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for High Energy Astronomy Observatory ($59.6 million in FY 1973) and orbiting explorers ($32 million) ; to lunar and planetary exploration (up $29.7 million, to $321.2 million, with $229.5 million for Viking project, $31.6 million for Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, and $18.7 million for supporting research and technology advanced studies) ; and to launch vehicle procurement. Funding for Pioneer planetary exploration program would decrease from $12.8 million in FY 1972 to $10.2 million. Increase of $7.2 million in applications programs, to $194.7 million in FY 1973, included $48.4 million for earth resources survey, $61.2 million for ATS, and $28.3 million for Nimbus. Total requested for NASA aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $212.8 million in FY 1972 to $249.3 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $110 million in FY 1972 to $163.4 million, including $27.5 million for quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft and $3 million for vertical takeoff and landing (vtol) research/ experimental vehicle programs. Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) development was terminated in favor of reoriented program to define smaller nuclear rocket system. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $4.9 million, to $259.1 million. Dept, of Defense FY 1973 budget of $83.5 billion was all-time high, $6.3 billion above FY 1972 budget authority, 30% of total Federal outlays for FY 1972, and 6.4% of Gross National Product—-but percentage of gnp had dropped from FY 1972’s 7%. dod total included $8.6 billion for research, development, technology, and engineering, $1.1 billion increase over FY 1972. Of requested Rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, continued flight experiment programs, and applied research and technology programs— would receive $454 million (up $49.4 million). Military sciences would receive $572.7 million (up $34.9 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,948 billion (down $36.8 million) and missiles rdt&e $2,383 billion (up $437.8 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for undersea long-range missile system (ulms) to supplement and eventually replace Poseidon-Polaris fleet ($942.2 million, up $802 million), B-l advanced strategic bomber ($444 million, up $74 million), F-15 air superiority fighter ($910 million, up $490 million), airborne defense warning and control system (awAcs) ($470 million, up $331 million), and Safeguard antiballistic missile program ($1,483 billion, up $366 million). Some $299 million was requested for advance procurement of components for new nuclear-powered CVAN-70 aircraft carrier. Increases were also programmed for prototype development of vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft for Navy, stol transports for possible C-130 replacement, Air Force SCAD strategic bomber penetration decoy, and engines for future transport and fighter aircraft. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration FY 1973 budget included $39.9 million for meteorological satellite operations, $6.8 million more than FY 1971 allocation of $33.1 million. Funding would complete financing of fourth satellite in ITOS series, continue financing of fifth and sixth ITOS satellites and one Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes), and initiate procurement of seventh itos. Dept, of Transportation budget request of $8.56 billion was decrease of $91.5 million over FY 1972. dot funding would start 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect atmosphere, and design safer and more productive airport system. Atomic Energy Commission FY 1973 budget request of $2.56 billion, up $247 million over FY 1972, would be used for development of liquid-metal fast-breeder power reactor and for controlled thermonuclear fusion research. National Science Foundation FY 1973 budget request of $653 million would cover basic scientific research, experimental program to test incentives to stimulate non-Federal R&d investment, program to analyze effect of R&D on national economy, continuation of research applied to national needs in advanced technology and environmental problems, program to improve research management at institutions of higher learning, and funding for astronomy to permit development of very large array of antennas for radio astronomy, (omb, Budget of US Govt, FY 1973; omb, US Budget in Brief; omb, Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; dot budget briefing transcript; aiaa Release 72-3; nsf Release 72-106; Kelly, W Star, 1/24/72, A14; Av Wk, 2/14/72, 14)
Willis H. Shapley, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator, described functions of NASA advisory committees in testimony before House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Foreign Operations and Government. Subcommittee was conducting hearings on public access to information under Freedom of Information Act, which required public accessibility to advisory committees [see June 5]. NASA Historical Advisory Committee, established in 1964, advised and assisted NASA management in implementing NASA historical program. Committee met annually to review program and its relation to academic and public activities. Research and Technology Advisory Council and Related Committees (rtac), established in 1967, provided consultation and advice on advanced research and technology goals in aeronautics and space and reviewed work in progress. NASA Space Program Advisory Council and Related Committees (spac), established in 1971, provided comprehensive space program advisory structure for NASA management on goals and objectives. NASA Tracking and Data Acquisition Panel, established in 1972, reviewed and advised on potential application of new technologies in carrying out tracking and data acquisition functions. Panel would be disbanded following its final report in near future. Aerospace Advisory Panel, established by NASA Authorization Act of 1968, reviewed safety studies and operation plans and reported on them to NASA Administrator. Membership of NASA advisory committees was drawn largely from universities, nonprofit organizations, industry, and other Government agencies. Scientific and technical subjects addressed by committees were open to public access through meetings and public had direct access to NASA officials and committee members. (Testimony)
NASA announced it would reprimand Apollo 15 crew for carrying 400 unauthorized postal covers on July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Astronauts’ actions would be considered in future assignments. Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin had acknowledged giving 100 covers to acquaintance, currently in Germany. Covers later were sold to stamp collectors for $1500 each. NASA inquiry had shown astronauts had at one time agreed to accept “trust fund” for their children in return for the 100 covers but had later realized impropriety of transaction and had voluntarily declined to accept fund or alternative offer of stamps. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in release to press: “Astronauts are under extreme stress in the months preceding a flight to the Moon and their poor judgment in carrying the unauthorized covers must be considered in this light. Nonetheless, NASA cannot condone these actions.” (nasa Release 72-140)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director, reviewed program in Los Angeles Times article: “As one looks back over the 12 years of Apollo, the biggest effort . . . was the engineering effort—the understanding of the demands that would be placed on the flight hardware, the understanding of the laws of nature that we would have to work with in order to fly to the moon, the conversion of dreams into hardware, the manufacture and testing of this hardware, so that we could feel confident to fly our men to the moon and return. “But within that overall engineering program, we knew we would be exploring, we knew we would open up new vistas and for that reason we developed the experiments to be taken along on later flights.” There had been “only one reason for flying Apollo after the first landing and that was to gather information for science, to continue the exploration of the Moon.” Underlying drive of Apollo “—to reach into space, to seize these new challenges, to learn more about the moon and also about earth, to explore for new opportunities for man to use in his future development—is not well understood by the public.” Apollo had “lifted mankind from his cradle and started him on the pathway to the stars.” {LA Times, 12/24/72)
Use of remote TV to monitor weather conditions in mountain pass used by general-aviation pilots operating under visual flight rules (vfr) would be evaluated by Federal Aviation Administration, faa Director John H. Shaffer announced. Program would be conducted for faa by National Weather Service of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration under $108 000 interagency agreement, (faa Release 72-38)
New satellite Hot Line between White House and Kremlin was targeted to begin operation in 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. President Nixon’s approval had been announced Sept. 24, 1971, of U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on direct communication link using two satellite circuits, one established by each country. Agreement had been signed Sept. 30, 1971. (Av Wk, 1/17/72, 9; A&A 1971) January 17-19:	American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) held 10th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in San Diego, Calif. Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey reviewed space activities for local high school students. Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates, delivered Dryden Research Lecture “Atmospheric Turbulence.” Lecture had been named in honor of late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first NASA Deputy Administrator, in 1967. It succeeded Research Award established by aiaa in 1960. Dryden Lecture award, sponsored by General Electric Co., carried $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for repetition of lecture before selected aiaa sections. Dr. Houbolt reviewed latest data on atmospheric turbulence and its influence on aircraft design and flight. Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was installed as 1972 aiaa President at Jan. 19 Honors Banquet. aiaa presented Goddard Award to Gary A. Plourde, project engineer at United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and Squadron Leader Brian Brimelow (raf) and Howard E. Schumacher, both of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Trio was honored as team for original research leading to first understanding of gas-turbine compressor stalls induced by turbulent inlet flow conditions. Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Dr. Max M. Munk, retired engineer, for “enduring contributions to the science of aerodynamics.” Robert M. Losey Award was given to Dr. David Q. Wark, Senior Scientist with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “in recognition of outstanding contributions to the science of meteorology as applied to aeronautics.” Edward W. Price, Head of Naval Weapons Center Aerothermochem-istry Div., received G. Edward Pendray Award for “continued outstanding contributions to the literature of solid rocket internal ballistics and combustion, particularly for his contributions on combustion instability and ignition.” Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics, for “significant contributions to the description and understanding of the interplanetary medium and the interactions of this medium with the earth and other large bodies.” (aiaa Releases 1/10/72, 1/13/72; A1AA Bull, 1/72, 2/72, 67) January 17-21:	Fourth Annual Earth Resources Program Review was held by NASA at Manned Spacecraft Center. Scientists from foreign nations and organizations, Government, universities, and private institutions attended. Reports were presented on 1971 research and analysis of aircraft and spacecraft remote sensing data. In Jan. 18 press briefing NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said pollution monitoring was natural activity for global surveillance capability because atmospheric pollution was potentially global problem. Not well understood were manner in which pollutants were dispersed throughout globe or manner in which earth corrected itself. “There’s a lot of work to be done in this area.” In Jan. 21 briefing Dr. John M. DeNoyer, NASA Director of Earth Observations, said program was moving from exploratory to flight phase, from learning to applying techniques. Among applications was spring Arctic ice survey, in which some 80 scientists would be on ice measuring strain rates, meteorological conditions, and ice types, supported by Convair 990 aircraft from Ames Research Center. Also microwave techniques in remote sensing could identify ice-free lanes in Great Lakes region, making possible efficient shipping much earlier in spring than at present. Soo Canal into Lake Superior, which carried more tons of freight than any other canal in world, was now open only one half of year. Weather and cloud cover made aircraft surveillance inefficient; microwave techniques from satellite altitude was more practical in this instance. Another important program would be thermal mapping by remote sensing to permit better industrial planning from knowledge of how development would actually affect environment. Land-use planning also would be greatly aided by remote sensing data processed by computerized inventory system being developed at msc. (msc Release 72—11; MSC PAO; Transcript) January 18—20:	Opening hearings on aeronautical research and development, Chairman Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology announced Subcommittee name had been changed to Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Change followed receipt of Jan. 14 letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announcing change in NASA office name from OABT to OAST. On first day of hearings Dr. Fletcher testified on “steady increase” in NASA funding for aeronautics: Funding had grown from $42 million in FY 1966 to $110 million in FY 1972, “a doubling in terms of constant dollars. When you add the funding for salaries and other in-house costs related to supporting the aeronautics programs, the total . . . has grown from 1.6% of the total NASA budget in fiscal year 1966 to 7.1% in fiscal year 1972.” Number of NASA personnel members working in aeronautics research and technology had grown from 2600 in 1966 to 5300. Increase had occurred while NASA staff had been reduced from 34 000 to 27 500. Dr. Fletcher said joint Dept, of Transportation and NASA Study on Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) had “forced the establishment of new and more effective coordination mechanisms between NASA and DOT.” Mechanisms were being used “to develop a formal card Policy Implementation Plan to specify clear goals, responsibilities, planned achievement milestones, and projected resource requirements for dot and NASA jointly.” card policy study had caused “better focus on the priority problem areas of aircraft noise . . . and terminal congestion” and directed more specific attention to role R&D might play in developing better total operating system for low-density aviation market so that civil aviation might be used more economically as tool for regional development. Focus did not compromise “ability to continue a comprehensive research and technology program in all the aeronautical disciplines to provide a technology base for the future.” Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson of Ames Research Center outlined general recommendations of CARD study: scope of civil-aviation R&D programs should be expanded to emphasize nontechnological factors; economists and social scientists should be assigned to NASA and dot staffs, r&d staffs of Dept, of Defense, NASA, dot, and Civil Aeronautics Board should be interchanged to provide broad systems background for more effective Government action in civil aviation programs. cab should explore policy of allowing intermodal mergers of airlines for expanded use of air cargo to encourage innovative industry R&D in this area. Dept, of Commerce should refine and monitor measurable indicators of U.S. progress in civil aviation industry. National Aeronautics and Space Council should review and recommend national policies guiding civil aviation that embraced several agencies. George W. Cherry, Deputy Administrator for Programs in oast, reported “considerable ongoing activity abroad in designing, building and selling new, small economical aircraft for the world’s low-density short-haul market. This raises the questions: Where will replacement aircraft come from? Can the U.S. industry compete with the foreign manufacturers to fill the market?” Answers required “fundamental policy decisions by the United States with regard to the desirability of providing continuing or expanded public-need air service, and also . . . to whether Government support can or should be given to the manufacturer.” U.S. needed to know more about market and economics of operating in low-density area to write specifications for aircraft and operating system. “If industry designs fall short of meeting the economic specifications, there should be enough information available to determine if Government assistance . . . could result in the operator providing viable service. If subsidy is necessary, subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of manufacture, rather than the recurring costs of operation, might make good sense.” NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson described questol project plans for two quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (stol) transport research aircraft: “The experimental airplanes will function as a versatile facility for NASA flight research programs developed in cooperation with other Government agencies and interested industry groups, including the airlines. The information provided will reduce the technical risk associated with development, by industry, of both civil and military STOL transports” and “provide a comprehensive technical foundation on which Government regulatory agencies can establish realistic criteria for certification of commercial subsonic stol transport aircraft and for en route and terminal area operations.” (Transcript) January 19:	NASA announced selection of flight crews for Skylab missions. Prime crewmen for first, 28-day flight were Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot), and Paul J. Weitz (pilot). Backup crewmen were Russel L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Mus-grave, and Bruce McCandless II. Crewmen for second, 56-day mission were Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Third mission, for 56 days, would be flown by Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue. Backup crew for second and third missions was Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind, (nasa Release 72-12)
Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., presented 1972 Admiral Luis de Florez Flight Safety Award to Dr. John T. Dailey of Federal Aviation Administration on final day of three-day seminar. Recognition was for “outstanding individual contribution through his development of a behavioral profile designed to identify potential hijackers.” (Flight Safety Foundation; Av Wk, 10/23/72, 13)
European Space Conference delegation visited U.S. to complete resolutions for July 11 esc conference in Brussels, which would discuss government action on European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space program. Brussels conference later was postponed. During Washington, D.C., meeting NASA and Dept, of State officials told esc delegation that space tug was no longer being considered as item for European development. Possibilities for European participation had been reduced to four structural areas of space shuttle. U.S. urged esc to undertake development of shuttle sortie laboratory. (NASA OMSF; Av Wh, 7/17/72, 19)
New York Times science reporter John Nobel Wilford toured Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), near Moscow, as first Western correspondent to be invited to center of U.S.S.R. cosmonaut activities. Guide for visit arranged by Soviet Novosti News Agency was Soyuz Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training. Shatalov said U.S.S.R. did not announce space mission dates “because we don’t want to bind the people who are preparing the flight.” Cosmonaut flight training areas were closed to most visitors “because we just don’t want journalists to interfere with the working atmosphere of the cosmonauts.” Area contained medical center with centrifuge that cosmonauts called “Devil’s merry-go-round.” From size and number of apartment buildings, Wilford estimated Star City population at 1500 to 2000, City was “smaller than Houston space center because it does not also serve as the mission control complex and apparently has no primary responsibility for the management of spacecraft design and development.” Like NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Star City contained facilities for premission training of cosmonauts and postmission physical examinations and recreation. Like U.S. astronauts, Soviet cosmonauts were trained in aircraft “that make deep dives to simulate weightlessness.” Parachuting tested ability to handle high-stress situations. First simulator for Salyut orbiting laboratory was being installed in new building to be completed at year’s end. Wilford said that “this could mean that no major advance beyond the present version of Salyut should be expected until well after the simulator is ready.” Of about 50 cosmonauts in Soviet space program, one third were civil engineers living in Moscow, Shatalov said; remainder were Soviet air force pilots who lived in Star City. No women were preparing for space missions but U.S.S.R. had “many women who specialize in meteorology and medicine, which are professions necessary on the orbital stations.” From descriptions by Shatalov and Cosmonaut-engineer Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, Wilford had constructed outline of preparations for Soviet space mission: Cosmonauts were assigned to mission one year in advance of launch date by commission of medical and engineering experts and Shatalov. There were two backup crews. After learning spacecraft mechanics and electronics and practicing in spacecraft simulator at Star City, crew went to Baykonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan three weeks before launch. There they completed training in actual spacecraft, checked instruments, stocked food, adjusted couches, and recommended minor changes in housekeeping. “Unlike Cape Kennedy,” Baykonur had no simulators for last-minute practice. For two days before launch, “after the state commission approves the spaceship’s readiness,” crew relaxed. On launch morning cosmonauts were examined physically and biomedical sensors were attached to their bodies before they donned spacesuits. Traditionally, cosmonauts then gathered in quarters for few moments of silence broken by shouts of “off we go!” They signed their names on door before leaving for launch pad. Between missions, cosmonauts were expected to devote time each month to “social work”—visits to schools, collective farms, and factories. Shatalov had suggested that new Soviet manned missions were possible within months and that U.S.S.R. was studying mission longevity in preparation for earth-orbiting laboratories. Of next Salyut mission, Shatalov said: “We are going to make it better .... We will prolong the visits of men, and the number of expeditions will grow. This is the difference now between our program and yours.” Yeliseyev had said his countrymen would “probably” be on the moon by 1975. At tour’s completion, Shatalov had offered toast: “To cooperation between our peoples, to working together in space, which is our future and the future of the world.” (Wilford, NYT, 3/22/72, 30 ; 3/26/72, 7; Huntsville Times, 4/2/72, 17)
Leesburg, Fla., high school students Dale Delpit and Mike Holloway emerged after 6 days and 16 hrs in capsule built by their science class to simulate spacecraft. They had walked and slept on waterbed to simulate weightlessness and had eaten pre-prepared foods. Both boys, aged 14, emerged with wobbly knees and with charcoal on faces to look like astronauts’ beards. (W Star, 6/12/72, 20) April 12:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other NASA officials testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science-Veterans Appropriations during hearings on NASA FY 1973 appropriation. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, demonstrated model of space shuttle and explained configuration and costs. Dr. Fletcher said that in halving cost of original plans main sacrifice was that “we are not reusing all the parts. We use this expendable gas tank to supply the orbiter. . . . That, however, had an enormous effect on the size. We were able to bring the size of the orbiter down so that we were able to use solid fuel rockets.” Dr. Low added, “We sacrificed nothing in terms of what kinds of satellites, what kinds of payloads we can put into orbit.” Estimates of larger costs by shuttle opponents had been derived by adding in cost of “all the satellites it will carry, the weather satellites, the communications satellites, and all of those things that would be carried anyway, whether there is a Shuttle or not,” Dr. Low said. “And this could be likened to charging to the cost of a freight train the cost also of all of the freight that it is going to carry.” In reply to question on cooperation with U.S.S.R., Dr. Low cited decision to build docking and rendezvous systems compatible between U.S. and U.S.S.R. manned spacecraft. Shuttle “will have a system on it so it can attach to another satellite and we will make that system so it is the same as the Russians will use on their satellites, so that if we need to rescue each other ... or if we want to conduct joint experiments in space, we can do that.” Queried on comparison of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs, Dr. Fletcher said, “It is quite apparent that over the last 3 or 4 years, the Soviet space effort has grown in dollar volume and in number of launches per year, during the period that ours has declined. So that . . . they are spending quite a bit more in space than we are. It is estimated that perhaps 2 percent of their gross national product is spent for space, whereas a half of a percent of our GNP is spent on space. . . . Our number of launches per year has steadily declined from a peak of something [like] almost 80 in 1966, down to . . . the order of 30 or 35 in 1970 and 1971; whereas, the number of their launches has steadily climbed . . . and is now higher than even our peak. In 1971, they launched over 80 spacecraft, whereas our launches were down to less than half that.” (Transcript)
Significance of nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences joint Apollo-Soyuz test project (astp) was discussed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, in letter to nasa staff. Eyes of world would be on nasa and Soviet manned space flight teams as never before. There “must be a near certainty that the mission will be successful, or it should not be attempted.” Not just nasa reputation but “future of manned space flight and international cooperation in space will be significantly influenced by the success or failure.” Mission also was “important first step to facilitate rescue missions in space and to enable manned spacecraft from two or more countries to participate in future cooperative activities. And because several years of friendly cooperation are required just to plan and fly this one test mission, it takes on an added symbolic significance and gives us the feeling that even now, long before the flight, we may be making a contribution to the cause of peace and better understanding between our two countries.” Decision to cooperate in project was “optimistic vote of confidence in the future of manned space flight by the two leading powers.” But project had practical limits. Neither side would transfer its technology as such. “So neither side has to give away anything, but each has much to gain.” Biggest concession to be made by each country was “recognition that close and visible cooperation between the two countries on an important aspect of manned space flight has become desirable.” (NASA Activities, 10/15/72, 200-2)
Doomed civilization theory was disputed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in speech at Carnegie Institute Museum of Art in Pittsburgh. Speech was part of Man and Idea Series sponsored by museum’s Women’s Committee. “I think these views overlook the very center of civilization—man himself, his intellect and his capacity to learn and act, and thereby retain in some great measure control over his own destiny.” Goal of space program was to “place the tools of planetary management into the hands of man.” Rather than barrier or constraint, space had become to man “a natural extension of his sphere of activity. I do not see this as ephemeral or temporary; I believe that, both physically and intellectually, our operating environment has been permanently expanded. This is a real contribution to the human spirit.” Human spirit was difficult to define; “it is measured by attitudes and aspirations and mature expectations. Our space experience, in the fourteen years past, has given us all a different—and better—view of the future. In a very real sense, the future is already here; we must learn to recognize it and live in it responsibly.” (Text)
Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1971 was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) for his achievements as Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso). Trophy was awarded annually by National Geographic Society to Air Force member who made most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace. Gen. Phillips had been Apollo Program Director in NASA and was currently Director of National Security Agency, (msc Release 72—197)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, denied reports that he had announced he might resign after Apollo 17 mission in December and return to Univ. of Utah. Reports had followed Administrator’s dinner speech before Knife and Fork Club in Salt Lake City, Utah, Sept. 19. Dr. Fletcher—who had headed NASA since April 27, 1971—issued reply to queries received at NASA Hq. saying that “he had given no thought to resigning from NASA and could not possibly commit [himself] to going hack to the University of Utah at this time.” (nasa pao; Off of Admin; SBD, 9/21/72, 84, 90)
Role of satellite in weather forecasting was described by Howard W. Pollock, Deputy Administrator of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, in speech before Ninth Space Congress at Cocoa Beach, Fla. Invention of earth satellites “might well be called the greatest single technological advance in meteorology since the invention of the balloon.” Geostationary and orbiting satellites had provided National Weather Service with “fantastic tools, immense amounts of information, and far greater capabilities than it has ever had before.” With orbiting satellites “we now have the potential for vertical temperature profiles at a theoretically infinite number of points around the world.” With satellite data “we foresee the day when we will . . . determine . . . the initial state of the world atmosphere in all essential details.” no A A was studying disaster warning satellite able to reach every home in every part of U.S. Every home could have a small inexpensive receiver. When natural disaster was forecast, satellite would he instructed to turn on receivers in area to be affected and broadcast appropriate warning with instructions about actions people should take. Fundamental technology for disaster warning satellite in coming decade was “largely available now” and planning was under way. (Text) papers of 20 students selected from 69 who applied. (Lettc Release 72-26; LeRC pao) April 20:	NASA TF-8A aircraft, piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry and equipped with supercritical wing, completed three performance evaluation flights from Flight Research Center. Aircraft flew at speeds ranging from mach 0.60 to 1.10 at 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude on one flight. On another it tested performance from mach 0.70 to 0.99 at 7300-m (24 000-ft) altitude and from mach 0.90 to 0.99 at 11 000 m (36 000 ft). On third flight, aircraft flew at mach 0.96 and 0.98 at both 7600 m (25 000 ft) and 10 700 m (35 000 ft) and mach 0.95 to 1.18 at 13 700 m (45 000 ft). Aircraft,' with experimental wing designed to decrease buffeting at high subsonic speeds, would continue test flights through May 19 and would have new side fairings installed beginning May 22. (nasa proj off)
Formation of General Aviation Accident Prevention Industry Advisory Committee to work with Federal Aviation Administration in developing techniques for preventing general-aviation accidents was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (faa Release 72—96)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 15 astronauts’ carrying unauthorized postal covers on mission. Baltimore Sun said their actions in “novel attempt to capitalize” on mission could not be excused. “From the start of the nation’s space program, astronauts have become instant celebrities and in some cases instant millionaires through endorsements, publications and investments. We’re not opposed to a little free enterprise, but the space program, as envisioned by the late President Kennedy, was a noble exercise in exploration not exploitation.” If space program was to be exploited at all, “profits should go back into the national treasury.” (B Sun, 7/14/72, A12) Chicago Tribune: “It is disappointing to realize that man has already tainted the moon with moral pollution, but we are impressed less by the gravity of the crime than by the debasement of the stamp collection business which it reflects. If stamp collectors were more discriminating, and stamp dealers less greedy, the moon might not have been contaminated so soon.” (C Trib, 7/14/72)
European space leaders were “growing increasingly impatient” over U.S. Government’s failure to resolve controversy over method for participation in international air traffic control satellite program (aerosat), Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. European Space Research Organization official had said European space community was concerned that U.S. would not honor agreement between Federal Aviation Administration and esro for joint backing of twin-satellite systems covering Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, but would back Communications Satellite Corp. proposal that aerosat be developed under international consortium. Concern had arisen “from the fact that the [U.S.] executive branch has not taken a firm stand on what its policy is to be.” (Av Wk, 1/10/72, 20)
President Rickard Nixon and Premier Alexsey N. Kosygin in Moscow signed the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. The agreement included a prefect to rendezvous and dock an American and a Soviet spacecraft in earth orbit and exchange astronaut and cosmonaut visits in each other's spacecraft during }975. In the photo of the docked model, the first two segments at lower left are the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, the cylindrical structure in the center is the docking module, and the Apollo command and service module is at the upper right, such other ways as may he mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation. “Article 3. The Parties have agreed to carry out projects for developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flights in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of the United States Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of Astronauts in each other’s spacecraft. The implementation of these projects will he carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the Summary of Results of the Meeting Between Representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on Question of Developing Compatible Systems for Rendezvous and Docking of Manned Spacecraft and Space Stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. dated April 6, 1972. “Article 4. The Parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field. “Article 5. The Parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. “Article 6. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.” Plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission were outlined in Fact Sheet issued by White House Press Secretary in Moscow: “Under today’s agreement both sides commit to the development of a complete project schedule, and to meeting that schedule. Arrangements will be made for the necessary contact and understanding between specialists. . . . Training exercises will be conducted in [each] country for the other country’s flight crew and ground operations personnel.” Working groups would meet in July to plan engineering aspects of mission. Persons directly participating in flight operations of test mission would be included in working groups two years before mission. During mission each country’s control center would be expected to control its own craft, but on decisions affecting joint elements of program—including countdown coordination—consultations would occur with other country. “There will be preplanned contingency courses of action. Television down-link will be transmitted to the other country’s control center, and voice communications between vehicle and ground will be available to the other country’s control center on a pre-planned basis.” Flight crews would be trained in other country’s language at least well enough to understand it and act in response during normal and contingency courses of action. Apollo command and service module (csm) and Saturn IB booster would be used. Additional cost of mission to U.S. would be about $250 million. Project Directors would be Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center, and Soviet Academician K. D. Bushuyev. (Texts)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent detailed medical examination and began technical debriefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Willard Hawkins of msc said astronauts looked good, were “in good physical shape,” and had normal responses. (AP, B Sun, 5/1/72, A3) During April: Soviet Space Program, 1971 was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences as supplement to Senate Document 92-51 [see Jan. 6 and 22], Report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—said 1971 had been peak year in Soviet space activity, with 83 successful launches against 31 for U.S. Soviet successes had included “remarkable performance of the roving lunar vehicle, Lunokhod 1, the versatile manned space station Salyut in which a manned world duration record was set, the arrival in Mars orbit of two very heavy payloads, Mars 2 and 3, and the placing in lunar orbit of the heavy automated laboratory Luna 19.” On negative side had been inability to develop large G booster, death of Soyuz cosmonauts, crash of Luna 18 on moon, failure of first Mars probe, and failure of Mars 2 and 3 landers to carry out planned experiments. U.S.S.R. in 1971 had flown manned-precursor spacecraft “with greater maneuverability than' the present ones, quite possibly testing the advanced propulsion needed for manned lunar flight.” Soviet spokesmen had reiterated commitment to manned space stations, applications satellites, and unmanned planetary exploration throughout solar system. Manned lunar and planetary flights “continued to get mention as a later goal.” U.S.S.R. was expected to launch another Salyut to be visited by Soyuz 12 and 13 for long stay. Thus far U.S.S.R. had given space program “continued verbal support” and had demonstrated “commitment of hardware which has been rising for the 15 years flights have been undertaken.” (Committee Print)
Space in the Age of Aquarius,” hour-long special on space program, was shown on nationwide Columbia Broadcasting System TV. Program, produced and emceed by actor Hugh O’Brian, included interviews with NASA scientists on benefits of space exploration. Comedian Jonathan Winters played part of numerous skeptics opposed to space program and new technology. In Baltimore Sun Judy Bachrach later commented that “gist of program could be found in Mr. O’Brian’s very last rhetorical question, ‘Do we go or do we stop?’ We go on, we go on.” By end of program “you could have just about died of shame for ever having dared to think anything perverse about our space program. NASA couldn’t have got better propaganda if it had produced the show itself.” (upi, C Trib, 4/10/72; B Sun, 4/14/72) April 10—11:	NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel reviewed all aspects of Skylab program during meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center. Skylab program managers and key personnel briefed panel. Panel would later advise NASA Administrator on any hazards in program’s operation or facilities, (msfc Release 72^10; msfc pao) April 11:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 485 from Plesetsk into orbit with 462-km (287.1-mi) apogee, 267-km (165.9-mi) perigee, 91.8-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 30. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/72; 8/31/72; Sov Aero, 5/17/72, 120)
Decision that space shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rocket motors in parallel burn configuration, rather than by pressure-fed liquid-fueled rocket motor, was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Announcement was also released to press during morning and Dr. Fletcher held press conference in afternoon. Dr. Fletcher said both solid- and liquid-fueled boosters had been found technically feasible but “choice was made in favor of the solid parallel burn because of the lower development cost and the lower technical risks. Cost estimate for shuttle development was now $5.15 billion instead of earlier $5.5-billion estimate. Request for proposals would be issued about March 17. nasa expected to select shuttle launch and landing site shortly. At press conference he said: “I think we have made the right decision at the right time. And I think it is the right price.” Dr. Fletcher said it was likely NASA would want to launch and land at same coastal site and possibly from sites on both coasts. Inland sites were unlikely because of requirement for booster recoverability. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at conference there would be eight-week response time to request for proposals to become prime contractor for shuttle development. NASA would evaluate proposals in another eight weeks and would be ready for choice of contractor in early July. Requirements had been developed jointly with Air Force and “we have a shuttle that meets the user’s requirements, both in NASA and in the Air Force.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, estimated breakdown of 580 shuttle flights projected over 12-yr period for newsmen. Out of 100% of missions, 26% would be manned or man-tended, 74% unmanned. Of that 74%, 27% would be for applications (including NASA and other agencies or commercial applications), 25% for science, and 22% for Dept, of Defense missions. (Hearings transcript; Press conference transcript)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, had been assigned additional responsibilities as Program Director of Apollo Soyuz Test Project (astp), NASA announced. Dr. Petrone would have overall responsibility for direction and management of U.S. portion of joint earth-orbital mission with U.S.S.R. (NASA Release 72-174)
President Nixon issued statement on U.S. space program following splashdown of Apollo 17 command module: “The safe return of the command module America marks the end of one of the most significant chapters in the history of human endeavor. In October 1958, this Nation set about sending men into a hostile, unknown environment. We had little idea what lay before us, but there was new knowledge to be gained and there was a heritage of meeting historical challenge— the challenge of greatness—to be sustained. Project Mercury, begun in 1958, taught us that man could survive and work in space. In 1961, President Kennedy voiced the determination of the United States to place a mem on the moon. We gained the understanding and the technology to embark on this great mission through Project Gemini and we accomplished it with the Apollo lunar exploration series. In 1969, for the first time, men from the planet Earth set foot on the moon. “Since the beginning of Apollo, nine manned flights have been made to the moon. Three circled that nearest neighbor in the universe, six landed and explored its surface. We have barely begun to evaluate the vast treasure store of extraterrestrial data and material from these voyages, but we have already learned much and we know that we are probing our very origins. We are taking another long step in man’s ancient search for his own beginnings, pressing beyond knowledge of the means of human existence to find, perhaps, the meaning of human existence. “Nor is this great work ending with the return of Gene Cernan, Jack Schmitt, and Ron Evans from the moon today. Rather it has barely begun. As Sir Isaac Newton attributed his accomplishments to the fact that he stood ‘upon the shoulders of Giants,’ so Newton himself is one of the giants upon whose shoulders we now stand as we reach for the stars. The great mathematician once wrote: ‘I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.’ I believe we have finally moved into the great ocean and we are trying now to understand what surrounds us. “The making of space history will continue, and this Nation means to play a major role in its making. Next spring, the Sky lab will be put into orbit. It will be aimed not at advancing exploration of deep space, but at gaining in space new knowledge for the improvement of life here on earth. It will help develop new methods of learning about the earth’s environment and the earth’s resources, and new methods of evaluating programs aimed at preserving and enhancing the resources of all the world. It will seek new knowledge about our own star, the sun, and about its tremendous influence on our environment. Scientists aboard the Skylab will perform medical experiments aimed at a better knowledge of man’s own physiology. Also, they will perform experiments aimed at developing new industrial processes utilizing the unique capabilities found in space. Skylab will be our first manned space station. It will be in use for the better part of a year, permitting the economy of extended usage, and laying the groundwork for further space stations. “Economy in space will be further served by the Space Shuttle .... It will enable us to ferry space research hardware into orbit without requiring the full expenditure of a launch vehicle as is necessary today. It will permit us to place that hardware in space accurately, and to serve or retrieve it when necessary instead of simply writing it off in the event it malfunctions or fails. In addition, the Shuttle will provide such routine access to space that for the first time personnel other than trained astronauts will be able to participate and contribute in space as will nations once excluded for economic reasons. “The near future will see joint space efforts by this Nation and the Soviet Union in an affirmation of our common belief that the hopes and the needs that unite our people and all people are of greater consequence than the differences in philosophy that divide us. “Finally, we will continue to draw knowledge from the universe through the use of unmanned satellites and probes. “We cannot help but pause today and remember and pay homage to those many men and women—including those who made the ultimate sacrifice—whose hopes, whose energies, skill, and courage enabled the first man to reach the moon and who now have seen with us perhaps the last men in this century leave the moon. But the more we look back the more we are reminded that our thrust has been forward and that our place is among the heavens where our dreams precede us, and where, in time, we shall surely follow. “Though our ancestors would have called the deeds of Apollo miraculous, we do not see our age as an age of miracles. Rather, we deal in facts, we deal in scientific realities, we deal in industrial capacity, and technological expertise, and in the belief that men can do whatever they turn their hands to. For all this, however, can we look at the record of 24 men sent to circle the moon or to stand upon it, and 24 men returned to earth alive and well, and not see God’s hand in it? “Perhaps, in spite of ourselves, we do still live in an Age of Miracles. So if there is self-congratulation, let it be tempered with awe, and our pride with prayer, and as we enter this special time of spiritual significance, let us reserve a moment to wonder at what human beings have done in space and to be grateful.” {PD, 12/25/72, 1788-9)
Future of France’s Kourou, French Guiana, Space Center was uncertain because of uncertainty over European space programs, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Center plans had not materialized because of delays in European launcher program and 18- to 20-month hiatus in French Diamant B launcher program. Only 1972 launches from Kourou had been 8 to 10 sounding rockets. French officials had discussed possibility of shutting down major portions of center between launches. Maintenance cost about $20 million annually. (Av Wk, 12/11/72, 18),
Faulty design of water-tight battery enclosure used in underwater astronaut training at Manned Spacecraft Center had been primary contributing factor to February 29 explosion which killed one man and injured another, msc announced. In report to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, accident investigation board said explosive mixture of hydrogen and oxygen in battery was detonated when switch was closed. It recommended use of power supplies other than batteries, (msc Release 72-133)
Congress received Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas Mattingly II. In welcoming speech Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) said, “The trail they took into space has further inspired all of us to reach for greater accomplishments.” Astronauts urged continued support of space program. Astronauts earlier in morning reported preliminary results from April 16-27 lunar landing mission to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Slides shown included first photo showing intensity of ultraviolet light around earth and also aurora belts, including magnetosphere on equator never seen before [see May 12]. They also showed photo of geocorona protecting earth from uv rays from sun. Mattingly said of lunar exploration. “I think as we go further . . . into our exploration of the moon, we’ll find it more and more complex than we suspected it would ever be. In our fondest dreams, I believe we never suspected the hidden treasures that are buried underneath the lunar soil.” (CR, 5/16/72, S7839-40; W Post, 5/17/72, Al; Hearing transcript)
Grumman Corp. and American Aviation Corp. had agreed in principle to merge American Aviation with Grumman’s commercial aircraft programs, Wall Street Journal reported. American manufactured sport, utility, and training aircraft. Grumman manufactured, sold, and serviced Gulfstream II corporate jet, and Ag-Cat agricultural aircraft. (WSJ, 9/6/72) September 7:	Skylab Orbital Workshop was delivered to Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. President Walter F. Burke in Huntington Beach, Calif., ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Workshop would be moved to U.S. Naval Facility at Seal Beach Sept. 8 for transfer to U.S.S. Point Barrow and 14-day voyage to Cape Kennedy. Workshop, weighing 25 000 kg (55 000 lb), was largest section of Skylab experimental space station scheduled for 1973 launch. (nasa Off Admin; Miles, LA Times, 9/8/72)
Federal Aviation Administration announced appointment of Robert F. Bacon as Director of Office of Aviation Policy. He had been Acting Deputy Director of System Planning Div. in faa’s Airports Service. (faa Release 72-200)
Retirement of Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees as Marshall Space Flight Center Director and appointment of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, to succeed Dr. Rees in January 1973 were announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Dr. Rees, with Dr. Wernher von Braun, had pioneered U.S. space and rocket activities. He had succeeded Dr. von Braun as msfc Director in 1970. Dr. Petrone had been Apollo Program Manager at Kennedy Space Center before becoming Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. in 1969. Dr. Fletcher commended Dr. Rees for “successful completion of the Marshall Center’s role in the Apollo program. The performance of the Saturn launch vehicle . . . has been magnificent. The development of the Lunar Roving Vehicle and its performance ... is a tribute to his leadership.” (nasa Release 72-244)
Twenty-First Annual Report of the Activities of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, Congress of the United States was transmitted to Congress. Report said U.S. might soon be entirely dependent upon U.S.S.R. and Japan for titanium used in jet aircraft construction. Last titanium plant in U.S.—Reactive Metals, Inc., in Niles, Ohio—had closed Dec. 13. It was third plant to go out of business in 1971 because of lack of titanium market, oversupply of titanium sponge, increased foreign competition, and critical financial losses. U.S. Bureau of Mines later reported that two U.S. titanium plants reopened during February 1972.	(Text; Bureau of Mines pio) February 22:	Apollo 16 press conference was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Manager, said Apollo 16 lunar landing site would consist of volcanic highland material. “The highlands which we are landing on . . . are composed of two types of units. One type is material formed early in lunar history and subsequently fragmented and redistributed by the numerous meteorite impacts which have scarred the lunar highlands. These units are predominantly ejecta deposits now. And on Apollo 15 with the genesis rock we hopefully have sampled some of these early deposits. The second major unit ... is materials which have modified these early deposits by flooding them or building up on top of them predominantly by volcanic processes. The primary objective of Apollo 16 is the exploration and sampling of this lighter type of highland terrain with hopefully a fragment or two of the old original stuff brought in by impact from . . . the old original crust which is probably still exposed down in the lower southern hemisphere.” Dr. M. E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory explained changes in drill design, with joints to permit core samples to be brought out more readily. Dr. H. J. Moore of U.S. Geological Survey described orbital science experiments, including photographic system to determine moon’s geometric shape. Apollo 16 cm would also photograph floor of Alphonsus Crater—where Ranger 9 impacted March 24, 1965—to provide positive identification of Ranger 9’s impact. Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., said astronauts would begin lunar surface extravehicular activity (eva) as soon after landing on moon as they could complete postlanding checkout. They would conduct 7-hr EVA, and reenter LM about 17 hrs after previous sleep period. Crew would conduct three evas On first, primary objective was to deploy Apollo lunar surface experiments package; on second, to sample as high on Descartes and Stone Mountains as possible; and, on third, to reach North Ray Crater. (Transcript)
LeRoy E. Day, NASA Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, described studies of shuttle’s effect on payload development costs during speech before American Institute of Astronautics and Aeronautics Rocky Mountain Section in Boulder, Colo.: “A number of . . . payloads have been flown and historical design and program cost data were available. We have determined by actual preliminary design, preparation of program plans, and detailed costing analyses, that these payloads could have been redesigned to fly on the shuttle with payload development cost savings ... of 50% of the historical baseline. The studies conclude that the cost of developing payloads (the major portion of space program costs) can be reduced primarily as a result of the shuttle’s ability to retrieve payloads for reuse, refurbishment and updating.” Dichotomy of unmanned and manned space programs should not be perpetuated, Day said. U.S. needed to continue “vigorous and meaningful manned space program” that did not “obscure the automated satellite programs.” Shuttle was “the one mechanism that can effectively support both goals in an optimum way” within national space budget. (Text)
Federal Aviation Administration completed installation of automated flight-data processing system in all 20 of its contiguous air route traffic control centers, rendered 34 automated radar terminal systems (arts hi) operational, and installed 53 instrument landing systems, (dot Release 99-S-72)
Senate approved S.R. 261, making minority changes in committee assignments. Sen. James L. Buckley (R-N.Y.) was removed from Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and Sen. Karl E. Mundt (R-S.D.) was added. (CR, 2/23/72, S2379-80) February 23—24:	NASA officials continued testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson reported “excellent results” in first acoustic tests, completed in November 1971, of experimental quiet engine for conventional takeoff and landing (ctol) aircraft. “In an unsuppressed baseline configuration . . . the noise levels were the equivalent of at least 3 EPNdB [epndb, effective perceived noise in decibels] lower than the original targets. In a first cut simulation of an acoustically suppressed nacelle which was not an optimum design, the noise levels were from 7 to 9 EPNdB lower yet, with aerodynamic performance losses no greater than expected.” It appeared possible to design an advanced version of ctol engine “which will incorporate all the advances in technology and will have a more nearly optimum trade-off between noise reduction and installed weight penalty.” In FY 1973, $2.5 million was requested for program to reduce noise of short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to 95 epndb at 500 ft (150 m). Tests at Flight Research Center of quieted T-34 high-bypass-ratio engine operating with simulated wing-flap system would develop design data for both quiet, experimental stol (questol) aircraft program and quiet, clean, STOL experimental engine program. Vertical takeoff and landing aircraft (vtol) noise reduction program, with budget request of $2.5 million, focused on lift fans with additional work on helicopter rotor noise. Acoustic and aerodynamic data would continue to be developed in tests at Langley, Ames, and Lewis Research Centers. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), described NASA role in Joint nasa, Federal Aviation Administration, and Dept, of Defense microwave landing system (mls) development plan to provide landing system for civil and military use to replace current very-high-frequency (vhf) landing system. NASA would provide personnel in faa mls Project Office, chairmanship of the mls Interagency Advisory Group, flight-test validation of the mls for stol operations, and extension of our work in FY 1973 to include ctol and vtol aircraft. “We are convinced the national microwave landing system program will make significant contributions toward noise abatement, airport congestion relief, and, especially, safety enhancement in the airport area.” Gerald G. Kayten, Director of Transport Experimental Program Office in oast, said on Feb. 23 that NASA programs would “provide a foundation upon which industry can base the design and development of the new stol systems in the late 1970’s, and upon which the Government can establish criteria for certification and regulation of such systems.” Programs also would enable Government to make 1976 decision on vertical short takeoff and landing (v/stol) incorporation recommended in Dept, of Transportation Northeast Corridor Report. “NASA’s main focus is on propulsive-lift technology for effective and economical STOL capability, engine technology for development of quiet and clean STOL propulsion systems, and airborne STOL avionics and system technology.” Technology represented “totally new capability based on major advances in each of several technical disciplines.” Albert J. Evans, Director of Military Aircraft Programs Office in oast, on Feb. 24 described support of military aircraft development programs. NASA had assigned research engineers to F-15 and B-l aircraft and Air Force prototype systems program offices. “This has put NASA ‘on the scene’ as technical problems become recognized and defined, and brings NASA’s technical capabilities ... to bear on the problems at an early date.” F—15 would make first flight early in FY 1973 “with about 12,000 nasa wind tunnel hours behind it, and much technical consultation by NASA staff members with the Air Force and the industry that is developing the F—15.” F—15 operational engine would be installed at Lewis Research Center to analyze air flow through engine components, combustion efficiency, and performance characteristics. nasa would analyze F-15 engine and airframe performance and flight-test aircraft at LeRC, where similar tests would be run on Air Force AX aircraft in cooperation with usaf. In B-l program, four frc engineers would be assigned to usaf Systems Program Office and contractor to assist in establishing flight-test requirements and instrumentation to verify analytical design techniques and ground-test data obtained at small scale in wind tunnels and information from simulator studies. (Transcript)
U.S. press commented on safe April 27 return of Apollo 16 astronauts. New York Times: Mission had “reminded us once again that man’s study of the moon is but in its infancy, and that the great bulk of the moon’s territory is still completely unexplored.” Yet, “only one more manned lunar mission is now scheduled.” As Apollo program ended, “its enormous successes underline the opportunities on the moon and compel all men to lift their eyes to the heavens if they would understand whence and how our species, our world and our solar system came into being.” (NYT, 4/28/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution: “These three strong young men are heros in the truest sense of the term. They have pitted their courage, their physical strength and their minds against a multiplicity of awesome forces which singularly or collectively could totally obliterate them. And they did it for the noblest of reasons—the pursuit of knowledge. If mankind has any claim to greatness, surely it is men like this that give it credence.” Editorial also approved space funding: “It is appropriate to note, just when the next-to-last planned Apollo spacecraft is safely home from the moon, that a few days ago the U.S. House voted approval of a $3,4 billion space agency budget bill. Part of the money will go for the development of a space shuttle, the next logical step in the great adventure of exploring space. The technological advances that are part of the space program have already proven themselves of value here on earth. It’s likely that this kind of extra technical dividend will continue to lead to break-through areas not even related to space.” (Atlanta JC, 4/28/72) San Francisco Examiner:	. . Apollo 16 may well turn out to be the most rewarding of all our moon expeditions. All Americans can take pride in a feat so remarkably compounded of scientific precision and human courage.” (SF Exam, 4/28/72) Chicago Daily News: “With experience, the crews and the thousands of technical experts supporting them from the Earth have learned to correct the minor flaws and juggle the entire intricate timetable when necessary. It seems a pity that much of the experience so dearly gained is soon to be put on the shelf. . . . But the lessons of Apollo can be applied at least in part to the portions of the space program that will remain. . . . And if the pioneering aspects of the space program are about over, its benefits will continue—most spectacularly in the weather and communication satellites, but extending also into more mundane improvements in daily living.” (C Daily News, 4/28/72)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, would become Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics in January 1973, Washington Post reported. He would replace Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), who was defeated for renomination to House. Post quoted Rep. Teague as saying he wanted to push U.S. space program forward because it “seems to be taking a back seat.” (Lyons, W Post, 12/15/72)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 16 astronauts presented 50 awards at Marshall Space Flight Center to Government and industry personnel who assisted successful Apollo 16 mission (April 16-27). (msfc Release 72—75)
House by vote of 356 to 32 passed H.R. 11021, to control emission of noise detrimental to human environment. House rejected amendment— after consultation with NASA Administrator, Secretary of Transportation, and Federal Aviation Administration—that would have authorized Environmental Protection Agency to provide for control and abatement of aircraft noise and sonic boom. (CR, 2/29/72, H1508-39)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics announced election of 19 new Fellows, including Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Bruce T. Lundin, Lewis Research Center Director; and Harris M. Schurmeir, Jet Propulsion Laboratory Project Manager. Fellows would be honored at annual banquet during Jan. 8-10, 1973, annual meeting and technical display. Dr. Fletcher had been cited for “pioneering work in missile guidance systems and for his farsighted administrative leadership of this nation’s aeronautical and space research and development programs.” Lundin citation was for “contribution to research in turbojet and ramjet engine technology and his management of many aircraft, missile and spacecraft research programs.” Schurmeir was cited for “basic work in systems engineering for lunar and planetary spacecraft and in particular for his leadership of the Ranger photographic missions to the moon and the Mariner missions to Mars.” Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Grant L. Hansen had also been elected AIAA Fellow, for “contributions to the electronic design of the Nike, Sparrow, Thor and Skybolt Systems, management and direction of the Centaur program and his perceptive leadership in military research and development.” (aiaa Release)
More than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies were using nastran (nasa’s structural analysis computer program) to solve their structural engineering problems, NASA announced. nastran was general-purpose program originally designed to analyze behavior of elastic structures in space program. One major use had been in design of space shuttle. More than 600 engineers had been made familiar with nastran since it was made available to public in November 1970 and program was being used in more than 185 different applications, with at least 55 more planned. Firms using nastran predicted many improvements in product safety, reliability, and quality as direct benefit to their customers, (nasa Release 72^40)
Development Test Satellite (dts), full-scale ground-test vehicle characteristic of high-capacity next-generation communications satellites, had been built by 15-member international consortium led by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Privately funded vehicle embodied concepts and technologies that Lockheed considered essential for profitable or cost-effective operations 1976-1985. Features included three-axis spacecraft stabilization; electric and hydrazine propulsion; sun-tracking, flexible, solar substrate solar arrays; multiple narrow antenna beams; onboard trans-ponder/antenna switching; and advanced thermal control. (Av Wk, 5/29/72, 41-7) May 30:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told meeting of White House Council that U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on joint space mission would lead to some 4400 new jobs in California’s aerospace industry by 1974 and retention of some 1500 jobs at NASA Centers in Florida and Alabama. (Gwertzman, NYT, '5/31/72, 9)
Further space budget cuts were forecast by Senate Finance Committee Chairman, Sen. Russell B. Long (D-La.), during Lafayette, La., press conference. He said President was trying to pare Federal budget to “reasonable limits.” There was “a lot of appeal to making some reductions in the space program.” (Sen Long Off; upi, W Post, 12/7/72)
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)
Orlando Sentinel editorial praised NASA Earth Resources Technology Satellites (erts) and Earth Resources Observation System (eros) programs: “Without more comprehensive knowledge we are limited in the decisions we must make to exploit or conserve the resources upon which our continued existence depends.” erts and eros “working together is probably the most far reaching earth-science experiment ever undertaken by man.” (O Sen, 6/19/72) June 20:	NASA held press conference on erts-A Earth Resources Technology Satellite (to be launched July 23) at Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Arch B. Park, Chief of NASA Earth Resources Survey Program, described experiments that “typify ... a direct relationship between the results of the experiment and the interest ... of the general public.” Most important experiments were in land use and understanding geology, soils, vegetation, and engineering aspects of man’s mass works. Second was environmental awareness, including experiments in biological control of pests, water quality, mine safety, forest conservation, and resources management. Primary objective of erts was described by project manager Wilfred E. Scull as “the acquisition of multi-spectral images” over U.S. and rest of world and use of data for various disciplines. Spacecraft, scheduled for launch July 21, would weigh 939 kg (2070 lbs) and would be launched into sun-synchronous, circular earth orbit at 920km (570-mi) altitude, repeating coverage under same conditions of illumination over entire globe every 18 days. Onboard equipment included three return-beam-vidicon (rbv) cameras that would take pictures every 25 sec, multispectral scanner subsystem (mss) that would continually scan ground directly beneath satellite, and two wideband video tape recorders (wbvtr) to record and store images for later playback. Data-collection system consisted of remote platforms for measuring soil, water, and air quality and other environmental data and transmitting data to erts as it passed overhead. Data would be telemetered to three main stations (Fairbanks, Alaska; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md.) and processed at gsfc. All images received by NASA would be sent to Dept, of Agriculture, Dept, of Interior, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Transcript)
Houston Post editorial commented on international aspects of space program: “The history of the world has provided few efforts more conducive to worldwide participation than space exploration. Its benefits are mutual. The space shuttle is emerging as a practical, selfsupporting project and needs wider participation. Meanwhile, space investigations need to be continued. An international space agency would seem to be a practical way to perpetuate what the U.S. and Russia have started.” (H Post, 12/8/72)
NASA achievements in 1972 were reviewed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in letter to staff. NASA had received “great vote of confidence from the President, the Congress, and the country” in assignment to develop space shuttle. Assignment had been “most appropriate” in year when Apollo program would be concluded and was “a new challenge . . . worthy of the one we are about to complete.” Year 1972 had also been one of “great decision” because in NASA FY 1973 budget “we have also won approval for the concept of a well-rounded space program, with funding for significant progress in all major fields of space activity during this decade. We will stress practical benefits from spacecraft in Earth orbit in this decade and the next. But we will also build greatly improved spacecraft to study the universe from Earth orbit and to explore throughout the solar system.” NASA might be “moving faster with a bigger budget, but I don’t see how we could be doing a better job.” (NASA Activities, 11/15/72, 224)
Role of Vandenberg Air Force Base in space shuttle program was doubtful, Frank Macomber said in San Diego Union. California politicians were claiming “partial victory” in NASA’s selection of West Coast site for second shuttle launch and landing site. But “clear-cut win went to Florida’s Cape Kennedy.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had “made it clear it will be another eight years before space shuttle launch base work would begin at Vandenberg.” In eight years “entire U.S. space picture will have changed. There will be a whole new set of American leaders, and a Congress which today would approve a space shuttle program for the West Coast might be so changed by 1980 that it would be voted down.” (Copley News Service, SD Union, 5/14/72, 23)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former nasa Administrator, delivered 1972 Tizard Memorial Lecture at Westminster School in London. Discussing man’s future in space, Dr. Paine evaluated role of applications satellites: Their “great economic and social value” was apparent “although their full potential is not yet appreciated. Men on every continent regularly use these services today; shares can be bought in the enterprises that provide them. We must not, however, overlook the equal value of the new information about the earth’s origin, history, environment, and destiny that our more basic lunar and planetary scientific programs are providing. Already studies of radiative energy transport in the atmosphere of Mars have contributed to terrestrial meteorology; lunar geological surveys have provided new clues to the early formation and structure of earth. The line between science and application in this rapidly advancing area is continually shifting and new scientific understanding of such questions as the origin of the Ice Ages might be of incalculable human importance.” (Text)
m/g Don R. Ostrander (usaf, Ret.), former NASA Director of Launch Vehicles, died at Andrews Air Force Base hospital, Md., of cancer at age 58. He had retired from Air Force as Vice-Commander of Ballistics System Division in 1965 and became Vice President for Planning, Bell Aero Systems Corp., until 1971. Gen. Ostrander had been appointed to NASA position in 1959. (W Post, 10/28/72, B10; Rosholt, Administrative History of NASA) October 26—27:	California newspapers reported reaction at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to news of renaming facility for retiring California Congressman H. Allen Smith (D-Calif.) [see Oct. 3 and Oct. 21]. News had come as surprise to officials, who had refused to comment. JPL engineer Charles D. Hepburn had said that several engineers deplored renaming of facility for political office holder when there were many great local scientists who had contributed to space program. Hepburn had said it was “insult to technology .... Our work has to do with the physical universe, not with the meanderings of a political career.” (LA Times, 10/26/72; Pasadena Star-News, 10/27/72) October 27: U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 13 weather satellite from Plesetsk to obtain “meteorological information needed for the operative weather forecast service.” Orbital parameters: 891-km (553.6-mi) apogee, 866-km (538.1-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; fbis-Sov, 10/30/72, LI; SBD, 10/30/72, 266)
NASA announced formation of JT3D/JT8D Refan Program Office in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. New Office—to be managed and directed by James J. Kramer, Chief of Noise Pollution Reduction Branch in Aeronautical Propulsion Div.—would direct program to develop and demonstrate modifications to JT3D and JT8D engines produced by United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. Larger diameter, quieter, single-stage fans, together with suitable acoustic nacelles, would seek maximum practicable quieting at takeoff and landing approach. Refan program was part of joint effort by NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Federal Aviation Administration to define retrofit changes that would produce significant aircraft noise reduction. (nasa Release 72—96)
Edwin E. Aldrin, Apollo 11 astronaut and second man to set foot on the moon, announced he was retiring from Air Force in summer. Col. Aldrin had been Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilots School at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., since he retired from NASA July 1, 1971. He said he was leaving usaf because his 10 yrs with space program had hurt his chances for promotion. (W Post, 1/15/72, A9)
NASA notified staff of Civil Service Commission directive canceling special salary rates for engineers, scientists, accountants, mathematicians, and others. Approximately 500 NASA employees affected would be converted to General Schedule and placed on saved pay rates or in higher pay steps with longer waiting periods for step increments, effective Feb. 6. Persons hired to affected positions after Feb. 6 would be paid General Schedule rates, (nasa Hq WB, 1/10/72, 2)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said in letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, that NASA should cut costs to take advantage of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space treaty signed May 24. Sen. Proxmire asked for estimates of savings possible through space cooperation and suggested that proposed joint space mission “would make it possible for us to postpone development of certain aspects of our manned space program.” (upi, NYT, 6/2/72)
Chemical & Engineering News published views and plans of presidential candidates for science and technology beyond general pledges in Democratic and Republican Party platforms. Same set of questions had been submitted to campaign organizations of Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) and of President Nixon. President Nixon said he would continue general pattern of previous years on Federal research and development funding; its division among defense, space, and civilian sectors; its possible link to gross national product (gnp) ; and appropriate balance for basic research, applied research, and development. Pattern would include increasingly effective program in civilian sector R&D, “prudent space program, and a sufficient defense R&D budget.” Administration believed r&d funding should be based on opportunities for effective programs and necessity for creating new opportunities through fundamental studies and that R&D resources, excepting basic research, should be allocated to areas that provided “greatest opportunity for leverage or that satisfy an immediate future need.” Sen. McGovern recommended increased Federal R&D funding. Principal problem was “government spending that has masqueraded as R&D, yet has little technical content. For example, when an Apollo is launched ... all of the kerosene and liquid oxygen that it uses comes out of the federal R&D budget. Only a very small percentage of the federal R&D budget actually represents laboratory investigations, instrument design, feasibility studies, and other technical efforts that involve scientists and engineers.” Sen. McGovern would emphasize civilian sector R&D and strong military R&D program as “good investment for long-term national security. My space program would emphasize unmanned planetary exploration and scientific satellites and also earth resource and communications satellites.” Nixon Administration would continue to maintain “strong and up-to-date defense force” and to capitalize upon past space investments. Both candidates recommended increased priority on developments of new energy sources. Nixon Administration was opposed to S. 32, reconversion bill introduced by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy to amend National Science Foundation Act of 1950 to establish framework of national science policy. Bill would focus policy and U.S. scientific talent and resources on Nation’s priority problems. Administration believed segment of S. 32 that would establish independent agency within nsf was “particularly unwise” because it would “divorce the R&D from the departments of Government responsible for using its results” and “would divert attention from the primary mission of nsf—to support fundamental and basic research.” Sen. McGovern would continue to support S. 32. “In its original form, before compromise to get Republican support, it would have provided $1.2 billion for a new NASA-type Civil Science Systems Administration that would fund genuine r&d across a broad range of civilian technology needs.” Administration did not believe in Cabinet-level science department or “supra” agency, nor that “existing science apparatus is totally adequate. As with all human and governmental institutions, it too should be dynamic and subject to change as conditions and events dictate.” Sen. McGovern felt “more centralized federal science management and funding apparatus might be useful, but the key need is not to change the institutions but rather to give them more power in the Federal Government.” He favored establishment of Office of Technology Assessment [see October 13] which would “assess each new technical program with an eye toward cost efficiency and effectiveness, and domestic betterment.” Asked if federally owned laboratories should be expanded to deal with problems of health and environment, Nixon Administration pointed out that NASA Centers were “closely involved with the R&D components of other federal agencies in an effort to solve pressing national problems.” Sen. McGovern believed Federal laboratories and research facilities had “plenty of problems in their immediate areas” with which to cope. “I have no intention of taking the easy route and putting them on safe subjects.” (Chemical & Engineering News, 10/23/72, 14-19) October 23-27:	Conference on high-energy astrophysics was held at Cal Tech by division of American Astronomical Society. Dr. Kenneth I. Kellerman of National Radio Astronomy Observatory said most baffling phenomenon observed by radiotelescopes was speed at which objects seemed to be moving. If measurements taken in past two years were accepted at face value, objects associated with quasars were speeding away from each other faster than speed of light. Such speed had been considered impossible. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. W. L. W. Sargent said strange blue objects sighted in sky by Hale Observatory astronomers might be newly formed galaxies “about 100 million years old, and they seem to be made up of very young stars.” Discovery indicated that galaxies might still be forming. Dr. Herbert Gursky of American Science and Engineering, Inc., said astronomers using Uhuru (Explorer 42 Small Astronomy Satellite launched by NASA Dec. 12, 1970) had spotted several x-ray objects that could not be detected by wavelengths other than x-ray. Impact of x-ray astronomy might be that “this new wavelength range may show some different aspects of stars and galaxies.” Through x-ray astronomy scientists “hope to . . . learn something about these objects that radio and optical observations can’t tell us.” Evidence of black hole—star whose gravity field was so strong that light could not escape from it—in constellation Cygnus was reported by Dr. Kip Thorne of Cal Tech, Dr. J. P. Ostriker of Princeton Univ., and Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering. Evidence had come from photos taken at Hale Observatory that showed bright blue line near source Cygnus X-l and from data gathered by XJhuru (see also Sept. 2). Scientists thought line in photos might be result of superhot gas being drawn from neighboring star in black hole. If finding was accurate, Cygnus X—1 would be first black hole discovered. Existence of black holes had been predicted by Einstein as part of his theory of relativity. (Cooke, Pasadena Star-News, 10/24/72; West, LA Times, 10/27/72; O’Toole, W Post, 10/28/72, A3; W Star & News, 10/28/72) October 24:	Soviet news agency Tass announced opening of Soviet National Conference on Space Biology and Medicine at Kaluga, U.S.S.R. Conference would hear papers on use of “terrestrial” atmosphere in spacecraft cabins, food and water regeneration, and establishment of bacterial medium in which future cosmonauts could live and work on extended space missions. Conference also would discuss weightlessness, crew selection and training, radiobiological aspects of flight, and psychophysiology of space crew work. Soviet Academician Oleg Gazenko had presented paper on topical problems of space biology and medicine at opening session. (fbis-Sov, 10/25/72, LI)
Any future development program for U.S. supersonic transport was expected to be given to NASA rather than Federal Aviation Administration, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported, faa, under retiring Dept, of Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe, had “lost so much of its authority” that “it no longer asserts itself” within Dept, of Transportation. {Av Wk, 12/11/72, 11)
Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Manned Spacecraft Center Director and former msc Director of Flight Operations, reviewed Apollo program in Associated Press interview published in Baltimore Sun. Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968) had been program’s pivotal mission. “It proved so many things that had a bearing on the progress of the program—things that it might have disproved. The navigation to and from the moon, the ability of the spacecraft systems to perform, the ability of man to survive the deep space environment, all hinged on the Apollo 8 mission.” Mission also had changed competitive position of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in space. “I really believed the Russians planned to fly a cir-cumlunar mission, sending a manned spacecraft looping around and returning it without orbiting the moon. That way they could say they sent the first man to the vicinity of the moon. And when we . . . decided to fly Apollo 8 as a moon-orbit mission, there was nothing left for them to do.” There was no major technological field that “hasn’t been materially changed or had some reflection of not only Apollo but of the whole space program.” Space technology had been important to maintenance of U.S. position as leading nation in world. Five manned lunar landing flights had produced greater scientific return than envisioned. “We have done just about all we should have done with the Apollo program in terms of lunar exploration. This is a good time to stop, evaluate what we have and use our resources to do other things in the space program.” (B Sun, 11/24/72, A10)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was chosen President of American College of Preventive Medicine at annual meeting in Atlantic City, NJ. (NASA Activities, 12/15/72; NASA Pio) November 14:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, visited Kennedy Space Center for briefings on ksc plans for 1970s. Programs included Apollo 17, Skylab, U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, space shuttle, applications programs, and Viking unmanned Mars missions for 1975 launch. Dr. Fletcher’s visit included Vehicle Assembly Building, to see Saturn V Orbital Workshop and Saturn IB launch vehicle for Skylab. (ksc Release 320-72)
President Nixon’s decision to support development of space shuttle was expected to stir “some loud opposition in Congress,” New York Times said, “bht probably not enough to sidetrack initial funding. . . .” Opposition was expected “from those who question the President’s decision to hack an expensive new space effort at a time when so many down-to-earth social programs have to wait in line for a share of the Federal dollar.” NASA officials had expressed “confidence that they have sufficient Congressional support for an initial shuttle appropriation.” (Wilford, NYT, 1/6/72, 14)
Second F—111 swing-wing fighter-bomber was lost over North Vietnam. First had been lost Sept. 28. U.S. Command in Saigon had no comment on North Vietnamese report that aircraft had been shot down. (AP, NYT, 10/19/72, 18) October 17—19:	Results of NASA research on powered-lift short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft were presented at Ames Research Center Conference. Papers were presented on short-haul transportation systems, aerodynamics, loads, flight dynamics, operation aspects, and quiet stol propulsion by authors from arc, Flight Research Center, Langley Research Center, Lewis Research Center, Federal Aviation Administration, and Army Air Mobility Research and Development Laboratory. (nasa Release 72-201; nasa SP-320)
Col. H. J. Odenthal (usaf, Ret.), pioneer airman who once assisted in rescue of Orville Wright after his aircraft had crashed, died at age 84. Col. Odenthal had helped organize Signal Corps air photographic and mapping division and had been awarded Croix de Guerre for his mapping flights in France during World War I. (Barker, W Post, 1/23/72, B16) January 22—25:	Intelsat-IV F—4 comsat was launched by NASA for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat) . Launched from Eastern Test Range at 7:12 pm est by Atlas-Centaur booster, satellite entered elliptical transfer orbit with 36 523-km (22 694.3-mi) apogee, 5984-km (3718.3-mi) perigee, and 28.2° inclination. Primary objective was to place satellite in transfer orbit accurate enough for onboard propulsion systems to transfer it to planned synchronous orbit for commercial communications over Pacific. Apogee-kick motor was fired at 7:32 pm est Jan. 24 and Intelsat-IV F—4 entered circular orbit with 35 787-km (22 237-mi) apogee, 25 625km (22 136.4-mi) perigee, 23-hr 52-min period, and 0.7° inclination over Pacific at 165° east longitude. It would drift 1.1° per day to reach station at 174° east longitude in early February. Satellite’s first major mission would be coverage of President Nixon’s visit to People’s Republic of China in February.	, Intelsat-IV F-4 was third comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and weighed 1402 kg (3090 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000—9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years. Intelsat-IV F-3 had been launched Dec. 19, 1971, and was operating satisfactorily over Atlantic. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; nasa Release 72-16) January 22:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA plans for continuing fruitful space program in interview published by Christian Science Monitor: “For the next few years, we may have fewer of the more spectacular explorational missions .... We will focus more on . . . communications satellites, weather satellites, earth resources survey satellites.” Next Applications Technology Satellite (ats) would demonstrate direct TV broadcasting in region of Rockies and Alaska, using large satellite with big antenna that could beam programs directly to augmented receivers in individual homes. Demonstration—-in cooperation with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare—would work through educational network rather than directly to homes, however. Comsats were “not quite so exciting an aspect of space technology” in U.S. but, “worldwide, there has been more interest in this than in almost any other aspect of our program.” Interest equaled that of ERT satellite. “Countries with vigorous mineral exploitation and agricultural development are interested in ERT satellites .... Countries with underdeveloped communications and education, such as India, are keenly interested in the broadcasting satellites.” In weather satellite field, new sophisticated instruments “give hope that we can get a really world weather observing network going.” Infrared sensors, microwave sensors, and high-resolution optics that obtained temperature profiles throughout atmosphere by looking “through holes in cloud systems” should help “to get points all over the globe where we now get only pieces of the picture.” NASA would try processing materials in zero g during Skylab program. “If it works with men doing it, there are cheaper ways we could do it without men. It may be one of those things that will be worth doing when we can get routine access to space with the shuttle.” In response to question, Dr. Fletcher said second Skylab would be “a very good thing for the country. But I’m not sure the budget needed for both a Skylab and the shuttle would be salable. The shuttle is more important in the long run. Not to do more of the Skylab sort of thing will be bad for prestige. The Russians will be doing much more than we will. I’m sure there will be criticism from Congress and the public.” But with shuttle and current budget level, “we could do virtually all those things we have talked about doing in this century. We could go back to the moon and establish crude bases .... We could establish a permanent space station. We just might be able to send men to Mars and get them safely home.” Apollo industrial base had already been destroyed, Dr. Fletcher said. “We could assemble a nucleus of people who know these things within NASA. But that’s about all.” As NASA turned toward space shuttle, “We hope and expect that many of the people who worked on Apollo will be in that program, so we won’t lose all the basic space flight know-how.” In international cooperation, France had asked to participate in Skylab mission and U.S.-U.S.S.R. meetings to establish compatible space docking system had progressed. “It looks as though we can do it technically. With existing hardware, we could do a docking in something like 1974 to 1975.” Scientific community was “still debating whether it would prefer an intensive Jupiter and Saturn explorational program or some form of grand tour to other planets as well,” Dr. Fletcher said. There was “no slackening of interest in Grand Tour” on NASA’s part. (CSM, 1/22/72)
NASA officials at Manned Spacecraft Center celebrated successful completion of last Apollo mission, following splashdown of Apollo 17. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director since 1969, said mission “goes into the record books as the most perfect mission, the most sophisticated science mission ever conducted.” Apollo 17 “closes a golden chapter in the age of space exploration. In a way, it brings a close to what has been a very romantic era in space exploration. But . . . the book is still being written. The next chapter will open the age of exploiting and utilizing space for other benefits.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said, “All great things must come to an end so we can move on to even greater things.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director, said he had “never seen a more perfect mission” than Apollo 17. Apollo program had been greatest engineering feat of all our lifetimes.” Before Apollo, “my mind, like most of us, was bound to earth. It’s certainly not that way anymore.” nasa spokesman at msc told press Apollo 17 was “the last, longest, and most successful of seven manned lunar landing missions.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/20/72, 1; AP, B Sun, 12/20/72, 1; upi, W Star & News, 12/20/72, A4)
Award of $1.5-million contract to United Air Lines, Inc., for flight-test program to evaluate operational procedures and avionic system to reduce noise level near airport approach patterns was announced by Ames Research Center. Contract was part of arc program in cooperation with Federal Aviation Administration. Avionics system would be developed by Collins Radio Co. under separate $233 000 NASA contract. (arc Release 72-136)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
John N. Wilford contrasted U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs in New York Times article: “As American astronauts prepare for another Apollo voyage to the moon . . . their counterparts in the Soviet Union are training for long-duration flights in earth-orbiting laboratories, leaving their own lunar exploration to automatic probes. As the American Pioneer 10 heads for Jupiter, a Soviet spacecraft, Venus 8 is traveling toward a planned softlanding on Venus. As American engineers design a reusable shuttle for ferrying men and satellites into space, the Russians apparently are still trying to develop a giant rocket to give them lifting power as great or greater than the Saturn V. As American launchings run about 30 a year and the space budget is under public attack, the Russians are launching nearly three times as many spacecraft and, if anything, are expanding their space program.” Contrasts had been highlighted in interviews with space officials during Wilford’s month-long visit to U.S.S.R. during March. According to Dr. Boris N. Petrov, director of Soviet Academy of Sciences Intercosmos Branch, “the priorities of the Soviet space program will remain the systematic research of near-earth space with the help of automatic stations, manned spaceships and orbital stations. For the moon and the nearest planets, the priority will continue to be research with the help of automated means.” (NYT, 4/14/72, 10)
Army Aviation Systems Command issuance of requests for proposals to 10 aerospace companies for prototype development of advanced armed helicopter was reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology. Helicopter would be equipped with advanced air-to-surface missiles. Airframe contractors were expected to b,e selected in June 1973. (Av Wk, 11/20/72, 19)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, described major alterations in “nature of the space effort” to be expected with 1978 introduction of space shuttle, in signed New York Times article. National space program had “turned an important corner in 1972—a year that, in a very real sense, was a year of decision” in choosing to proceed with shuttle. U.S. had “turned from a period of space exploration to a period of space exploitation for practical purposes.” By 1978 it would be “realistic to consider a variety of missions either not practicable at present cost levels or that were beyond the state of the art as it was in the pre-shuttle era.” Missions would include advanced, space-based communications systems that, when used for education, would “have the potential for eliminating illiteracy from the face of the earth.” Shuttle-launched advanced-version Nimbus satellites, combined with weather-modeling ground computers, would permit experiments in weather modification to dampen violent storms. Earth resources program data would provide precise picture of crop and timber conditions and extent of attacks by disease, drought, and fire. By 1980s, pilot space manufacturing operations might be in progress. “Super pure vaccine could thus be produced. Perfectly homogeneous alloys, fiber composites and perfectly round ball bearings are other possibilities.” During 1980s, “program of planetary exploration should record the completion of a close look at all the planets in our solar system as well as a detailed study of Mars, Jupiter and Venus. Large orbiting telescopes will be aimed at the outer reaches of the universe, examining such phenomena as quasars and pulsars.” (NYT, 12/4/72, 50)
Finance magazine devoted entire issue to “Corporate Continuity in Space: The Case for NASA’s Future.” Preface noted that in 1960s, NASA had “achieved its mem date to the moon and back with time to spare. For the Seventies and beyond, its new goals are a balanced mix of manned aeronautical work in near-earth orbit and unmanned research flights into deep space. While NASA administrator James C. Fletcher works with Congress to implement more stable funding concepts, the agency and its industrial contractors continue to provide security and scientific benefits for an earth-bound society while pushing forward the frontiers of aerospace technology.” {Finance, 4/72)
Consolidation of all engineering and development functions of Federal Aviation Administration into new service, Systems Research and Development Service (srds), was announced by faa. Spencer S. Hunn, head of faa’s National Airspace System Program Office, would head new service, which would incorporate naspo. (faa Release 72—170)
Soviet scientists were studying “collective effect” accelerators with high-current electrons to achieve very high energies needed to split atoms at lower cost and effort than by larger traditional accelerators. Traditional circular accelerators raised energy of electrons 50 mev per m. Collective-effect principle increased energy gain to 1000 mev per m. Very-high-current electron accelerators had been developed in U.S. and U.S.S.R. to generate beams of relativistic electrons with speeds close to velocity of light. (Shabad, NYT, 5/7/72, 64) May 8:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed space prospects in interview published in U.S. News & World Report: Chances of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. mission were “quite good.” It hadn’t been decided “exactly how it would work, but there might be two or three astronauts and the same number of cosmonauts.” U.S.S.R. probably would be “very active” in manned space flight until U.S. space shuttle was flying in 1978. “So it may appear that we have lost our leadership during that period.” U.S.S.R. would “try to be first in something— probably with manned and unmanned missions” during 1974 to 1978. “If and when they land men on the moon—even if they land on the same side . . . where we landed—that would attract a lot of public attention. ... If they were to land on the far side of the moon, that would be even more spectacular.” It would also be spectacular, Dr. Fletcher said, if U.S.S.R. announced it was “putting up a space station as the first step in a program to get to Mars.” Gap in U.S. space program had been caused by “series of things” including cancellation of two Apollos. “We probably should have worked it so that the shuttle would be operating earlier, but we spent a lot of time studying the shuttle—and that was good. . . .” Only possible fill-in was to “fly more Apollo components, and we are looking at that possibility. We have leftover Saturn rockets and leftover com-mand-and-service modules, and we’re looking to see if they can be used between 1974 and 1978.” It would take another Sputnik to accelerate U.S. space program to peak force, “but I don’t see that it’s necessary. ... I honestly think that we could do a reasonably good job on the budget that we’ve programmed for the ’70s. I think the main problem with the five-year gap is going to be loss of national prestige during the period.” Space program critics and decreasing space budget “may have a negative impact on people wanting to stay with the space program.” If there were no gap-filling missions, “we may have to phase part of the astronaut group into some other kinds of work while we wait for the shuttle.” When shuttle was operational it would “enable us to make space flight a routine event. Maybe we’ll have an every Monday-morning flight out to space. This will change the nature of what we do in space completely. When we can get into space cheaply, easily, quickly and routinely, this will open up space for new ventures at present not predictable.” (US News, 5/8/72)
Appointment of William H. Rock, Assistant Program Manager for Apollo-Skylab Programs, as Manager of new Sciences and Applications Office at Kennedy Space Center was announced by Ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus. New office would become KSC’s interface with NASA’s Office of Applications, (ksc Release 279-72)
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)
Delivery to Dulles International Airport of arts iii—computerized automated radar terminal system to improve air traffic handling in busy terminal areas—was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. System processed radar beacon signals emitted by airborne transponders giving aircraft identity and altitude and presented information on radar displays for air traffic controllers, (faa Release 72-19) January 30:	First of four lunar eclipses to occur during 1972 was partially visible in portions of North and South America. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory spokesman said later that 37-min eclipse was not seen over Northeastern U.S. because of cloud cover. (NYT, 1/29/72, 19; 1/31/72, 3) January 31—February 23: European Space Research Organization’s 117-kg (257-lb) Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite was launched by NASA from Western Test Range by three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta (DSV-3L) booster at 9:20 am pst. Orbital parameters: 244 011-km (151621.4-mi) apogee, 416-km (258.5-mi) perigee, and 90.2° inclination. All vehicle systems monitored during launch functioned normally. Second burn of 2nd stage and ignition and burnout of 3rd stage occurred over Indian Ocean south of African continent. By Feb. 6 all flight experiments had been turned on and were working properly and all spacecraft systems were still functioning normally Feb. 23. On Feb. 18 NASA officially judged mission successful. Primary NASA objective was to place spacecraft into orbit that would permit successful achievement of esro scientific objectives and provide tracking and telemetry support. Satellite—16-sided cylinder with 70% of its outer surface covered with solar cells—carried seven experiments to investigate strength and direction of magnetic fields, energy distribution of protons and electrons, and nature of solar winds; make very-low-frequency solar observations; and detect micrometeorites. Heos 2 was second heos mission. Heos 1 had been launched Dec. 5, 1968, and was still in orbit. After orbital insertion, spacecraft was controlled from European Space Operations Center (esoc) and tracked by European Space Tracking Stations (estrack). European Space Technology Center (estec) was responsible for project management and would reimburse NASA $6.6 million for booster and prelaunch and launch support services, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-17; GSFC SSR, 1/31/72) January 31:	Mathematica, Inc., published Economic Analysis of the Space Shuttle System. Report of study directed by Klaus P. Heiss and Oskar Morgenstern under nasa contract concluded development of space shuttle system was economically feasible assuming level of space activity equal to average of U.S. unmanned space program of past eight years; thrust-assisted orbiter shuttle (taos) with external hydrogen and oxygen tanks was economically preferred choice among current shuttle configurations; and choice of thrust assist for orbiter shuttle was still open, with pressure-fed boosters and solid-fuel rocket motors, either using parallel burn, as main economic alternatives. Third economic choice was use of series-burn boosters. (Text)
Two press briefings were held at nasa Hq., Apollo 16 Mission Director’s press briefing and press conference on medical aspects of Apollo 15 and 16. In first, press was told hypergolic loading of propellants had begun and countdown demonstration test with fueled spacecraft would begin March 29. msc was continuing simulations, and prime recovery ship would leave San Diego March 23 and Pearl Harbor April 8 to take position. Launch preparations were proceeding on schedule toward liftoff at 12:45 pm est April 16. Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee said one purpose of microbial ecology evaluation device (meed; experiment to carry fungi and bacteria) on Apollo 16 was to prepare for future Skylab missions. In Skylab “we are going to have some evas and some of these bacteria, fungi, are on the suit before they go out. So the idea is to find out is there anything when we bring those suits back in and stow them for long periods of time like we are going to have on Skylab, do we have anything that we should be considering or concerned about as far as mutants and so forth.” Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover had been improved with new seatbelts that could be hung up out of way when not in use and with extra circuit breaker to permit deployment of TV after third extravehicular activity period, lrv would not cover as much distance on Apollo 16 as on Apollo 15. “We are planning 25.2 kilometers [15.7 miles] . . . because that gets us to our primary objectives,” not including 10% wander factor for missing craters. (Transcript) In second briefing, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, explained medical problems and procedures on Apollo 15 and changes for Apollo 16. Major concerns on Apollo 15 were cardiac arrhythmia—irregular heart rhythm—and fluid-electrolyte imbalance, with severe loss of potassium. Cardiac arrhythmia occurred occasionally in normal persons and frequently in college students, apparently as a result of fatigue from all-night studying, adrenalin increase from apprehension about grades, drug effect from drinking coffee to stay awake, and heavy workload. Fatigue, adrenalin increase, drug effect, and heavy workload also acted on astronauts. Fluid-electrolyte imbalance was dependent upon intake in food and drink and output in breath, sweat, and body wastes. In space, balance was affected by weightlessness, acceleration, 100%-oxygen atmosphere, abnormal work-rest cycle, and sustained work loads. Countermeasures that could be taken were better control of intake, supplementing electrolytes with intravenous fluids, coordinating exercise, providing lower body negative pressure, and optimizing work-rest cycles. Medical objectives for Apollo 16 were essentially same as for Apollo 15: to ensure crew safety medically, to improve probability of mission success by providing necessary medical information, and to detect and understand changes incident to space flight and learn more about effects of space flight on man. To improve medical wellbeing of Apollo 16 astronauts, 72-hr preflight controlled-diet period would determine amount of potassium needed by each crew member. Since potassium could not be preloaded, small amounts of extra potassium would be given in daily diet in flight to ensure adequacy. In addition to regular preflight cardiovascular examination, x-rays of astronauts’ hearts would be taken before and after mission to determine whether heart size decreased during flight. Skylab equipment would be used in flight for electroencephalogram, electrocardiogram, and electro-oculogram. Other inflight medical changes were daily sample of improved electrocardiogram data, option to alter bioharness wearing schedule, expansion of crew status report, high-potassium diets with potassium-enriched beverages and snack supplements, measurement of food and fluid intake and urine and fecal output, return to earth of urine and fecal samples for analysis, and provision of anti-arrhythmic drugs lidocaine, procainamide, and atropine. Dr. Berry also announced that Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who had been removed from Aurora 7 mission (May 24, 1962) and NASA flight status 10 yrs ago because of possible heart malfunction, had been returned to NASA and Federal Aviation Administration flight status. Evidence of atrial fibrillation found in 1959 and treated until 1969 had disappeared and tests completed recently had shown “perfectly normal cardiac function and cardiac anatomy.” First space flight for which Slayton could be eligible would be proposed joint mission with U.S.S.R. (Transcript)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, warned of challenges to U.S. leadership in technology if U.S. did not proceed in space shuttle development. In speech before Advertising Club of Baltimore he said: “The problem is very real. Last year, the United States for the first time had an annual trade deficit, a negative balance of trade, of over $2 billion. But this deficit would have been three times that amount—$6 billion—had it not been for a favorable balance of almost $4 billion achieved in the aerospace field.” Decision to proceed with space shuttle “provides a needed tool for the space program, and it will keep the United States strong in advanced technology.” (Text)
NASA held 14th Annual Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C. Guest speaker Caspar W. Weinberger, Director of Office of Management and Budget, said: “A country needs—even a country as great as America— to be reminded of its greatness from time to time. And that is the thing of overwhelming importance that NASA has done .... They have reminded us, at a time when we desperately need it, of our greatness. They have taken us out of the aura of self-criticism and of doubt . . . and given us a set of accomplishments that will be not only very hard to match, but a set of accomplishments in which every one of us . . . should take enormous pride.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented Outstanding Leadership Medal to Leonard Jaffe, Acting Director of Earth Observation Programs, for management of Earth Resources Survey program. He presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. William R. Lucas, Marshall Space Flight Center Deputy Director, for exceptional contributions to Apollo program; to Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, and Dr. Hans Mark, Ames Research Center Director, for management achievements; and to Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., for Apollo science achievements. Secretary of the Interior Rogers C. B. Morton presented posthumous medal for Dr. William T. Pecora, late Under Secretary of the Interior, to Mrs. Pecora. Award was in recognition of work on Earth Resources Observation Systems (eros) program. Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering, Inc., for work on cosmic rays and to Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, Cal Tech physicist, for work on lunar samples. Third awardee, Dr. Brian O’Brien, physicist on NASA Space Program Advisory Council, was unable to be present. Group Achievement Award was presented to Atlas Centaur Project Team, Hq., Lewis Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center; Deep Space Maser Development Group, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; Digital Fly-by-Wire Project Team, Flight Research Center; Earth Resources Technology Satellite Project Team, Goddard Space Flight Center; Oao 3 Project Team, arc, gsfc, ksc, and jpl; Pioneer 6-9 Project Team, Hq.; Quiet Engine Team, LeRC; and Space Shuttle Technology Project Team, Hq. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 41 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 20. (Program; NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 245; NASA Hist Off; Huntsville Times, 11/9/72)
Dept, of Transportation would begin priority program to establish quiet, short-haul air transportation system to relieve airport congestion and noise, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe said in speech before Air Line Pilots Assn, in Washington, D.C. Federal Aviation Administration would designate certain existing U.S. airports as short-haul airports and develop strict standards on noise and pollution compatible with the community, (dot Release 49-72)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
Huntsville (Ala.) Times editorial criticized attitude of Democratic presidential candidate Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) toward U.S. space program: “The McGovern space-budget figure of $2 billion may not seem a paltry sum to many taxpayers and voters. But it becomes a piddling figure . . . when compared Avith massive governmental outlays for farm price-supports and other questionable multibillion-dollar expenditures. And even in endorsing this minimal space effort, Senator McGovern stresses the negative aspect of not wanting to see additional thousands of aerospace employees thrown out of work, rather than emphasizing the positive contributions of space to the expansion of man’s scientific knowledge, to the strengthening of the technological know-how of American industry, and to the enhancement of the nation’s image throughout the world.” (Huntsville Times, 9/11/72) September 11—13:	American Society of Mechanical Engineers held annual Aerospace Div. Conference at Anaheim, Calif. Application of aerospace technology to societal problems and future of space exploration were discussed by officials of NASA; National Science Foundation; Depts. of Commerce, Transportation, and Interior; state and local governments; industry; and education. Aviation’s role in earth resources surveys was described in paper by Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson and Airborne Science Office Chief Donald R. Mulholland of Ames Research Center: “At the present time, 275 companies are engaged in aerial surveys, but less than 50 of these are equipped for nonphotographic remote sensing. New sensor technology growing from and stimulated by the space program has made it possible to obtain vastly improved data.” Federal Aviation Administration data showed that in 1971 “some 230 aircraft were used for aerial surveys and another 31 for patrolling.” ARC used general-aviation, high-altitude research, and four-engine jet transportation craft. Remote sensing from aircraft provided data to improve environment, conserve natural resources, and contribute to economic growth. “The sensors required . . . are evolving rapidly, in part from well-established aerial reconnaissance technology, and in part from technology developed for the space program.” asme Spirit of St. Louis Award was presented to Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man on moon, for “meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics.” (asme Release 7/18/72; NASA Activities, 10/15/72, 207-10) September 11-October 1:	Series of six stratospheric balloons were launched to altitudes from 58 000 to 41000 m (125 000 to 135 000 ft) from Cape Girardeau Municipal Airport, Mo., in project directed by Navy’s Office of Naval Research and Raven Industries, Inc., in cooperation with four universities and NASA. Balloons, with volumes from 310 000 to 937 000 cu m (11 000 000 to 33 100 000 cu ft), achieved all flight objectives. Sept. 11 flight carried instruments from Univ. of New Hampshire to study charge and isotopical composition of cosmic radiation particles and two ionization chambers from Atomic Energy Commission and Rice Univ. Sept. 14 flight carried Washington Univ., St. Louis, experiments, including one to measure isotopic abundances of silicon, sulfur, calcium, and iron nuclei. On Sept. 14 and 24, Enrico Fermi Institute, Chicago Univ., counter experiments were launched to measure nuclear composition of very-high-energy cosmic rays. Univ. of California, at Riverside experiment was launched Sept. 19 to measure albedo neutrons from earth and solar neutrons from solar flares and quiet sun. Sixth flight, Oct. 1, carried Goddard Space Flight Center experiment to measure flux of very-high-energy cosmic rays. (Navy, onr Field Representative [Navy Balloon Proj])
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden participated in pregame pageant at 1972 Orange Bowl Classic football game in Miami. Pageant, “The First Decade,” was dedicated to U.S. space program. (NASA Activities, 2/15/72, 35) January 2:	Research in U.S. was shifting from pure to practical, Thomas O’Toole wrote in Washington Post. “Changes that stress practicality have already been made to parts of U.S. science, but they’re scarcely detectable against the $16 billion the federal government spends every year to support U.S. science and technology. One of the few programs of any size begun by the Nixon administration is a $49 million project at the National Science Foundation code-named rann—for Research Applied to National Needs, rann supports a host of small programs aimed at improving things like subways, cancer treatment, earthquake forecasts and sewers.” Changes within NASA required “little new money, but they serve to spotlight the emphasis the Nixon administration places on the practical goals of science. In the last six months NASA has taken on study projects from the Departments of Commerce, Interior, and Transportation— none of which involves space exploration. The space agency also has a contract from the National Science Foundation to investigate the use of solar cells (used on most unmanned spacecraft) to electrify homes and buildings. It has another contract from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to look into ways an apartment complex might recycle its sewage and water the way future astronauts will do inside their spacecraft.” (W Post, 1/3/72, Al) 9-12 in experiments, demonstrations, or activities to be performed by astronauts during 1973 Skylab missions. NASA would select 25 proposals on basis of compatibility with Skylab requirements. Selectees and their teachers would attend Skylab Educational Conference and award presentation at Kennedy Space Center at Skylab launch time. NASA would build required hardware in consultation with students. Regional and national selectees would be announced in April, (nasa Release 72-1)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in letter to New York Times, criticized interpretation of shuttle economics in Jan. 25 Times article: “nasa has a good record on cost estimating, as demonstrated by bringing in the Apollo program below the original estimates. Even if a contingency amount of $1 billion should be required to overcome unforeseen problems beyond those provided in the $5.5 billion estimates, the combined total for development and initial investment will be substantially below the $10 billion to $14 billion estimate in the Times.” (NYT, 2/7/72)
NASA officials testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, presented program request with increased emphasis on technology for “solving urgent domestic civil air transportation problems of noise and congestion,” continuing concern for “rapidly growing foreign competition” to U.S. leadership in world aircraft markets, greater attention to “countering the erosion of this Nation’s preeminence in military aeronautics,” phase-over in space shuttle technology from exploratory activities to development support, continuing focus on space technology for advanced earth-orbit systems and outer planet exploration, change in emphasis from development of large nuclear rocket to continuing the technology base for nuclear propulsion, with focus on small high-energy system. Budget also included continuing reduction of research staff and emphasis on upgrading existing facilities, with no new facilities requested. In aeronautics, advanced system studies in FY 1971 and FY 1972 had examined application to new subsonic and sonic aircraft designs of projected advances in aerodynamics, structures, propulsion, controls, and avionics; identified technology advances offering greatest economic and competitive position benefits; and defined actions to “bring the advanced technologies to a state of readiness for industry utilization by the late 1970s.” Follow-on studies would be conducted in FY 1973 on “additional noise alleviation possibilities and on terminal compatibility.” Application of supercritical aerodynamics and configuration treatment, engine noise and emission suppression techniques, composite structures, and use of active control systems “were shown to result in a quieter, safer, more economical subsonic/sonic transport having greater productivity than the current wide-body jet transports.” In FY 1973 “aerodynamics effort will concentrate on refinements of supercritical wing and related configuration treatment for transport concepts capable of increased flight efficiency.” David S. Gabriel, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office, testified on office’s on-going work after termination of nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program June 30, 1972: “To reach the outer planets in reasonably short trip times during the 1980’s requires more advanced propulsion systems than are currently available. Among the candidate propulsion systems for these missions is a small, approximately 15,000-pound-thrust [66 720-newton-thrust] nuclear rocket engine, more suited to these unmanned outer planet missions than the large NERVA engine. Other candidates include high-performance chemical rockets and solar-and-nuclear-electric propulsion. “For the balance of this fiscal year and during the next, we will compare . . . candidate propulsion systems for a variety of future potential missions of the 1980’s and 1990’s including the outer planet exploration missions.” (Transcript)
Geraldine Cobb, former NASA employee, had piloted twin engine Islander aircraft for average six hours daily during 15-day search for survivors of Lockheed Electra airliner that crashed in Peruvian jungle Dec. 24, 1971, with 92 aboard, Reuters reported. Miss Cobb, who had picked up only survivor of crash and had flown her to missionary settlement, had passed all NASA tests to become astronaut, Reuters said. She had been “No. 1 choice to be the first woman to fly an Apollo mission until the space program was cut back and it became clear that no woman would be selected by nasa.” (B Sun, 1/12/72, A2)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released statement from San Clemente, Calif., following President’s announcement of decision to proceed with development of space shuttle. Decision was consistent with NASA FY 1972 budget and was “a most historic step in the nation’s space program—it will change the nature of what man can do in space. By the end of this decade the nation will have the means of getting men and equipment to and from space routinely, on a moment’s notice if necessary, and at a small fraction of today’s cost. This will be done within the framework of a useful total space program of science, exploration, and applications at approximately the present overall level of the space budget.” Dr. Fletcher described shuttle as “airplane-like orbiter, about the size of a DC—9 . . . capable of carrying into orbit and back again to earth useful payloads up to 15 feet [4.6 metersl in diameter by 60 feet [18 meters] long, and weighing up to 65,000 lbs [29 500 kg]. Fuel for the orb iter’s liquid-hydrogen liquid-oxygen engines will be carried in an external tank that will be jettisoned in orbit.” Orbiter would be launched by unmanned booster and would operate in space for one week, during which crew could launch, service, or recover unmanned spacecraft; would perform experiments; and, in future, would resupply and restaff space modules brought to space by shuttle. He cited reasons “space shuttle is important and is the right step in manned space flight and the U.S. space program.” First, “the shuttle is the only meaningful new manned space program which can be accomplished on a modest budget. Second, the space shuttle is needed to make space operations less complex and less costly. Third, the space shuttle is needed to do useful things. Fourth, the shuttle will encourage greater international participation in space flight.” Dr. Fletcher said NASA and contractors would focus until late February on technical areas, including comparisons of pressure-fed liquid- and solid-fuel rocket-motor options for shuttle’s booster stage, before NASA issued requests for proposals in the spring. “This summer we will place the space shuttle under contract and development work will start.” At press conference in San Clemente following release of shuttle statements, Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Low discussed President’s decision. Dr. Fletcher said President was “particularly anxious that I stress the international aspects of this. This program will be open to all nations of the world, and it is his hope some day that foreign visitors from all over the world will be able to participate by moving to and from space in the space shuttle.” NASA anticipated that “at its peak, the direct employment on the space shuttle will be of the order of 50,000 individuals. Of course, a great many of those will be employed in this area.” Responding to question, Dr. Fletcher said decision on shuttle launch site, “which will be the same as the landing site,” depended on recommendation of launch site selection group. “It is not necessarily Cape Kennedy or any other site at this time.” (Text: Transcript)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 16: While space program had been “worth the money,” it was “just a well that this is the next to last manned mission; the most promise henceforth will be in earth-orbital projects. The Soviets appear to be investing much more heavily in those than the United States.” (W Star, 4/15/72, A4) April 15—16:	Wallops Station held open house as part of joint program of Federal activities. Displays included moon rock and Apollo spacesuit. Television set was available for visitors to watch Apollo 16 launch on April 16. (Wallops Release 72-5) Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 175.9km (109.3-mi) apogee and 166.7-km (103.6-mi) perigee. Insertion into trajectory toward moon was achieved at 2:34 get in spite of minor anomalies—leak in instrument unit (iu) temperature control system’s gaseous nitrogen bottle pressure and malfunction of S—IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) helium regulators, which caused continuous venting. CSM separation from Lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:05 GET and docking with LM was shown on color TV for 18 min. First S-1VB APS burn was near nominal, but because of helium depletion and potential trajectory disturbances, second bum was not made and S-IVB lunar impact operations were terminated. Tracking of stage ended at 27:09 get when IU signal was lost. S-IVB impacted lunar surface at 75:08 get (4:02 pm EST April 19) at point estimated to be 1.8° north latitude and 23.3° west longitude. Impact was detected by seismometers at Apollo 12, 14, and 15 sites. Unexplained light-colored particles streaming from LM close-out panel during docking were reported by crew at 7:18 GET. Young and Duke entered lm, powered up, and found all systems normal. Grasslike particles, shown on cm TV, were later identified as shredded thermal paint, but degraded thermal protection was not expected to affect LM operations. First midcourse correction (MCC—1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Electrophoresis demonstration began on schedule at 25:05 get and appeared to be successful, from crew’s description of reaction of charged particles in liquid. Ultraviolet (uv) photographs of earth from 107 300 km (66 700 mi) and 216 600 km (134 600 mi) were taken as planned. Duke reported “spectacular” view of half earth from 201 000-km (125 000-mi) altitude when he could see sun shining on only half of planet. During MCC-2, made at 30:39 get, services propulsion system (sps) tank pressure anomaly that had occurred earlier in mission was tracked and minor leak in transducer reference cavity was located. Procedures were sent to crew to account for transducer reading. Visual light flash experiment was started about two hours late, at 49:10 get, because of problem in aligning spacecraft. Duke counted 70 white, instantaneous light flashes that left no after-glow, uv photography of earth at 327 800 km (203 700 mi) was completed as planned. Young and Duke entered lm at 53:50 get for two-hour checkout of LM systems. All system checks were nominal. Scientific instrument module (sim) door jettisoned at 69:59 get. csm—lm undocking and separation maneuver was conducted on schedule at 96:14 get. When Young and Duke came from behind moon in lm, Duke told Mission Control his helmet was full of orange juice. Duke’s microphone apparently had become entangled with tube through which he drank juice stored in his spacesuit. “Every time I turn my head I get orange juice. It’s delicious . . . hut it’s better in your mouth than floating around the cockpit. I’ve already had an orange shampoo.” When Mattingly came from behind moon in csm he reported he had not conducted circularization burn because of malfunction in SPS yaw gimbal servo loop. While flight controllers evaluated problem, LM-powered descent-initiate maneuver was delayed, and LM and CSM maneuvered into station-keeping mode prepared to dock or continue landing procedures. Analysis of problem identified malfunction in secondary circuit that would not preclude lunar landing. Second separation maneuver by CSM with RCS burn was performed and LM began descent to moon on 16th revolution. LM Orion touched down in moon’s Descartes region 230 m (755 ft) northwest of planned target point at 104:30 GET (9:23 pm EST April 20). “Wow, down. Old Orion is finally here, Houston. Fantastic,” Duke exclaimed. “All we’ve got to do is jump out the hatch and we’ve got plenty of rocks.” Duke and Young said site was rolling country surrounded by mountains and covered with big boulders. Sunlight was so bright it washed out moon’s colors and made lunar surface appear white. Since LM had stayed in lunar orbit six hours longer than planned it was powered down to conserve electrical power and first extravehicular activity (EVA-1) was rescheduled to follow sleep period. EVA-1 began at 119:05 get (11:59 am est April 21). Young climbed down ladder and stepped onto lunar surface. “Okay, Cayley Plains,” he said, “Apollo 16 is gonna change your image.” Duke followed and astronauts began deploying experiments. Because of problems with LM antenna astronauts’ first steps on moon—for first time—were not beamed back to earth. Once Young and Duke set up portable antenna, TV signal and communication with ground controllers were received clearly on earth. TV pictures showed bleak, pale surface resembling Apollo 15 site, with flat-topped Smoky Mountain to north and Stone Mountain to south. Astronauts said site was rockier, more hilly, and more cratered than previous landing sites. Soil was firm, with rocks scattered over 30% of the surface and small craters covering 70%. During deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) Young tripped over heat flow experiment (hfe) cable, pulling it from connector after Duke had drilled first bore hole. Mission Control later developed way to repair $1.2-million experiment, but procedure was not used because it would have been too complex and too time consuming and included some risk to other ALSEP components. U.S. flag and remaining ALSEP components were deployed successfully and functioned nominally. Crew deployed lrv and found ampere readings for battery No. 2 off-scale low and rear steering inoperable. About 40 min later, after loading, all meters and rear steering operated properly and LRV performed nominally throughout remainder of EVA. Young and Duke explored Flag, Spook, Plum, and Buster Craters and collected 20 kg (44 lbs) of samples, including number of white rocks. One crystalline rock coated with bluish glass appeared to have same texture as anorthosite “Genesis rock” collected on Apollo 15 mission; another was pure white. Some were flecked with green and black glass, some were black and gray, and one weighed about 6% kg (14 lbs). EVA-1 terminated at 126:16 get after 7 hrs 11 min 11 sec. After resting inside LM and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:51 get (11:33 am est April 22). They explored Survey Ridge and Stone Mountain and said ridge was pockmarked with small, subdued craters, most about one meter {three feet) wide and some containing smaller craters within main crater. Area around South Ray Crater was strewn with sharp boulders and resembled crater in Nevada where astronauts had trained. Young and Duke turned on lrv TV so viewers could watch them walking and collecting samples high up on slope of Stone Mountain. They reported seeing more of previously discovered white soil under gray surface layers and said soil was very loosely consolidated. While ascending ridge and traversing very rocky terrain, LRV rear wheels failed to respond at full throttle, lrv continued to move, hut front wheels were digging in. Troubleshooting procedures identified mismatch of power mode switching. After change in switch configuration lrv worked properly. Astronauts took core samples and collected rocks that appeared to be volcanic, a greenish rock shaped like a snake’s head, and pure crystalline rocks. EVA was televised in color with lrv camera and was extended 20 min. During crew’s return to LM, 5-cm (2-in) portion of Young’s portable life support system (plss) antenna broke off, causing 15- to 18-db drop in signal strength. EVA—2 ended at 150:14 get after 7 hrs 23 min 26 sec. Third eva began 30 min early at 165:45 get (10:27 am est April 23)	to allow additional time near North Ray Crater and two other stations. Astronauts chipped off samples from enormous basalt rock the size of a house. All planned activities were accomplished, but astronauts had trouble configuring cosmic ray detector for stowage and return to earth, lrv covered 9% km (6 mi) and reached 17 km per hr (11 mph) going down 15° slope. TV coverage was excellent throughout eva. Total EVA-3 time was 5 hrs 40 min 14 sec—bringing total eva time to 20 hrs 14 min 54 sec and total distance traversed to 27.1 km (16.8 mi). While LM was on moon, Mattingly, orbiting moon in Casper, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. He radioed information to geologists at Mission Control to help them plan EVA—3 exploration of Stone Mountain and determine best way to approach North Ray Crater. He located radioactive hot spot on eastern edge of Ocean of Storms south of Apollo 14 landing site and gamma spectrometer identified thorium, potassium, and uranium. Mattingly also discovered, on far side of moon, volcanic lava flows that resembled maria flows and spilled out over northeast rim of crater high in mountains near lunar equator. Two areas resembled volcanic flows around Flagstaff, Ariz., where crew had trained. Many large basins on moon’s far side appeared to be covered with same kind of material that covered area around Apollo 16 site. Young and Duke depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 96.6 kg (213 lbs) of lunar samples at 175:44 get (8:26 pm est April 24). Liftoff was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully and LM crew transferred samples, film, and equipment to CSM. For first time docking was not seen on TV, because LM steerable antenna was inoperable. LM jettison was delayed one day so that astronauts could rest. After LM jettison at 195:12 GET, LM lost altitude and began tumbling, apparently because circuit breaker in attitude-and-translation-controller assembly’s primary guidance and navigation system had accidentally been left open. LM ascent stage remained in lunar orbit and was expected to impact lunar surface in about one year. Boom that carried instrument to measure atmosphere of moon was jettisoned because it would not retract and might have broken off. Orbit-shaping maneuvers were canceled to avoid firing of SPS because of degraded backup SPS thrust vector control. Scientific Subsatellite was launched at 196:14 get (4:56 est April 24)	into lunar orbit with 123.3-km (76.6-mi) apolune and 97.9-km (60.8-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 40-kg (90-lb) satellite 77 cm long and 36 cm in diameter (30 x 14 in) carried three experiments. Subsatellite extended three 1%-m (5-ft) booms, two with magnetometer sensors to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and third for stabilization. Spacecraft also carried particle shadows and boundary layer experiment to collect data on plasmas and solar flares and S-band transponder to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Expected lifetime was 6 to 9 mos—shorter than 12 mos planned because shaping burn to optimize orbit had not been performed—but Subsatellite crashed into moon May 29. Transearth injection maneuver at 200:33 get put CSM on trajectory for earth after 114 hrs 5 min (65 revolutions) in lunar orbit. April 25-27:	Good-quality TV pictures of receding moon from inside CM and of lunar surface from LRV on moon were transmitted between 227 and 229 get. At 243:35 get (3:43 pm est April 25) Mattingly left CSM for inflight EVA to retrieve panoramic and mapping camera film cassettes from SIM on SM. Mattingly made two trips, during which he observed condition of instruments, reported that insulation paint near rocket nozzle was blistered, and deployed and exposed microbial ecological evaluation device (meed) experiment for 10 min. He reentered CSM after 1 hr 24 min. Scheduled TV press conference began at 268:13 GET and ended at 268:31 GET. Astronauts briefly described moon’s far side, including crater Guyot, which seemed to be so full of material that it overflowed and spilled down side of the crater. CM separated from SM at 290:08 GET, 15 min before entry interface at 121900-m (400 000-ft) altitude. Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and CM splashed down and flipped upside-down in mid-Pacific about 5 km (3 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 2:44 pm EST April 27, after 11-day 2-hr (265-hr 51-min) mission. After flipping spacecraft upright by inflating air bags, astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, left CM and were carried by helicopter to biomed area on recovery ship for postflight examinations. After being declared in excellent condition, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. Young had lost 3% kg (7% lbs); Mattingly, 3 kg (6V2 lbs); and Duke, 2% kg (5% lbs), but all were “euphoric, hungry and thirsty, and walking well.” CM was retrieved and placed in dolly on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 16 objectives: to make selenologi-cal survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Descartes region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased EVA operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for lack of rate feedback in thrust vector control and yaw oscillations that delayed lunar landing, caused revision of lunar surface activities, and necessitated end of mission one day earlier than planned. All anomalies were quickly analyzed and resolved or compensated for by workaround procedures developed to permit mission to continue. Flight crew performance was excellent. Minor errors made by crew were attributed to fatigue and did not preclude mission success. Mission was officially judged a success. Accomplishments included largest payload (34 518 kg; 76100 lbs) placed in lunar orbit, first cosmic ray detector deployed on lunar surface, first use of far-UV camera on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (71 hrs 14 min), longest lunar surface EVA (20 hrs 15 min), and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth (96.6 kg; 213 lbs). In addition, astronauts returned 3793.5 m (12 446 ft) of exposed film used on lunar surface and in lunar orbit. Apollo 16 was 13th Apollo mission to date, 10th manned Apollo mission, and 5th successful manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 15 had been conducted July 26-Aug. 7, 1971. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-64K; NYT, 4/16-30/72; W Post, 4/16-28/72; W Star, 4/16-28/72; B Sun, 4/18/72, Al; AP, New Haven Register, 4/21/72) April 16:	Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko—first Soviet dignitary to accept invitation to watch Apollo launch—described his reaction to launch to press at Kennedy Space Center. “It was beautiful, it was poetry. It was a great impression.” Yevtushenko said he had been even more impressed on his midnight visit to the floodlit launch pad with astronaut David R. Scott, “It’s really a beautiful show, this white tender body of a rocket, supported by the clumsy but sometimes tender hands of the red gantry tower. I absolutely had the feeling of one big brother embracing his sister before a long way, a long road. It was wonderful. Silence, not people. No press. Nothing. The sky, the ground, the rocket. It was so beautiful.” (Witkin, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)
President Nixon’s decision that proposed joint Federal Aviation Administration and European Space Research Organization aeronautical satellite program should be “substantially redirected” was conveyed to Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe in memo from Presidential Assistant, Dr. Henry A. Kissinger. Memo said joint program was “not in accord with Administration policy.” Every effort would be made to reassure esro governments that U.S. “fully supports international cooperation in space even though it cannot accept the specific proposals contained in the current draft faa/esro Memorandum of Understanding.” (Av Wk, 2/21/72, 17; Aug, W Star, 2/11/72)
U.S.S.R. said it would conduct missile-carrier tests in Pacific through Dec. 31. It warned ships and aircraft to steer clear of area about 2400 km (1500 mi) east of Japan. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 11/24/72, Al; AP, B Sun, 10/24/72, 6) November 24:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of first launch of Aerobee sounding rocket on Nov. 24, 1947, from White Sands Missile Range. Launch had been unsuccessful; rocket carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload had veered off course and had been destroyed. But since then arrowshaped Aerobee had been busiest booster in U.S. space program, with launch rate of almost one per week and few failures out of 900 launches to date. Aerobees carrying scientific payloads to altitudes as high as 480 km (300 mi) had been launched by NASA, Air Force, Navy, and Federal scientific groups. Launches were mainly from NASA’s Wallops Station, White Sands Missile Range, and Fort Churchill Range in Manitoba, Canada. Aerobee—most widely used rocket in astronomy—had carried delicate instruments through blanket of air and dirt surrounding earth to area of greater visibility. Instruments launched June 13, 1969, by NASA on Aerobee 150 from Natal, Brazil, had detected x-ray star only 16 km (10 mi) wide that weighed as much as sun. Scientists at Univ. of California who conducted experiment had said stellar object might be first direct evidence of neutron star and first time size of x-ray source from deep space could be determined. Other scientific payloads aboard Aerobees had measured Crab Nebula, collected micrometeoroids, taken temperatures aloft, and recorded air densities. In 1952 Air Force Aerobee carried two monkeys and two mice in biomedical experiments. Rocket originally weighed 700 kg (1600 lbs), was 5.8 m (19 ft) long, and carried payloads under 45 kg (100 lbs). Over years Aerobee had grown to be 15 m (50 ft) long, powered by four clustered, liquid-fuel engines and solid-fuel booster. Largest Aerobee could blast 400-kg (900-lb) payload to altitude of 200 km (125 mi). (Lyons, NYT, 11/26/72, 39; A&A 1915-1950)
President Nixon accepted resignation of John H. Chafee as Secretary of the Navy, effective at undetermined date. President also submitted to Congress nomination of r/a Allen L. Powell to succeed r/a Don A. Jones as Director of National Ocean Survey in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Dept, of Commerce, r/a Jones was retiring effective April 30. Senate confirmed nomination of Powell May 3. {PD, 4/10/72, 722, 725, 737; CR, 5/3/72, D484) April 4-6:	Moscow meeting of NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences delegations confirmed desirability of joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking test mission and established understanding on management and operation of mission to be conducted in 1975, subject to government approval. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, led U.S. delegation. Soviet delegation was headed by Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, Acting President of Soviet Academy. Parties agreed to use of U.S. Apollo spacecraft and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft with systems developed by both sides, to specific documents for development of joint documentation, and to principles for preparatory and operational phases of mission. (Summary of results; NASA Release 5/24/72) April 5:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences continued hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified that LeRC quiet engine program was proceeding on schedule: “Tests of full-scale fans for the engine have revealed much new information on the interrelationships among noise, aerodynamic performance, and structural integrity. The complete experimental engine will be operated in about 6 months. Results . . . indicate that we may expect to better the original noise abatement goals. Program results are given to industry on a continuing hasis. . . . We can expect some of our improvements to be adopted by industry in new engine designs before completion of our program.” NASA—aec Spade Nuclear Systems Office Manager Milton Klein testified: “Reactor power sources will be required to provide power in amounts greater than a few kilowatts for many of the missions of the future. For unmanned military satellites, radiation hardening—mandatory for certain military missions—and low recurring costs for multiple missions are important advantages of small reactor systems. For unmanned NASA earth orbit missions, reactors become cost effective above a few kilowatts, a power range needed for such applications missions as communications satellites. In manned missions . . . overriding advantage of reactor systems is their ability to accommodate unforeseen large increases in power demand.” Advanced reactor systems were needed for electric propulsion systems capable of high energy missions to far planets. Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski reported that satellite network included 10 electronic ground stations operated by NASA, supplemented by optical tracking network operated by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Electronic stations provided worldwide system that tracked each satellite, determined status of onboard systems, commanded satellite functions, and acquired data. Optical stations, which included laser capabilities at selected sites, provided specialized services in precision orbital tracking. (Transcript)
Newspapers continued editorial comment on decision to develop space New York Times: “The space shuttle is far less expensive than the Apollo project, and, fortunately, is not being launched in the atmosphere of Cold War hysteria that attended the birth of the lunar landing effort. On the contrary, NASA has already stated publicly it would welcome cooperation on the space shuttle from other industrially developed nations, including the Soviet Union. The argument that the space shuttle is simply another SST boondoggle has little validity. The potential benefits are far greater, and the space shuttle presents none of the environmental problems that counted so heavily against the supersonic transport.” (NYT, 1/8/72, 28) Detroit News: “It is good that the $24 billion outlay on the Apollo moon program is not to he wasted by the United States dropping out of the space program. Mission Impossible became mission accomplished because there was a national commitment to beat the Russians to the moon. The fact that the race has been won, however, should not blind Americans that it was only the first, tentative step in unlocking the mysteries of space. If we don’t press on, others will.” (D News, 1/8/72)
Final Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearing on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill heard testimony on space shuttle by Dr. Brian O’Brien, physicist and Chairman of nasa Space Program Advisory Council and of National Academy of Sciences’ Advisory Committee to Air Force Systems Command. Committee also heard shuttle testimony from Dr. Courtland D. Perkins, Chairman of Princeton Univ. of Dept, of Aerospace and Mechanical Sciences and Chairman of nasa Space Systems Committee. Dr. O’Brien said he believed shuttle would provide “space transportation system which can be available on short notice to meet unforeseen conditions which may result from world events, and . . . great flexibility in our space operations, whether civil or military.” It “should make possible a drastic reduction in cost of launches and in cost of payloads destined for earth orbit; while providing the opportunity for refurbishing or repairing satellites in orbit, or returning them to earth. In short, it should prove an invaluable tool in keeping us at the forefront in our operations in space.” Dr. Perkins said nothing NASA could do “could have a more profound effect on the total space program in the years ahead.” Shuttle would provide launch capability for nearly all programs, manned and unmanned, permitting elimination of large stable of rocket boosters and large complex of launch sites. Program provided strong signal to young scientists and engineers that U.S. wasn’t “about to throw away our carefully developed competence in space” and it was one of only few new national programs continuing “growth and stretch” in high technology. (Transcript)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of U.S. Air Force. First Secretary of the Air Force W. Stuart Symington had been sworn in Sept. 18, 1947, effective date of transfer of Army air activities to Dept, of the Air Force established by Armed Forces Unification Act of July 26, 1947. Publications during September commemorated Silver Anniversary. Airman editorial noted it has been more than 50 yrs since advent of military aviation “and it is virtually impossible to divide the technological achievements and amazing advances over that span of years into categories like ‘pre-autonomy’ or ‘post-autonomy.’ ” It was spirit that counted—“that indomitable, driving, probing, questioning, seeking perseverance, and sheer genius that has taken man from Kittyhawk to the moon in what is really an incredibly short period of time.” Air Force System Command’s Newsreview traced historical highlights of its bases and organizations. Arnold Engineering Development Center (aedc) near Tullahoma, Tenn., had been established in 1953 at recommendation of aeronautical scientist Dr. Theodore von Karman. Center currently consisted of 40 test units that provided “simulated flight-test capability ranging in speed to more than 20 times the speed of sound and to altitudes around 1,000 miles [1600 kilometers].” Center’s replacement value was $840 million. Patrick Air Force Base, Fla,, had grown with space program. Launch of V—2 from Eastern Test Range at Patrick in 1950 “was the first step to the moon. That goal, now accomplished five times, leaves the future of space exploration on the threshold of a dream.” Future of the Air Force was discussed by Gen. John D. Ryan (usaf) in Armed Forces Journal issue dedicated to Air Force Silver Anniversary. “It would be very easy ... to take off on rhetorical flights of overcoming the unlimited challenges of aerospace. The challenges do exist; and they could conceivably mean that the future of the Air Force will include the use of remotely piloted vehicles, hypersonic aircraft, and the laser. But if these, and anything else man can envision and produce, do exist in the future, they will only be the means for Air Force people to do their basic job of providing this country with the aerospace power required for defense and security. As in the past 25 years, success in the future depends heavily on the dedication and quality of Air Force people.” (Airman, 9/72, 25; AFSC Newsreview, 9/72, 6, 9; AFJ, 9/72; Dept of AF, A Chronology of American Air Space Events, 1/3/61)
NASA held separate Headquarters debriefings for three losing aerospace firms in $2.6-billion space shuttle contract competition. North American Rockwell had won contract July 26. Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., told press after Grumman debriefing that his firm was unsuccessful largely because its shuttle design was more “conservative” than that of NR. Gavin said NASA officials had considered “mission suitability” and not management problems as weakness in Grumman bid. Grumman design had more complex swing arms to hold shuttle stationary before launch and lacked “background with large cryogenic tanking” used in shuttle’s fuel supply. Grumman design had also been more expensive than NR version. Spokesmen for other losers, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp., declined to comment after debriefings. [See also Oct. 4.] (Andelitnan, NYT, 8/8/72)
Achievement Award of Small Business Assn, was presented to Kennedy Space Center for its aid to President Nixon’s Minority Business Development Program for FY 1971. (NASA Activities, 8/1/72, 171) July 2:	U.S. had been using weather control for military purposes, Washington Post reported. Previously ignored passage in Pentagon papers Dept, of Defense report on Vietnam war released by press had indicated Indochina had been “test battleground, the site of purposeful rain-making along the Ho Chi Minh trails.” Report by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) called Nile Blue had been cited as prime evidence of dod rainmaking. Post said report was computer study of how man-made changes might affect world’s year-to-year climate. AHPA Director Stephen J. Lukasik had told Senate Committee on Appropriations that Nile Blue was established in FY 1970 to achieve U.S. capability to evaluate consequences of possible actions to manipulate climate, detect changes in global circulation, and determine means to counter deleterious climatic changes. (Cohn, W Post, 7/2/72, C2) July 3:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, believed U.S.S.R. was working toward year-long manned space mission in earth-orbit, Aviation Week & Space Technology article reported. Opinion was based largely on “intuition,” Dr. Fletcher had said, but long-duration flight would be necessary before either U.S. or U.S.S.R. could attempt manned planetary mission. “I don’t know what the optimum flight time would be before we could be sure man could survive extremely long missions.” (Strickland, Av Wk, 7/3/72, 21)
Display of sculpture “Scott and Irwin on the Moon” by Red Grooms opened at Guggenheim Museum in New York. Diorama showing moon, Apollo 15 lunar roving vehicle Rover and huge figure of astronaut had been commissioned as part of NASA-National Gallery of Art “Eyewitness to Space” program but Grooms had paid all of his own expenses. Washington Post art critic Paul Richard later said work managed “to capture something of the scale, something of the heroism and the hubris, of man’s exploration of the moon.” It should “move to some public place, the National Portrait Gallery, perhaps, after it leaves the Guggenheim on Feb. 27.” (W Post, 1/19/72, Bl)
NASA officials met with 25 national winners in Skylab student project competition at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss design of students’ space experiments and demonstrations. During visit students toured msfc laboratories and Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (nasa Release 72-94; msfc pao) May 9:	Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) said in Washington, D.C., that arguments for space shuttle development had become “classic case of bureaucratic deception and waste.” He would offer amendment to cut off all shuttle funds. (NYT, 5/11/72)
Air Force Space Technology Program satellite Sesp 1971-2 (launched Oct. 17, 1971) was still transmitting data after year in orbit. Satellite, designed to operate for 6 mos, had traveled more than 214 million km (133 million mi) in 5233 earth orbits, stp program manager at Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Robert T. Johnson, had said some experiments aboard satellite would be extended six more months. (Lockheed Release 72—73)
Federal Aviation Administration released aviation forecasts for FY 1972 through FY 1983: U.S. passenger emplanements would increase from 170 million in FY 1971 to 174.9 million in FY 1972 and 189.7 million in FY 1973—gain of about 3% in FY 1972 and almost 9% in FY 1973. By end of 1983, emplanements were expected to reach 475.5 million— almost three times FY 1971 level. Revenue passenger-miles recorded by U.S. airlines were expected to grow at annual rate of about 10.5%, to reach 445 billion in FY 1983, more than three times total of 132.4 billion in FY 1971. Total hours flown by general-aviation aircraft was expected to increase almost 4% in FY 1972 and 5% in FY 1973, to 28.8 million. By 1983, total hours were expected to reach 46.2 million. General-aviation fleet was expected to grow from 131407 aircraft in January 1971 to 212 000 in January 1983. (faa Release 72-67)	_	_
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United, States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data Through 1971 and a Forward Look (72-17 SP). Report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—updated Senate Document 92-51 released Jan. 6 and discussed future directions and significant aspects of space programs. Soviet planetary probes Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) were studying temperatures, density, and constituents of Martian ionosphere, atmosphere, and surface. Joint experiment with France on Mars 3 had been studying solar wind. With Soviet start in planetary exploration during 1971, U.S. should continue to feel competition in planetary program until NASA Viking landed on Mars in 1976. nasa future plans gave prominent priority to space shuttle. While Soviet plans for reusable space vehicle had not been divulged, “it is hard to imagine their attainment of announced goals . . . without use of a shuttle.” U.S.S.R. talked of putting up space station in five years. “It may be that the long awaited new large launch vehicle will find use in lifting major components for such a station. Using this vehicle, the U.S.S.R. could put up its equivalent of the U.S. Skylab any time from 1972 on.” U.S.S.R. had recorded “wide variety of commitments ... to conduct wide-ranging program” of solar system exploration and of earth applications. They had discussed possibility of Grand Tour flights and of manned planetary missions. In space cooperation, “although no firm commitment has been made and no real timetable set, the possibility has been opened that some of the surplus Saturn IB and Apollo hardware might be used to send an American crew to dock with a future Soviet space station. Then perhaps later if a remaining Saturn V is used to put up a Skylab 2 ... a Soviet Soyuz might send a crew to dock with it. More joint planning and more funds will be required to accomplish these suggestions.” (Text)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $498 487 Federal Aviation Administration contract to Council for Airport Opportunity for training program to assist some 900 minority workers in New York area in qualifying for better jobs in aviation, (dot Release 80-72)
First successful experimental demonstration in U.S. of magnetic levitation system (maglev) was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. maglev—system for suspending vehicle above guideway with power supplied by supercooled magnets—would permit trains to travel at speeds up to 480 km per hr (300 mph) without physical contact with rails or guideway. Test was performed in Menlo Park, Calif., by Stanford Research Institute under contract to Dept, of Transportation, (dot Release 100-72) November 22:	Deputy Director James A. Lovell, Jr., of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Science and Applications Directorate announced intention to retire from space program to press at Msc. As astronaut he had spent more time in space than any other U.S. astronaut. Lovell had been Gemini 4 backup pilot, Gemini 7 pilot, Gemini 9 backup command pilot, Gemini 12 command pilot, Apollo 8 command module pilot, Apollo 11 backup command pilot, and Apollo 13 commander. Lovell told press he was examining offers from New York and Chicago business firms. “This is not something that I would choose to do under other circumstances but . . . there are not enough slots for us guys who want to remain in the operations end of space flight.” Lovell said he would remain with NASA until completion of Apollo 17 mission, (upi, W Post, 10/24/72, A5)
Future need for public administrators who understood science and technology was forecast by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in speech before American Society of Public Administrators in New York. Sociological and technological components of world problems raised problems to “new level of complexity.” Management and public administration teams were examining “successful conduct of the Apollo program—the most complicated and difficult technical task ever undertaken by man.” However, “in Apollo we were carrying out a highly complex, but basically technical program. Essentially we were dealing with machines, not people.” Asked if U.S. should use Apollo program approach to solve environmental problems, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman had told interviewer: “I don’t think that I would care to live in a country that solved its social problems in the same way we solved the Apollo problems.” Dr. Fletcher agreed “our Science-Administrator needs for the future should not he equated with needs for better technical program managers, although this too will become increasingly important. In developing and formulating wise and sound policies and programs to tackle our emerging problems, it will be essential to have individuals within all governmental levels who are capable of understanding the potentials of science and technology . . . and who are alert to their ultimate purposes and consequences. ... It is in this role that I conceive of the new Science-Administrator. (Text)
Press conference on overall aspects of May 24 U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement was held at Manned Spacecraft Center during meetings of NASA and Soviet working groups [see July 6-18]. Participants included Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Soviet Intercosmos Council; Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director; and Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs. Dr. Low said “great deal” had been accomplished in all areas covered by cooperation agreement. Working groups were meeting almost constantly. Nations had exchanged lunar samples from all flights through Apollo 15 and Luna 20 and were about to exchange samples on Apollo 16. Area of greatest interest was rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Talks on joint mission were “going extremely well.” Petrov said Soviet people had been informed of plans for joint space flight “at the same time as the American people”—when technical discussions were in progress. “Our press, just as your press, carried information on the discussions.” Asked if foreign press would be permitted to witness launch of Soviet Soyuz during joint mission, Petrov said both Apollo spacecraft and Soyuz launch would be conducted “under the same conditions as all previous launches.” Question on control of mission was deferred to conference on joint rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for July 17, but Dr. Low said “general principle” would be that, “while the Soviet cosmonauts are visiting in our Apollo command module, we will be in command; when we’re visiting in their Soyuz, they will be in command of that ship . . . and we will be under their command.” Petrov said he hoped, and was certain, “that this first test flight will not be the last one” and that theic ,,rould be possibility of space rescue flights if needed, “regardless of what country’s spacecraft are involved.” If test flight was successful, Dr. Low said, “our plans are to equip the Space Shuttle with this kind of a docking system. We don’t think that we will need a follow-on test but instead we will be flying operationally with compatible systems beyond that point.” Asked to comment on Soviet Venus probe Venus 8, launched March 27, Petrov said spacecraft should reach planet at month’s end. “That vehicle will release another one which should come down onto the surface of Venus.” Soviet scientists had done everything possible to guarantee mission’s success, “but what is not excluded is the possibility of a landing in such a position ... or place where transmission of information will not last for very long.” Probe was expected to provide data to increase understanding of planet’s surface and structure, “which is not only a question of increasing our knowledge but which can . . . clarify the origins and structure of . . . Earth.” Data already transmitted for Venus 8 had been “so new and so unexpected and so interesting.” (Transcript)
Soviet news agency Tass reported completion of Polar Morning—joint U.S.S.R. and France experiment at E. T. Krenkel Hydrometeorological Observatory in Arctic. During three-month expedition, series of meteorological rockets 'had carried Soviet and French payloads to altitudes between 90 and 180 km (56 and 112 mi) during period of transition from winter to summer and from polar night to polar day. Data were obtained on atmospheric temperature, wind speed and direction, cloud formations, corpuscular radiation, and solar activity. (FBIS-Sov, 6/16/72, LI) June 15:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Apollo 16 Astronauts Charles M. Duke, Jr., John W. Young, and Thomas K. Mattingly II met with President Nixon at White House to discuss April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission and joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Following discussion Dr. Fletcher and astronauts held press conference. Dr. Fletcher said President was “very pleased” with progress made toward joint mission. “The President particularly wanted to emphasize that . . . this is only the beginning of what he conceives as a long association with the Soviet Union in many other areas of space cooperation. ... we are busy working on other kinds of things that we can do together . . . perhaps through the turn of the century, doing things together for economic reasons and because he feels strongly that the international aspect of this is important in improving relationships. If we can do this together, we can do other things together.” President also emphasized worldwide space cooperation. As areas for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in future, Dr. Fletcher thought “the ones we can be sure of” were “the cooperative program on Mars [and] a new cooperative program on Venus, where we explore the upper atmosphere and the entire atmosphere and they explore the surface. We are going to be doing that together.” (Other nasa officials explained later these would be coordinated efforts rather than joint missions.) July meeting of principals at Manned Spacecraft Center would “iron out the management” of joint docking mission. Astronaut Young said that “real problem” was communication; “once we solve that problem we can prove that we can work together in a lot of other areas besides.” Dr. Fletcher said plans for joint astronaut and cosmonaut training had not been concluded, “but it is going to be absolutely essential that the cosmonauts come over here and train on our equipment and vice versa. That much has been agreed to.” Training program probably would start “within about a year.” Dr. Fletcher summed up progress made on joint mission since May 24 signing of cooperation agreement: “We have set up the agenda for the meeting which will primarily involve the management aspects. ... We also have, at home, worked out some of the details of the specifications . . . and now are waiting approval.” Perhaps most “spectacular” progress had been “great enthusiasm from Congress for the mission, particularly when we told them this was not going to cost any more money.” (Transcript; WSJ, 6/16/72)	.
Plaque placed in auditorium of National Academy of Sciences bore inscription: “The National Academy of Sciences Auditorium is dedicated to all individuals who through the Academy have devoted their talents and knowledge to the service of the Nation and mankind. It perpetuates the memory of Hugh L. Dryden whose friends, by establishing the Dryden Memorial Fund, helped to make this auditorium possible.” Dr. Dryden was NASA Deputy Administrator 1958-1965, former Director of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca), and former Associate Director of National Bureau of Standards. (nas Pres Off; NASA Hist Off)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences met in closed session to hear testimony from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 15 astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin on Apollo 15 commercialism. Discussed were selling of stamp covers carried on mission and of replicas of statue “Fallen Astronaut” placed on moon during mission. Following meeting Committee Chairman, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), issued statement: “The testimony of NASA management and of the astronauts was forthright and complete. There is no doubt that certain provisions of NASA’s Standards of Conduct for NASA Employees were violated by the astronauts for which they have been punished. The question of whether or not they violated any law is being examined. No conclusions were reached by the Committee at this meeting and the Committee will decide at a later time what further action it will take.” (CR, 8/3/72, D869; Text)
American Society for Testing and Materials—non-profit organization that developed standards for more than 4700 materials, products, systems, and services—urged adoption by U.S. of metric system during Washington, D.C., workshop. In interview Society’s President Erie I. Shobert II said: “Basically, the reason for changing ... to the metric system is to enhance our ability to communicate with others, but that ability ... is reflected in hard dollars and cents.” Failure of U.S. to convert had been large factor in U.S. trade deficit, he said. (Kadis, W Star, 3/9/72, C8) March 9:	President Nixon ordered immediate implementation of new Federal Aviation Administration regulations to prevent carrying of weapons or explosives aboard civil aircraft and unauthorized access to aircraft, tighten baggage check-in procedure, and improve cargo and baggage loading security. Dept, of Transportation would expedite rule-making for new regulations governing airport operators to complement measures required of airlines. Action had been prompted by discovery of bombs aboard aircraft at New York, Las Vegas, and Seattle during 48 hrs. (PD, 3/13/72, 553)
U.S. was “running out of blank spaces on the map” and needed last frontier of space “to keep the human spirit up,” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said in interview published by National Enquirer. “Huge tasks” set for computer industry by Apollo program had boosted that industry from $1-billion-per-year earnings in 1969 to $8 billion in 1972. “The aerospace industry itself is a $27 billion business. These and associated industries which the space program stimulates . . . produce the base for the taxes to support all programs. Let the tax base erode and you will very soon see that we won’t be able to afford the social programs.” (Adler, National Enquirer, 4/16/72)
Houston Chronicle editorial commented on Soviet attempt to restrict satellite TV broadcasts as threat to world peace: “We should be very-slow to accept any limitations upon the use of satellites. We have just begun to tap the benefits that can flow from the exploration of space. Our international space program stands in contrast to Russia’s secret effort. While we are opening new avenues of communications, Russia typically is acting to keep its citizens in ignorance.” (H Chron, 10/17/72)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said “real increase in productivity in space” would come with shuttle, in speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. “. . . we have built more than 80 launch stands in this country, 50 of which are still either active or on standby . . . [and] we are using 17 different combinations of boosters and upper stages . . . today. The shuttle will allow us to consolidate most of these. . . .” Shuttle, “major investment in a new tool for space exploration,” had been designed for productivity “in terms of launch services, . . . access it will provide to space, . . . [and] the way it will let us operate in space.” (Text)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
Reception in House Rayburn Building honored retiring Chairman George P. Miller of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Rep. Miller (D-Calif.)—defeated June 6 in California primary for nomination for reelection to House—had presided over House Committee in overseeing and funding U.S. space program since 1961. House Speaker, Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.), said that “never had so much been accomplished in the national interest in so short a time” as by Committee. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., praised work of Committee in evolution of entire U.S. space effort. Rep. Miller responded that U.S. space achievements were “a beginning and not an end” of the national enterprise required to serve Nation and society in the future. National Space Club President Donald R. Rodgers presided over ceremony attended by 300 guests, including Congressmen, NASA and industry representatives, and Senate and House Space Committee staffs. (NASA Hist Off)
Federal Aviation Administration announced publication of 1972 edition of National Aviation System (NAS) Ten Year Plan and Policy Summary. Summary detailed FAa’s long-range program for development of balanced airport-airways system to meet projected demand for air transportation through 1982. Plan objectives included: completion of semiautomation of en route air-traffic control facilities; provision of basic automation equipment for radar-equipped terminal facilities and automatic metering and spacing of approaches in medium- and high-density terminal areas; increase in instrument-landing-system (ils)-equipped runways and installation of improved ILS at high-density airports; introduction of microwave ILS; investigation of use of satellite technology for air-traffic control communications, navigation, and surveillance and implementation of satellite communications in oceanic areas; expansion of designated area navigation routes to shorten en route and terminal flight paths; and plans for landing facilities and systems for vertical or short takeoff and landing (v/stol) aircraft. (faa Release 72-63) April 15:	Apollo 16 preflight briefing was held at Kennedy Space Center. Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager James A. McDivitt said Apollo 16 countdown was “probably the smoothest” to date. McDivitt announced that Apollo 16 would be last flight with which he would be associated: “I really don’t have any plans for the future because I’ve really been concentrating on Apollo 16, and while I made the decision that it would probably be a good time for me to leave the program, I have not had time to really sit down . . . [and] think through what my future would be.” Primary reason for leaving program after Apollo 16, rather than after Apollo 17, was so that if change meant move to new location McDivitt’s children could enter new schools at beginning of new school year. McDivitt was Air Force brigadier general and had been commander of Apollo 9 mission (March 3—13, 1969) and command pilot of Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) during seven years as NASA astronaut. (Transcript)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced appointment of l/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of National Security Agency, effective Aug. 1. Gen. Phillips, assigned to NASA in 1964, had been Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. until Sept. 1, 1969, when he became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization. He would replace Adm. Noel A. M. Gayler (usn), who would become U.S. commander in chief in Pacific area. (W Star, 4/27/72, A2) April 28:	Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny sent message congratulating President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 16 mission and safe return of astronauts. He asked President to convey “best of wishes to the members of the spaceship crew, courageous cosmonauts John Young, Charles Duke and Thomas Mattingly.” (fbis-Sov, 4/28/72, G2)
United Kingdom Minister for Aerospace Michael R. D. Heseltine, at Paris meeting of science ministers of European Space Conference countries, urged creation of European space agency to achieve common policy as prerequisite for participation in post-Apollo space program. (■SF, 1/73, 1)	_
Findings to date of investigations into Apollo 15 commercialism were released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and by NASA. Senate Committee reported on Aug. 3 closed hearing that received testimony from NASA management and Apollo 15 astronauts on commercialization of postal covers and replicas of “Fallen Astronaut” sculpture that was carried to moon during mission. Hearing had revealed “no basic new facts” on incidents, nasa had disciplined astronauts for carrying unauthorized covers. There was “no indication at this time that the Apollo 15 crew either profited or intended to profit from” sales of sculpture. Sale of sculpture by artist Paul Van Hoeydonck “appears to be a direct contradiction of the intent of the Apollo 15 astronauts.” Committee said Dept, of Justice had requested copy of hearing transcript and was reviewing situation for possible violation of Federal statutes. Committee said its continuing investigation had determined, after Aug. 3 hearing, “that several astronauts had accepted payment for autographing blocks of stamps. NASA was “continuing its investigation of this latest incident and is determining what management actions it will take as a result.” Committee expressed concern “with the adequacy of NASA management procedures which would permit such incidents to occur or create an atmosphere or an environment which might encourage misconduct.” It also was concerned with “awareness of responsible management personnel as to their responsibilities for the recognition of and need for initiation of timely and appropriate action on sensitive events coming to their attention.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, released report on Apollo 15 commercialism and disciplinary actions taken by NASA. Investigations and reviews had revealed weaknesses in NASA’s administrative procedures, management communication channels, and internal operating relationships. Actions were under way to remedy weaknesses, including revision of policy and procedures on articles to be carried on manned flight missions. No more than 12 personal items weighing no more than 0.2 kg (0.5 lb) would be carried by each flight astronaut. All personal items would be approved by NASA Administrator. Items that could be commercially exploited by recipients were prohibited. List of items would be publicized no later than 30 days after flight’s completion. Future missions would carry official flight kit containing items appropriate for official presentation by Government. Items would be approved by Administrator and announced before launch. Commercialism of flight kit was prohibited. NASA pao stated in response to inquiries about sale of autographs by astronauts, “nasa has determined . . . autographs were signed by the astronauts on their own time while not on duty, that no misuse of Government property or personnel was involved, but that a procedural infraction did occur in that no NASA management advice was sought prior to these actions.” NASA employees had been “personally admonished . . . for this infraction of NASA procedures” and facts had been reported to Dept, of Justice. (Texts; NASA pao)
nasa Associate Administrator Dale D. Myers—following detailed presentation on space shuttle decision announced by Administrator James C. Fletcher [see above]—moved to testimony on Apollo program, during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. In new Apollo 16 lunar surface experiments, far-ultraviolet camera/spectograph would photograph celestial objects or areas emitting or absorbing energy from atomic hydrogen. Data would provide information on “composition, density, distribution, and motion of interplanetary, interstellar, and intergalactic gas clouds which will . . . enhance our understanding of the structure and evolution of the galaxy.” Data, recorded on film and returned from lunar surface by astronauts, would be “first attempt to evaluate the Moon as a platform from which to make future celestial observations.” Second new experiment, cosmic ray detector, would acquire data on origin and source mechanism of high-velocity cosmic rays and solar particles beyond effects of earth’s atmosphere and magnetic field. (Transcript) March 15:	NASA Associate Administrator jar Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, Administrator James C. Fletcher, and Deputy Administrator George M. Low (left to right) explained space shuttle plans at a press conference following the announcement that the shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rockets. In the artist’s drawing, the rockets are dropping away for recovery. NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 29th flight from Flight Research Center. Purpose of flight was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Fixed rakes and rotating survey probes were checked out and angle-of-attack calibrations were obtained at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude from mach 0.9 to 1.1. (nasa proj off)
New York Times editorial commented on March 19 visit of its science writer John N. Wilford to U.S.S.R.’s Star City, home of cosmonauts. Visit “implied a major change in Soviet policy toward space cooperation. No Western journalist had previously been permitted inside this key center of Soviet manned space activities.” Wilford’s report had suggested U.S.S.R. might be willing to explore moon jointly with U.S. “If so, the idea catches the United States at an embarrassing point in development of its space program. After the scheduled flights of Apollos 16 and 17 . . . this country plans to focus most of its future activity in space on earth-orbiting space stations and development of a space shuttle.” (NYT, 3/23/72) March 24:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 12:45 pm pst by Thor-Burner II booster. Orbital parameters: 884-km (549-mi) apogee, 802-km (498-mi) perigee, 101.7min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/29/72, 156)
National Academy of Sciences released findings of two-year study of science and its relation to society, made by Physics Survey Committee chaired by Yale Univ. physicist Dr. David A. Bromley. Report, tentatively titled “Physics in Perspective,” was in press at release time. It rated 69 program areas in physics in order of priority and emphasized cost to U.S. science and society and to physics if programs were not adopted. Most “striking” aspect of survey had been “renewed discovery of the over-all power and vitality of U.S. physics,” but “this strength is in danger.” Committee found danger most immediate and obvious in subfields like elementary particle and nuclear physics where major facilities approved in mid-1960s were just becoming operational. Report named 15 programs that had growth potentials warranting high priority for incremental support: macroscopic quantum phenomena including superfluidity and superconductivity, quantum optics, scattering in solids and liquids, heavy-ion interactions, higher-energy nuclear physics, national accelerator laboratory, Stanford linear accelerator, controlled fusion, turbulence, nonlinear optics, lasers and masers, atomic and molecular beams, biophysical acoustics, very large radio array, and x-ray and gamma ray astronomy. Committee concurred with recommendation of Astronomy Survey Committee [see June 1] that High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) should be prominent in national effort in astrophysics and astronomy. “Because of the opaqueness of the earth’s atmosphere to both X and gamma radiation, these windows on the universe have only recently been opened through rocket and satellite astronomy. Any reasonable extrapolation from the preliminary soundings that have been possible so far suggests a larger return in fundamental insight into the structure and history of the universe. In the total national physics program, the estimated cost of this facility—$400 million . . . is extremely high. To be considered in proper perspective it must be viewed in the context of the total expenditures of the U.S. space program. In anticipated scientific return—both short- and long-range— it merits high priority in that program.” (NASA—nrc-nae News Rpt, 8-9/72, 1-7)
Prospects of U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts “chummily tooling around” in orbit had “hardly raised a ripple when it was announced at the Moscow Meetings,” author Robert Sherrod commented in New York Times article. But attempts of President John F. Kennedy to “cooperate with the Soviets in space nine years ago” had failed. Failure showed “differing methods of Kennedy the idealist and Nixon the pragmatist.” President Nixon had “smoothed the way” with seven meetings between U.S. and Soviet engineers, beginning with April 24, 1970, meeting between then NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, and Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov. President Kennedy’s attitude toward space program had been “ambivalent” until Sept. 20, 1963, when he proposed “joint expedition to the moon” in speech before United Nations. Proposal had come as surprise and had “staggered” anti-Soviet space supporters in Congress, who proceeded to pare NASA budget. House had voted 125 to 110 against using NASA funds for joint lunar landing with Communist country. Kennedy had “forgotten that politics is the art of the possible, forgotten that a leader should never surprise his own close support,” Sherrod said. “In the sunnier climate of 1972, Richard Nixon duly observed the axiom and the rule.” (NYT, 6/17/72)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA’s FY 1973 authorization request before House Committee on Science and Astronautics as hearings opened. He emphasized importance of space program to U.S. national economy: “Scientific knowledge, scientific exploration, and the practical applications of aeronautics and space are enormously important in their own right. But perhaps most important of all is the need for the United States to have a continuously advancing technology. To meet the pressing social problems of our times requires above all a sound economy operating at a high level of employment to generate the tax revenues required at all levels of government. To maintain such an economy in a competitive world, we must increase our productivity year after year, decade after decade. The only way in the long term to keep increasing our productivity is through advancing our technology. “I know of no other activity which has done and can do as much to keep the United States strong in advanced technology as NASA’s programs in space and aeronautics.” Economic necessity for advanced technology; “the direct practical benefits of space applications and improved aircraft, including their significance for national defense; and . . . the human and future practical values of increased understanding of the earth, sun, moon, planets, and universe—these are the basic reasons for maintaining a strong national program in space and aeronautics.” Dr. Fletcher said that NASA’s FY 1973 program “moves forward in that it fully supports President Nixon’s decision to proceed with the development of the Space Shuttle, the keystone to the Nation’s future in space; it continues our major ongoing space programs; and it provides a 50 percent step-up in our work in aeronautics. It is realistic in that it supports these objectives within a fiscal year 1973 budget approximately equal to that of last year, and under a plan that does not commit the Nation to higher total NASA budget levels in future •• years.” (Transcript)
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)
Public attitude toward space program in late 1960s was described by Washington communications consultant Julian Scheer, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in Washington Post article. “There was a mixed feeling of pride and guilt . . . during those years.” Program had moved forward as “almost a solitary symbol of something that was working. But the question of its rightful place in the scheme of things always hung over it.” While “a cynic would conclude that the American people had turned from social problems,” realist “might conclude that what we were hearing in the late 1960s were the first real rumblings against large federal programs. The space program, meanwhile, had gained its momentum while this disillusionment was setting in. We got to the moon, it seemed, almost without anyone knowing it. The program had the velocity—and there was no turning back.” (W Post, 12/8/72, A26)
Former Congressman H. Allen Smith of California was quoted as having said in letters to Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Cal Tech that he would not seek to enforce law passed Oct. 21 to change jpl name to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Smith had written: “I have no intention of bringing any lawsuit or any other action to force this name change. There are many laws on the federal books which are not enforced.” Wall Street Journal said it was “doubtful” that Congress would reverse itself on measure. NASA officials had already found House Committee on Science and Astronautics “unwilling to help provide relief.” (WSJ, 11/24/72) Nov. 24-Dec. 8: U.S.—U.S.S.R. Working Groups 2 and 4, meeting at Manned Space Center on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), defined antenna locations on Soyuz and confirmed that U.S.S.R. would build antennas; negotiated interface signal characteristics for radio communication and ranging systems and confirmed 428-km (266-mi) ranging capability; agreed on end-to-end compatibility tests of radio and hardline communications; resolved U.S. very-high-frequency amplitude-modulation implementation requirements for Soyuz systems, defined design of cable communications systems including cable lengths, junction boxes, and Soviet supply responsibilities; and discussed intercenter control communications, establishing basis for March negotiations. (NASA proj off)
President Nixon sent United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: The Emerging Structure for Peace to Congress. Third annual report on U.S. foreign policy analyzed world situation. Of space, President said; “As our astronauts have seen, the unity of the Earth is experienced most vividly from outer space. And conversely, seen from our planet, space itself is a frontier to mankind as a whole, not merely to individual nations. Space is, therefore, an unparalleled field for cooperation among nations. “As we move into the second decade of space exploration, the U.S. is committed to work with others in space for the benefit of all mankind. We are taking whatever steps can reasonably and properly be taken to work with other countries in the development of their space skills. “Specifically, we have assured the European Space Conference that its member countries may obtain our assistance in launching satellites which are for peaceful purposes and which are consistent with international obligations embodied in such agreements as the Outer Space Treaty and the arrangements for the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat). We are prepared to consider such assistance to other interested countries. In addition, we are working closely with the Europeans on the concepts and design of a reusable space transportation system. “Over the past year, NASA has agreed with the Soviet Academy of Sciences to significant cooperation in specific space tasks, and in the exchange of information and plans concerning our respective space programs. We have exchanged samples of lunar soil. We are examining together the means to enable Soviet manned spacecraft and our own to rendezvous and dock in space. Joint expert groups have been meeting to arrange details of further collaboration in space meteorology, biology, and medicine, in the study of the natural environment, and in exploration of the moon and planets. “In 1971, after years of negotiation in which the United States has played a leading role, the United Nations General Assembly approved an Outer .Space Liability Convention. . . . “Last year also brought a new definitive charter for the operation of INTELSAT. . . .” President said NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences space cooperation had been among series of U.S.—Soviet agrements, “striking both in their diversity and in their promise of mutual advantage.” But in “changed world” conditioning U.S. foreign policy, President noted “the end of an indisputable U.S. superiority in strategic strength,” and its replacement by a strategic balance in which the U.S. and Soviet nuclear forces were comparable. U.S.S.R. had continued to improve its capability in “virtually every category of strategic offensive and defensive weapons. . . . Soviet strategic forces, even at current levels, have the potential of threatening our land-based ICBMs if the Soviets choose to make certain qualitative improvements. They have the necessary technological base.” People’s Republic of China Was “continuing to, develop a strategic offensive capability. The possibility of accidental attacks remains.” President said it was wise for U.S. to begin Safeguard abm deployment, but “we may soon complete a salt agreement with the USSR which will limit abm deployment.” President commended 1970 Hague and Montreal International Civil Aviation Organization conventions to deter aircraft hijacking and sabotage: “These two conventions will increase the likelihood that hijackers, saboteurs, and persons committing other attacks against civil aircraft will be punished. . . . Universal ratification would ensure that air pirates could find no place to hide. “We intend to press for wide adherence to these agreements and for continued international cooperation, including exchanges of information on security measures. We will also continue to urge international agreement to suspend air service to countries which refuse to cooperate in the release of hijacked aircraft and in the punishment of hijackers.” (PD, 2/14/72, 235-411)
NASA Equal Opportunity Council to review, advise, and recommend on implementation of NASA Equal Employment Opportunity Program was established by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. Membership of full-time NASA employees from key staff and program offices would serve two-year terms. Chairman, Bernard Moritz, would serve one-year term. (NASA Activities, 6/15/72, 119)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress 26th annual report on U.S. participation in work of United Nations. He noted in transmission message that 26th U.N. General Assembly had endorsed two treaties sponsored by U.S., Convention on the International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects and Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. International Civil Aviation Organization conference had adopted Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation. {PD, 9/11/72, 1351-2) September 8—9:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of NASA Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., celebration included open house and Sept. 8 ceremony honoring original 14 employees who had participated with Air Force in successful 1947—1951 X-l rocket aircraft program to exceed speed of sound in level flight. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented plaques to seven original employees who attended. Since creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, predecessor of NASA, frc had participated in advanced aircraft research programs that had extended boundaries of manned aeronautical flight from subsonic speed to 7200 km (4500 mi) per hr achieved by X—15 aircraft between 1959 and 1968. Other frc programs included rocket-powered D-558 II Skyrocket, first aircraft to fly twice the speed of sound; X-5, forerunner of F—111, F—14, and B-l aircraft; lunar landing research vehicle, prototype of Apollo lunar landing trainer; and XB-70 aircraft that had takeoff weight of more than 226 800 kg (500 000 lbs) and mach-3 cruising speed, frc programs were continuing effort to improve safety, utility, and flying qualities of general-aviation aircraft; M2, HL-IO, and X-24A lifting-body flights to validate concepts for future manned spacecraft and aircraft; YF-12 program to acquire inflight data for future supersonic military and commercial aircraft; supercritical wing program to evaluate new NASA-developed wing’s ability to permit modified F-S aircraft to cruise economically at higher speeds; and digital fly-by-wire aircraft program to evaluate use of electronic flight control system to control aircraft completely. Fly-bywire system was being considered for space shuttle use. (NASA Release 72-173; frc Release 15-72; frc X-Press, 9/15/72) September 9:	Tass reported results of Venus 8 probe that had landed capsule on Venus July 22 after four-month flight. Wind had moved descending capsule horizontally in same direction as planet’s rotation on its axis. Wind speed had declined from 48 m (160 ft) per sec at 45-km (28-mi) altitude to 2 m (6 ft) per sec at 11 km (7 mi). Key question during landing was whether sunlight reached Venusian surface or was absorbed completely by atmosphere and clouds. Preliminary data on changes in illumination at different altitudes showed that Venusian atmosphere considerably weakened sunlight but some sunlight did reach surface. Atmosphere consisted of 97% carbon dioxide, less than 2% nitrogen, and less than 0.1% oxygen and contained 0.01-0.1% ammonia at altitudes between 33 and 46 km (20 and 30 mi). Surface in landing area resembled earth granite rock in radioactive composition with 4.0% potassium, 0.0002% uranium, and 0.00065% thorium. (fbis-Sov, 9/13/72, L7)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were nearing “historic agreement to begin joint ventures in space,” Wall Street Journal reported. “For the first time, the Soviets are dropping their secrecy curtain enough to provide detailed engineering data on their spacecraft—a sign that Brezhnev, Kosygin & Co. really want to go ahead.” U.S. officials—including Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser—“are eagerly committing themselves to cooperation; American spacemen, feeling pinched for funds, now count on accord to keep them flying in the future.” Political decision on joint space mission “is in the hands of the Kremlin and the White House.” Some officials believed “announcement of this Soviet-American engagement could come before June—perhaps in Moscow if President Nixon goes ahead with his scheduled trip there this month.” (Spivak, WSJ, 5/16/72, 1)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in Christmas message to NASA staff: “We are nearing the end of a historic and decisive year for NASA. We have completed the first great era of space exploration and use and begun a promising new one, with more emphasis this time on use. Well done, Apollo! Well begun, Shuttle!” (Text)
Air Force and Dept, of Defense viewed space not as a mission but “as a place that offers more effective ways of accomplishing certain defense missions,” Grant L. Hansen, Assistant Secretary of Defense for r&d, said in published interview. There was no “space program in the sense of nasa” within dod. During first phase of space exploration and use for national defense, Air Force has been assigned role as DOD’s executive agency for military space efforts, from operation of Joint dod and Atomic Energy Commission Vela space surveillance system to launches of payloads for other military services. New instructions from Dr. John S. Foster, dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering, in 1971 had encouraged all military services to “look for ways of using space systems to perform their jobs better and cheaper.” Air Force would continue launches but “will no longer operate space systems of other services, nor will there be the requirement to develop their systems for them. The cooperation among the services on space matters is excellent, and, I believe, this change, which recognizes that space as a military medium has reached maturity, benefits everybody.” (AF Mag, 6/72, 35-40)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
Federal Aviation Administration announced award of contracts totaling approximately $3 million to six companies for first phase of five-year program to develop microwave landing system (mls) for civil and military use [see Jan. 17]. Companies were Airborne Instrument Laboratory, Bendix Corp., Texas Instruments Inc., Raytheon Co., Hazeltine Corp., and ITT Gilfillan, Inc. (faa Release 72-18) January 28:	Preliminary description of Apollo 15 lunar samples was presented by Apollo 15 Preliminary Examination Team in Science. More than 350 individual samples weighing total of 77 kg (170 lbs) had been collected from 10 areas in Hadley region during July 26Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Samples were mare basalts and breccias with variety of premare igneous rocks. “The bulk chemical compositions and textures of these rocks confirm the previous conclusions that the lunar maria consist of a series of extrusive volcanic rocks that are rich in iron and poor in sodium. The breccias contain abundant clasts of anorthositic fragments along with clasts of basaltic rocks much richer in plagioclase than the mare basalts. These two rock types also occur as common components in soil samples from this site. The rocks and soils from both the front and mare region exhibit a variety of shock characteristics that can best be ascribed to ray material from the craters Aristillus or Autolycus.” (Science, 1/28/72, 363—74)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, appraised scientific contributions of Apollo program in testimony during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill. “. . . Apollo 11 crew crossed over four hundred thousand kilometers (250,000 miles) of space to touch another planetary body. Four teams of astronauts, from Apollos 11, 12, 14 and 15 . . . have now made the epic journey and walked the lunar surface. They have returned some 176 kg (388 lbs.) of lunar rocks and soils for analysis in earth-based laboratories and have established scientific stations on the moon that are continuously transmitting scientific and engineering data back to earth.” Apollo data, with information expected from continued sample analysis and lunar data analysis in the post-Apollo period, “surely will be of practical value to man, even helping him to cope with current environmental problems on earth.” NASA sample analysis program had “required unprecedented advancement in instrumentation and techniques to perform multiple element and isotope analyses with extreme precision on minute amounts of sample.” Improved high-resolution instruments made “detailed investigations of surface features and internal structure of materials.” Other related important breakthroughs had been computer hardware and software for processing and reducing large amounts of analytical data in a very short time. “These advances, in large part stimulated by NASA-funded meteorite studies, were absolutely essential, because of the scientifically unique, but limited, lunar materials. . . . these high precision research methods can now or will soon be routinely utilized in industrial processes and laboratories.” They could also “be immediately applied to a variety of environmental and biomedical problems by providing the capability to check and monitor levels of pollutants and toxic elements in our atmosphere, water, and foods.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider outlined program’s progress: “During the coming fiscal year testing and checkout will be completed and operation of Skylab will have started. Within 2 years, the first Skylab . . . will have become part of history, having contributed new knowledge in many fields.” Skylab offered “an earth observation capability never before available” to U.S. manned spacecraft. During eight-month mission, Skylab would fly over entire U.S. except Alaska, over much of Europe, all of Africa, Australia, China, and almost all of South America—covering 75% of earth’s surface and passing over each point every five days. By end of 1971, 288 investigations requiring Skylab data had been submitted, 249 U.S. and 39 foreign. Of these, 164 had been identified for further study. Skylab was “first manned space flight program designed specifically to carry activities and equipment explicitly aimed at improving man’s life on earth. It will contribute significantly to the increase of knowledge of pure science and is also an experimental space station; a forerunner of permanent space stations of the future.” Earth-oriented sensors would test technology for synoptic surveys of many environmental and ecological systems. Solar and astronomical observations and other science experiments would expand knowledge of solar system, universe, and near-earth space. Biomedical experiments would inform how man’s well-being and ability to function were affected by living in space. Harry H. Gorman, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on $305-million FY 1973 budget request for development, test, and mission operations in manned space flight research and development program: “This is the first year in which this activity is presented as a separate item. . . With near-completion of Apollo program, “we believe it iinportant to separately identify and control this basic capability which has been built up. . . . This work is essential to the support of the Nation’s space programs for the 1970’s and beyond.” Requested funding would provide for contractor support of in-house capabilities for Apollo and Skylab programs; for definition, design, development, and subsystem testing activities in shuttle program; and for pre-definition and definition of future programs, including High Energy Astronomy Observatory, Stratoscope 1 and 2, and Earth Observation Satellites. (Transcript)
Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space on U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on cooperation in space [May 24]. He described events that led to agreement on joint rendezvous and docking mission: Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, then nasa Administrator, had suggested to Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov during April 1970 meeting in New York “possibility of cooperation in the area of astronaut safety, including compatible docking fixtures for space stations and shuttles.” National Academy of Sciences President, Dr. Philip Handler, had conveyed NASA’s interest to Soviet Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh. “In July, Dr. Paine suggested directly to President Keldysh that this possibility be considered.” Dr. Low said if docking mission was successful, “both countries will have increased their chances of rescuing astronauts in distress without commensurate increase in the costs of a standby rescue capability. It is here that the joint test mission is particularly important. It will give us the opportunity to identify and resolve under the best possible conditions the problems we can expect to flow from differences in language, equipment, and operational procedures.” Joint working groups were making significant progress. Space meteorology group was organizing experiments to advance temperature sounding from satellites and microwave measurement of precipitation zones, ice conditions, and sea surface roughness and temperature. Another joint working group had provided for coordination of meridional sounding rocket networks in Eastern and Western Hemispheres and had begun to exchange operational and scientific meteorological data. Working group on natural environment was defining coordinated experiments in remote sensing of the environment related to vegetation, geology, and the oceans. Oceanographic effort would continue satellite and ship measurements over same ocean area. In group on scientific investigation of near-earth space, moon, and planets, “experts from both sides have been working on a common system of lunar coordinates and a program for compiling a complete map of the moon on the scale of 1:5,000,000.” Group on space biology and medicine was “considering certain common standards and procedures to increase the comparability of information.” If U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together to achieve “intimate and complex common goal” like joint space mission, “we will have built mutual confidence and trust. The symbol of US and Soviet spacemen meeting in orbit before the eyes of the entire world cannot help but ameliorate attitudes, viewpoints and expectations throughout the world.” (Transcript)
Swiss Transport Museum inaugurated its Air and Space Wing in Lucerne with ceremonies attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. (Swiss Transport Museum)
Claire Sterling commented in Washington Post article on progress of United Nations Conference on the Human Environment [see June 5-16]: At halfway point “nobody is signing anything. We may all be in favor of what the Chinese speak of here as ‘a beautiful environment for mankind,’ but neither China nor any other state is giving up a shred of sovereignty, or binding itself on a single proposition by treaty or covenant.” Conference was not discussing some of worst environmental problems—“worldwide population explosion, rapid depletion of the planet’s non-renewable resources, and an approaching global energy crisis”—except at counterconferences, “where nondelegates are talking their heads off.” Everyone was talking about money, “but nobody is . . . coming up with enough of it to matter.” (W Post, 6/13/72, A20) June 13—15:	National Symposium on Technology Transfer was sponsored in Washington, D.C., by American Chemical Society, American Institute of Chemical Engineers, American Society for Metals, American Society for Nondestructive Testing, American Society for Quality Control, and American Society for Testing and Materials. NASA officials led workshop on design techniques and reliability procedures on June 15. Cochairmen Howard M. Weiss, Deputy Director of Reliability and Quality Assurance Office, and Joseph H. Levine, Chief of Reliability Div. at Manned Spacecraft Center, discussed computer aids to structural design, principles of reliable design and systems safety, and role of testing in design process. (NASA Release 72-91)
Federal Aviation Administration national plan for development of new microwave instrument landing system for common use by civil and military aircraft was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. System covered broad area, would increase number of flight paths and airport acceptance rate, and would ease noise over surrounding communities. It would provide continuous distance information, eliminating need for marker beacons that gave limited progress information on final approach, (faa Release 72-12)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of two Federal Aviation Administration contracts for development of plans for quiet, short-haul air transportation system. Battelle Memorial Institute was awarded $243 600 for structured program planning based on wide range of viewpoints within public and private sectors. Urban Systems Research and Engineering, Inc., was awarded $202 400 to analyze strategies for development of vertical or short takeoff and landing (v/stol) aircraft system in terms of decision making under uncertain conditions, (faa Release 72—71)
Europe’s dilemma over altered conditions for participation in post-Apollo space program was described by Kenneth W. Gatland in Spaceflight. Europe had been invited to develop research and applications module (ram) for space shuttle, rather than space tug as originally discussed. Elimination from Europe of any shuttle propulsion technology had “left little room for manoeuvre.” Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm would be “denied the opportunity to contribute their Attitude Control Propulsion System (acps) engine” which “is considered to be fully competitive with U.S. equivalents” because NASA had rejected acps as “too advanced and too complex” a European contribution. Space tug— with attributes of both launch vehicle and spacecraft—would have pushed propulsion technique “well beyond what is currently envisaged in Europe.” Tug covered “very extensive range of the basic techniques of interest to the Europeans and might engender solutions to the most classic problems.” Tug’s “far-reaching integration with the shuttle and with the payload during operations would have afforded Europe effective participation in most American missions, i.e., the majority of space activities in the 1980s.” (SF, 9/72, 322-3)
